Citation Nr: A25032956
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 231030-390824
DATE: April 9, 2025

ORDER

Assignment of special monthly compensation (SMC) based on the need for regular aid and attendance of another person (aid and attendance) under 38 U.S.C. § 1114(l) is denied.

A certificate of eligibility for specially adapted housing or special home adaption is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran's service-connected disabilities are:  posttraumatic stress disorder; a skin disorder manifested by tinea including tinea corporis, manum, pedis, and cruris; right upper extremity radiculopathy; cervical strain with degenerative changes; and, left varicocele, status post removal; the Veteran's combined disability evaluation is 100 percent.  

2. The Veteran's service-connected disabilities do not render him unable to care for daily personal needs or to protect himself from the hazards and dangers incident to his daily environment without assistance of others.

3. The Veteran's service-connected disabilities do not result in a loss or loss of use of a lower extremity or upper extremity. Moreover, the Veteran is not service connected for a severe burn injury, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, blindness, or an inhalation injury.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1.  The criteria for the assignment of a special monthly compensation based on the need for regular aid and attendance of another person have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1114(l), 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.350(b) and (i), 3.352(a).

2.  The criteria for establishing eligibility for financial assistance for specially adapted housing or special home adaptation are not met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 2101, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.159, 3.809, 3.809a.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from September 1972 to March 1973 and from November 1976 to July 1994, with additional service in the North Carolina Army National Guard.

This case is before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from October 2, and October 10, 2023, Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO) rating decisions.

In the October 2, 2023, rating decision, the RO denied entitlement to a certificate of eligibility for specially adapted housing.

In the October 10, 2023, rating decision, the RO denied entitlement to SMC based on the need for regular aid and attendance of another person under 38 U.S.C. § 1114(l).

On October 30, 2023, VA received the Veteran's VA Form 10182 Decision Review Request: Notice of Disagreement (NOD).  The Veteran selected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board will decide the appeal based on the evidence of record at the time of the October 2, 2023, rating decision as to the issue of entitlement to a certificate of eligibility for specially adapted housing and at the time of the October 10, 2023, rating decision as to the issue of entitlement to SMC based on the need for regular aid and attendance of another person under 38 U.S.C. § 1114(l).  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.

At the outset, a March 2015 VA Form 21-22a Appointment of Individual as Claimant's Representative indicates that Liberman and Mark serves as the Veteran's limited representative as to the issues of: (1) service connection for joint swelling of the knees, feet, and ankles; (2) service connection for sleep apnea; (3) service connection for chronic skin rash; (4) service connection for periodontal disease; (5) increased rating and earlier effective date for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD); (6) increased rating for tinea pedis; and (7) entitlement to a total disability rating based on individual unemployability (TDIU) due to service-connected disabilities.  See 38 C.F.R. § 14.631(f).  In an April 2019 correspondence, the Veteran's limited representative affirmed that their representation was limited to the above issues.  No VA Form 21-22a expanding representation to general power of attorney has been received.  Accordingly, the Veteran is pro se - or unrepresented - as to the claims at issue in this decision, and his limited representative for other claims before VA has been omitted from the header of this decision.

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider regarding claim(s) that have been denied by this decision in whole or in part, he may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim[s], considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

SMC

1. Entitlement to assignment of SMC based on the need for regular aid and attendance of another person (aid and attendance) under 38 U.S.C. § 1114(l).

SMC is an additional level of monthly compensation paid to veterans above the basic levels of compensation for various types of losses or levels of impairment solely due to service-connected disabilities.  It reflects recognition by the VA that certain disabilities, either alone or in combination, impact the veteran beyond the impairment of earning capacity, which is central to the Rating Schedule. 38 C.F.R. § 4.1.  Because it considers the synergistic effects of multiple disabilities, a determination of the correct SMC award level requires layering of different entitlements.  Basic levels of SMC are listed at 38 U.S.C. § 1114(k), while additional levels of SMC are provided in 38 U.S.C. § 1114(l) through (t). The pertinent provisions in this case are found in 38 U.S.C. § 1114(l) and (s).

SMC under 38 U.S.C. § 1114(l) is payable where a veteran, as the result of service-connected disability, has suffered the anatomical loss or loss of use of both feet, or of one hand and one foot, or is blind in both eyes, with 5/200 visual acuity or less, or is permanently bedridden or so helpless that he os she is in need of the regular aid and attendance of another person.  38 C.F.R. § 3.350(b).

Determinations as to the need for aid and attendance must be based on actual requirements of personal assistance from others.  In making such determinations, consideration is given to such conditions as: inability of the claimant to dress or undress himself or to keep himself ordinarily clean and presentable; frequent need of adjustment of any special prosthetic or orthopedic appliances which, by reason of the particular disability, cannot be done without aid; inability of the claimant to feed himself through loss of coordination of upper extremities or through extreme weakness; inability to attend to the wants of nature; or incapacity, physical or mental, which requires care or assistance on a regular basis to protect the claimant from the hazards or dangers inherent in his daily environment.  38 C.F.R. § 3.352(a).  A veteran is "bedridden" when there is a disability or combination of disabilities that actually require the veteran to remain in bed, and the fact that the veteran has voluntarily taken to bed or that a physician has prescribed rest in bed for the greater or lesser part of the day to promote convalescence or cure will not suffice.  Id.

It is not required that all of the enumerated factors in 38 C.F.R. § 3.352(a) be found to exist to establish eligibility for aid and attendance; such eligibility requires at least one of the enumerated factors be present.  The particular personal function that a veteran is unable to perform should be considered in connection with his condition as a whole, and it is only necessary that the evidence establish that the veteran is so helpless as to need regular aid and attendance, not that there be a constant need.  Id.; see also Turco v. Brown, 9 Vet. App. 222 (1996).

At the outset, the Veteran already receives SMC payable at the statutory housebound rate under 38 U.S.C. § 1114(s), effective from February 4, 2020.  However, SMC based on the need for aid and attendance is a greater benefit than SMC payable at the housebound rate.

In this case, the evidence persuasively weighs against the finding that the Veteran is so helpless as to require regular aid and attendance from another person due to his service-connected disabilities.

At the outset, the Veteran's service-connected disabilities include PTSD, rated as 100 percent disabling; a skin disorder manifested by tinea including tinea corporis, manum, pedis, and cruris, rated as 60 percent disabling; right upper extremity radiculopathy, rated as 40 percent disabling; cervical strain with degenerative changes, rated as 20 percent disabling; and left varicocele, status post removal, rated as noncompensable.

First, there is no evidence that the Veteran is bedridden, i.e., has a combination of disabilities that actually require the veteran to remain in bed, or is blind in both eyes, with 5/200 visual acuity or less.

The Veteran has not specifically asserted that he requires aid and attendance due solely to his service-connected disabilities.  Rather, the evidence, including evidence submitted by the Veteran, appears to indicate that he requires regular aid attendance due to nonservice-connected disabilities, rather than service-connected disabilities.

Specifically, a June 2023 Veteran-submitted examination for housebound status or permanent need for aid and attendance noted that the Veteran's pertinent diagnoses included ischemic congestive cardiomyopathy with left ventricular assistive device (LVAD) placement, cerebrovascular accident (CVA), and paresthesia, with no service-connected diagnoses explicitly identified in the examination form.  The private examiner noted that the Veteran was able to feed himself but unable to stand to prepare meals without assistance from his spouse.  Furthermore, he required assistance in bathing and tending to other hygiene needs due to "difficulty mobilizing."  The Veteran was not blind, did not require nursing home care, and did not require assistance with medication management.  He had the capacity to manage his benefit payments, or to direct someone else to do so.  He was dressed appropriately during the examination.  The examiner noted that, due to left hemiparesis related to CVA, the Veteran required assistance with activities of daily living and a motorized scooter.  The examiner further noted that the ischemic cardiomyopathy would cause him to be unable to ambulate long distances.  Finally, the examiner noted that the Veteran's spouse cared for him at home and that the Veteran was unable to ambulate beyond standing and pivoting.  The examiner noted that the Veteran left the house only for appointments and required assistance with walking any distance.

A June 23, 2023, VA community based primary care note indicates that the Veteran required a motorized wheelchair due to left hemiparesis secondary to CVA.

During a July 12, 2023 VA caregiver certificate assessment, the Veteran endorsed depression symptoms, but recalled having met with the VA provider previously, denied suicidal or homicidal ideation, and was cognitively able to understand questions.

A July 25, 2023, VA personal care services note indicates that the Veteran's left side was paralyzed.  However, short term memory was "okay," with the Veteran able to recall after 5 minutes.  He had sufficient cognitive skill for "daily" decision making, and independent decisions were "consistent" and "reasonable."

A July 31, 2023, VA home-care assessment veteran consult indicates that the Veteran required assistance with dressing, bathing, grooming, toileting, feeding (including food preparation), ambulation, and transferring due to a combination of disabilities including weakness and shortness of breath due to end-stage heart failure status post implantation of a LVAD and defibrillator, left hemiparesis due to CVA, right upper extremity weakness due to cervical radiculopathy, and gouty arthropathy.  Furthermore, regarding cognitive impairment, the VA provider noted that the Veteran was oriented to person, place, and time, not delusional, and could communicate without noted difficulties.

Given the above, the evidence persuasively shows that the Veteran's need for aid and attendance is due to his nonservice-connected disabilities.  Here, the June 2023 Veteran-submitted examination for housebound status or permanent need for aid and attendance suggests that he is unable to dress and undress, feed himself, and attend to the wants of nature without assistance due primarily to his end-stage heart failure and left-sided paralysis following a CVA.

Although the Veteran's service-connected PTSD symptoms are consistent with total occupational impairment, he has nonetheless appeared to be oriented to person, place, and time, able to communicate effectively to VA treatment providers and caregivers, able to independently manage his medications (or direct another to do so) and had the capacity to manage benefit payments.  This is not consistent with mental incapacity requiring care or assistance on a regular basis to protect the claimant from the hazards or dangers inherent in his daily environment.

The Veteran has not undergone a VA psychiatric examination during the rating period.  However, during his most recent VA psychiatric examination in January 2018, the Veteran was noted to have symptoms of depressed mood, anxiety, mild memory loss, impaired judgment, impaired abstract thinking, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work like setting, inability to establish and maintain effective relationships, suicidal ideation, and impaired impulse control.  These symptoms resulted in total occupational and social impairment.  Furthermore, the examiner suggested that the Veteran's poor performance on a cognitive test would have resulted in ability to follow directions, or understand instructions, or maintain attention.  However, as noted above, during the rating period, the Veteran has been noted to understand questions from treatment providers and be capable of making decisions independently.  Furthermore, the January 2018 examination provided no evidence consistent with inability to take care of basic needs, such as dressing, eating, and toileting, due to his service-connected disabilities, or that the Veteran's PTSD caused him to be susceptible to hazards or dangers inherent in everyday life.  Specifically, the examiner did not find that there was negligence of personal appearance or hygiene, intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living, to include maintenance of minimal personal hygiene, or persistent danger of hurting self or others. 

Although the Veteran's service-connected right upper extremity radiculopathy and cervical strain undoubtably result in some functional impairment, the above medical evidence, particularly the June 2023 Veteran-submitted examination for housebound status or permanent need for aid and attendance, suggests that the Veteran's primary physical impairments are related to nonservice-connected end-stage heart failure and left-sided paralysis following a CVA.  In this regard, the end-stage heart failure and left-sided paralysis following a CVA have been noted to result in inability to walk, feed himself, and bathe or take care of other hygiene needs.  There is no evidence that the Veteran's use of a motorized scooter, limited standing ability, and inability to walk, which are consistent with loss of use of the feet, are attributable to service-connected disabilities, or disabilities other than end-stand heart failure and left-sided paralysis as a residual of CVA.

Accordingly, the evidence persuasively weighs against assignment of SMC under 38 U.S.C. § 1114(l) based on the need for aid and attendance by another person due to service-connected disabilities.  Accordingly, assignment of SMC based on the need for aid and attendance is not warranted, and the benefit of the doubt doctrine is inapplicable.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (only when the evidence persuasively favors one side or another is the benefit of the doubt doctrine not for application).

Specially Adapted Housing

2. Entitlement to a certificate of eligibility for specially adapted housing or a special home adaption grant.

In a May 2023 correspondence, the Veteran reported that he required specially adapted housing - specifically, a 12 by 12 accessible bathroom - due to his recent LVAD heart procedure.

Financial assistance in acquiring specially adapted housing is available to a veteran who has a permanent and total service-connected disability due to: (1) amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) rated as 100 percent under 38 C.F.R. § 4.123a, Diagnostic Code 8017; (2) blindness in both eyes; (3) full thickness or subdermal burns that have resulted in contractures with limitation of motion of two or more extremities or of at least one extremity and the trunk; or (4) the loss or loss of use of both upper extremities such as to preclude use of the arms at or above the elbows.  Specially adapted housing is also available to a veteran with a permanent and total disability that precludes locomotion due to: (a) the loss or loss of use of both lower extremities; (b) the loss or loss of use of one lower extremity, together with residuals of organic disease or injury which so affect the functions of balance and propulsion as to preclude locomotion; or (c) the loss or loss of use of one lower extremity together with the loss or loss of use of one upper extremity which so affect the functions of balance or propulsion as to preclude locomotion.  38 U.S.C. § 2101(a); 38 C.F.R. § 3.809.

The phrase "preclude locomotion" is defined as the necessity for regular and constant use of a wheelchair, braces, crutches, or cane as a normal mode of locomotion, although occasional locomotion by other methods may be possible.  38 C.F.R. § 3.809(c).

"Loss of use" is also not specifically defined under 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.809 or 3.809a. Regulations pertaining to special monthly compensation for loss of use of a hand or foot state that loss of use is held to exist when no effective function remains other than that which would be equally well served by an amputation with use of a suitable prosthetic appliance. The determination should be made on the basis of the actual remaining function, such as the ability to grasp, manipulate objects, balance, or propel oneself forward. See 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.350(a)(2), 4.63.

Specially adapted housing may also be available to a veteran who served on or after September 11, 2001, who has a permanent disability that was incurred during such service, and which results in loss or loss of use of one or more extremities which so affects the functions of balance or propulsion as to preclude ambulating without the aids of braces, crutches, canes, or a wheelchair. See 38 U.S.C. § 2101(a)(2)(C). 

If entitlement to specially adapted housing is not established, a veteran can qualify for a grant for necessary special home adaptations if the Veteran has a service-connected disability that results in blindness in both eyes with 20/200 visual acuity or less in the better eye with the use of a standard correcting lens or a limitation in fields of vision such that the widest diameter of the visual field subtends an angle no greater than 20 degrees; such a disability need not be permanent and total in nature. Additionally, a special home adaptation grant is available for a veteran that has a permanent and total disability which: (1) includes the anatomical loss or loss of use of both hands; (2) is due to deep partial thickness burns that have resulted in contracture(s) with limitation of motion of two or more extremities or of at least one extremity and the trunk; (3) is due to full thickness or subdermal burns that have resulted in contracture(s) of one or more extremities or the truck; or, (4) is due to residuals of an inhalation injury (including, but not limited to, pulmonary fibrosis, asthma, and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease). 38 C.F.R. § 3.809a(b).

Generally, an eligible veteran will be provided one-time only assistance with a special home adaptation grant or specially adapted housing. However, issuance of a special home adaptation grant before a veteran becomes eligible for specially adapted housing under 38 C.F.R. § 3.809 does not preclude a later grant for specially adapted housing. 38 C.F.R. § 3.809a(a).

The Veteran's service-connected disabilities include PTSD, rated as 100 percent disabling; a skin disorder manifested by tinea including tinea corporis, manum, pedis, and cruris, rated as 60 percent disabling; right upper extremity radiculopathy, rated as 40 percent disabling; cervical strain with degenerative changes, rated as 20 percent disabling; and left varicocele, status post removal, rated as noncompensable.

At the outset, the Veteran has asserted entitlement to specially adapted housing due to a nonservice-connected heart disability rather than due to any service-connected disability.

Here, the Veteran does not have ALS rated as 100 percent disabling, blindness in both eyes, or full thickness or subdermal burns that have resulted in contractures with limitation of motion of two or more extremities or of at least one extremity and the trunk.

Furthermore, to the extent that the service-connected right upper extremity radiculopathy affects function of the right upper extremity, there is no indication that the radiculopathy results in loss of use of the right upper extremity, and furthermore, any impairment resulting in loss of use in the left upper extremity and right and left lower extremities consistent with preclusion of locomotion, i.e., requirement of assisted locomotion methods, has been noted to be due to other causes, such as end-stage heart failure and left-sided paralysis as a residual of CVA, as noted, for example, in the June 2023 Veteran-submitted housebound and aid and attendance examination report.

Finally, there is also no basis for an award of certificate for eligibility for a special home adaption.  Specifically, there is no evidence of anatomical loss or loss of use of both hands due to service-connected disabilities; deep partial thickness burns that have resulted in contracture(s) with limitation of motion of two or more extremities or of at least one extremity and the trunk due to service-connected disabilities; full thickness or subdermal burns that have resulted in contracture(s) of one or more extremities or the truck due to service-connected disabilities; or a service-connected disability due to an inhalation injury.

 

 

L. B. CRYAN

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	D. Small, Attorney Advisor

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.