Citation Nr: A25032632
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240729-461218
DATE: April 9, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for diabetes mellitus type II (DMII) is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a bilateral foot disorder, to include foot ulcers, mild hallux valgus deformity, hammertoe deformities of the second through fifth digits, dorsal spurring at the tarsal joints, calcaneal spur at the insertion of the plantar fascia, and arterial calcifications, is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Marine Corps from October 1979 to October 1981, during Peacetime.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a June 2024 rating decision by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO), which in pertinent part, denied service connection for PTSD, DMII, and bilateral sores on feet chronic as secondary to diabetes mellitus type II. 

In the July 2024 Board Appeal: Notice of Disagreement, VA Form 10182, the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. As such, the Board's review is limited to the evidence of record at the time of the decision on appeal (June 5, 2024). The Board cannot consider evidence submitted during the period the decision on appeal (on or after June 6, 2024). 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.301. However, because this case is being remanded, any evidence that is not considered by the Board at this time will be considered by the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) upon readjudication of this claim.

As a final initial matter, the Veteran selected the Direct Review docket, and the Board notes that the allotted time to select a different Board review option under 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.202(c)(2) and Williams v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 305 (2024), which allows for a docket switch 60 days from the date of the VA Form 10182 or one year from the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision, whichever is later, has not elapsed; however, as this case is being remanded, there is no prejudice to the Veteran at this time as this is not a final decision and he will have an option to return to the Board following this remand, with all options again available to him.

PTSD

The AOJ has conceded a diagnosis of PTSD for this Veteran. See June 2024 Rating Decision.

As for a PTSD stressor, the AOJ stated in the rating decision on appeal, "A stressor is conceded based events in service we requested a stressor statement from you on 03/12/2024 and received a negative response." However, the AOJ denied the claim and did not offer the Veteran a VA examination for this disorder.

On the topic of a stressor, the Board notes that the Veteran has stated in at least two VA Mental Health visits in March 2024 that his military trauma exposure stemmed from the time he worked in black ops rescuing students while in Libya/Jordan. See March 2024 VA Mental Health Notes. Thus, although the Veteran did not formally respond to the March 12, 2024 subsequent development letter requesting information on his PTSD stressor, the Veteran has provided information regarding his PTSD stressor and the information is available in the claims file.  A pre-decisional error to not attempt to corroborate the Veteran's presence in Libya/Jordan during his 1 year and 4 months noted on his Form DD-214, and to otherwise attempt to corroborate the Veteran's allegation that he had "black ops" training and/or deployments.  

Lastly, as noted above, the Veteran has not been afforded a VA examination for his PTSD. In sum, the AOJ has conceded a PTSD diagnosis; the Veteran's PTSD stressor information is readily available in the claims file; and he has not been afforded a medical examination. Thus, the low threshold for obtaining a medical examination and opinion under McLendon for these conditions have been met. As such, remand for such to be obtained is necessary in order to correct this pre-decisional duty to assist error. See 38 U.S.C. ยง 5103A(d); McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 81 (2006).

DMII

In March 2024, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination and medical opinion for his DMII. The Board finds the opinion inadequate. First, the VA examiner did not address direct service connection, instead the VA examiner only provided an opinion encompassing a toxic risk exposure activity (TERA). Thus, the VA examiner did not address all raised theories of entitlement and contentions of record as to GERD. See Robinson v. Peake, 21 Vet. App. 545, 552 (2008), aff'd sub nom. Robinson v. Shinseki, 557 F.3d 1355 (Fed. Cir. 2009) (recognizing VA's duty to consider all issues raised either by the claimant or by the evidence of record). Second, on the TERA opinion, the VA examiner stated that the Veteran was exposed to asbestos for two years and that medical literature shows no direct relationship between asbestos causing diabetes. The Board finds this opinion conclusory, and thus the Board does not have a rationale to evaluate. See Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 124 (2007) (holding a medical opinion must contain clear conclusions with supporting data, and a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two).

As such, remand is required to correct this pre-decisional duty to assist error and to obtain adequate VA opinions for the Veteran's DMII. See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007).

?

Bilateral Foot Disorder

In March 2024, the Veteran was afforded a VA skin examination and medical opinion for ulcers on his feet. The VA examiner stated there was no current diagnosis and stated in the opinion that there was no link to service because there was no current diagnosis. The Board notes that the Veteran had a left foot ulcer in January 2024. See January 2024 VA Treatment Notes. Thus, the Veteran did have a current diagnosis of a left foot ulcer during the appeal period. As such, the VA examiner should have provided an opinion as to that current disorder.

Second, the Veteran's contentions in the January 2024 Fully Developed Claim include allegations that wearing combat boots as a mortarman disfigured his feet and he has unusual sores from diabetes. See January 2024 Fully Developed Claim. To this end, the Veteran has a current diagnosis of bilateral mild hallux valgus deformity, hammertoe deformities of the second through fifth digits, dorsal spurring at the tarsal joints, calcaneal spur at the insertion of the plantar fascia, and arterial calcifications. From the allegations in his claim and the evidence of record, the Veteran should have been provided a VA foot examination along with the VA skin examination.

As such, remand is required to correct these pre-decisional duty to assist errors and to obtain a VA examination and adequate VA opinions for the Veteran's foot disorders. See Barr, supra.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. After attempting to obtain any additional clarifying information from the Veteran as necessary, attempt to corroborate-through all official sources-his noted PTSD stressor (for performing "black ops" in Libya/Jordan to rescue students) during his period of service.

?

2. Schedule the Veteran for an appropriate VA examination to determine whether his PTSD is related to military service. The examiner should review the claims file in conjunction with the examination.  

After review of the claims file and examination of the Veteran, the examiner should state what stressor his PTSD is based upon and whether such stressor occurred during military service. Specifically, the Veteran has identified two potential stressors: (1) the in-service stressor of rescuing students during black ops missions while in Libya/Jordan, (2) the 2022 nonservice-related stressor of being jumped in the civil sector. See March 18, 2024 VA Mental Health Notes.

The examiner should address any lay statements of record regarding the claim.

All findings should be reported in detail and all opinions must be accompanied by a clear rationale.

3. Obtain an addendum opinion from an appropriate examiner, who has never participated in this claim, in order to determine whether the Veteran's DMII is related to military service. The entire claims file, including a copy of this remand, must be made available to and must be reviewed by the examiner. A new examination may be ordered if deemed necessary.

After reviewing the claims file, the examiner should state whether such began during military service, within one year of discharge therefrom, or is otherwise the result of military service, to include any toxic exposures the Veteran had during military service. In this regard, the examiner is asked to consider total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran.

In addressing the above, the examiner must address: (i) the Veteran's TERA memorandums, and (ii) any relevant lay statements of record to include any statements regarding onset of symptomatology and any continuity since onset.

All findings should be reported in detail and all opinions must be accompanied by a clear rationale.

4. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination with an appropriate examiner, who has not previously participated in this case, in order to determine whether any current skin disorders of the foot, to include ulcers, are related to military service. The claims file must be made available to and be reviewed by the examiner in conjunction with the examination.

Following a review of the claims file and examination of the Veteran, the examiner should identify any and all skin disorders of the foot currently found, including ulcers.

For each skin disorder of the foot found, the examiner should provide an opinion regarding whether such disorder began in or is otherwise related to military service, to include any reported incidents during service. 

In addressing the above, the examiner must address the Veteran's noted bilateral heel pain noted in February 1980, as well as foot blisters noted in June 1981.  The examiner should also specifically discuss the Veteran's lay statements regarding onset of symptoms and any continuity of symptomatology since onset and/or since discharge from service. 

All findings should be reported in detail and all opinions must be accompanied by a clear rationale.

5. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination with an appropriate examiner, who has not previously participated in this case, in order to determine whether any current foot disorders, to include bilateral mild hallux valgus deformity, hammertoe deformities of the second through fifth digits, dorsal spurring at the tarsal joints, calcaneal spur at the insertion of the plantar fascia, and arterial calcifications, are related to military service. The claims file must be made available to and be reviewed by the examiner in conjunction with the examination.

Following a review of the claims file and examination of the Veteran, the examiner should identify any and all foot disorders currently found, including bilateral mild hallux valgus deformity, hammertoe deformities of the second through fifth digits, dorsal spurring at the tarsal joints, calcaneal spur at the insertion of the plantar fascia, and arterial calcifications.

For each foot disorder found, the examiner should provide an opinion regarding whether such disorder began in or is otherwise related to military service, to include wearing combat boots as a mortarman. 

In addressing the above, the examiner must address the Veteran's noted bilateral heel pain noted in February 1980, as well as foot blisters noted in June 1981.  The examiner should also specifically discuss the Veteran's lay statements regarding onset of symptoms and any continuity of symptomatology since onset and/or since discharge from service. 

All findings should be reported in detail and all opinions must be accompanied by a clear rationale.

 

 

MARTIN B. PETERS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Garfield, Jeannine F.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.1303.