Citation Nr: A25032328
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240409-432585
DATE: April 8, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) is dismissed.

Entitlement to service connection for chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS) is dismissed.

Entitlement to service connection for migraines is dismissed.

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is dismissed.

Entitlement to service connection for fibromyalgia is dismissed.

Entitlement to a compensable disability rating for asthma is dismissed.

Entitlement to service connection for a traumatic brain injury (TBI) is denied.

Entitlement to a compensable disability rating for cataract, with presence of left eye intraocular lens (previously rated as cataracts) is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. At the time the Veteran submitted his April 9, 2024, VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) (NOD) concerning the issues of entitlement to service connection for IBS, CFS, migraines, OSA, and fibromyalgia and an increased disability rating for asthma, a February 26, 2024, VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review request was pending at the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) for the same issues.

2. The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran has had a TBI at any time during or approximate to the pendency of the claim.

3. During the period on appeal, the Veteran's cataract, with presence of left eye intraocular lens, manifested as impaired visual acuity with 20/20 or better corrected distance vision in the right eye and no worse than 20/40 corrected distance vision in the left eye and no incapacitating episodes.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for dismissal of the appeals concerning IBS, CFS, migraines, OSA, fibromyalgia, and asthma have been met.  38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. § 20.205.

2. The criteria for service connection for a TBI have not been met.  38 U.S.C. 

§§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

3. The criteria for a compensable disability rating for cataract, with presence of left eye intraocular lens, have not been met.  38 U.S.C. § 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. 

§§ 3.321, 4.1, 4.75-4.79 Diagnostic Codes 6027, 6066.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from December 1988 to May 1995.

The rating decision on appeal was issued in May 2023 and constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies. 

In an April 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the May 2023 AOJ decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim[s], considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

1. Entitlement to service connection for IBS is dismissed.

2. Entitlement to service connection for CFS is dismissed.

3. Entitlement to service connection for migraines is dismissed.

4. Entitlement to service connection for OSA is dismissed.

5. Entitlement to service connection for fibromyalgia is dismissed. 

6. Entitlement to a compensable disability rating for asthma is dismissed.

By way of history, an April 2023 rating decision denied the Veteran's claim of entitlement to service connection for CFS, a May 2023 rating decision denied his claims of entitlement to service connection for IBS, migraines, TBI and fibromyalgia, and granted service connection for cataracts and asthma, and a subsequent May 2023 rating decision denied his claim of entitlement to service connection for OSA.  

A rating decision rendered in February 2024 continued the noncompensable disability rating assigned to the Veteran's asthma, confirmed and continued the denials of service connection for CFS, IBS, OSA, and migraines, and deferred adjudication of his claim for an increased rating for cataracts.  The Veteran subsequently filed a February 2024 Decision Review Request: Higher Level Review, requesting review of his claims of CFS, IBS, OSA, migraines, asthma, fibromyalgia, and cataracts. 

While the Veteran's February 2024 request for higher level review was pending, he submitted a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) in April 2024 appealing the denials of increased ratings for asthma and cataracts, and denials of service connection for CFS, IBS, OSA, TBI, migraines, and fibromyalgia. 

Once one of the available options for review of a decision on a claim, or issue within a claim (a request for higher-level review, supplemental claim, or an appeal to the Board) has been filed, a request for review under a different available option may not be filed with respect to the same claim, or same issue within the claim, while that review is pending adjudication or until the request for higher level review, supplemental claim, or Notice of Disagreement is withdrawn.  38 U.S.C. 

§ 5104C(a)(2)(A); 38 C.F.R. § 3.2500(b).

Here, the Veteran's claims of entitlement to service connection for CFS, IBS, OSA, migraines, and fibromyalgia and for an increased disability rating for asthma were pending higher level review with the AOJ at the time the Veteran submitted his April 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement).  As such, the Board may not review the appeals, and they must be dismissed based on improper concurrent election.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2500(b).

7. Entitlement to service connection for a TBI is denied.

The Veteran is seeking to establish service connection for a TBI.  Specifically, he contends he experienced trauma to the head during service. 

A veteran is entitled to VA disability compensation if there is a disability resulting from personal injury suffered or disease contracted in the line of duty in active service, or for aggravation of a preexisting injury suffered or disease contracted in the line of duty in active service.  38 U.S.C. § 1110.  

Generally, to establish a right to compensation for a present disability, a veteran must show: (1) a present disability; (2) an in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service, the so-called "nexus" requirement.  Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

According to the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit in Lynch v. McDonough, 999 F.3d 1391 (Fed. Cir. 2021), the proper standard of review is whether the factors are in an "approximate balance."  Lynch held that the veteran is entitled to the benefit of the doubt when the evidence is in an approximate balance, i.e., nearly equal and does not require the evidence to be in exact equipoise.  Id.

Review of the Veteran's service treatment records are absent complaints of, treatment for, or diagnosis of a TBI or its residuals.  An April 1995 Report of Medical Examination upon separation from service reflected the Veteran's head, neurological system, and psychiatric state were clinically evaluated as normal.  On an April 1995 Report of Medical History upon separation from service, the Veteran denied having, or having ever had, a head injury, frequent or severe headaches, dizziness or fainting spells, eye trouble, loss of memory or amnesia or periods of unconsciousness.

Post-service treatment records do not reflect the Veteran has been diagnosed with a TBI.

Based on a review of the record, the Board finds the evidence persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran has a TBI that is related to service.

The existence of a current disability is the cornerstone of a claim for VA disability compensation.  See Degmetich v. Brown, 104 F.3d 1328, 1332 (1997) (holding that §§ 1110 and 1131's requirement of the existence of a present disability for VA compensation purposes cannot be considered arbitrary); see also McClain v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 319, 323 (2007) (holding that the requirement of a current disability is met when a claimant has a disability at the time a claim for VA compensation is filed or during the pendency of that claim.  Here, the evidence does not show that the Veteran has a diagnosis of, or has ever been diagnosed with, a TBI.

The Board acknowledges that the Veteran has not been afforded a VA examination in connection with his claim.  VA will provide a medical examination or obtain a medical opinion if the evidence indicates the existence of a current disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability that may be associated with an event, injury, or disease in service, and the record does not contain sufficient medical evidence to decide the claim.  38 U.S.C. § 5103A(d)(2); 38 C.F.R. 

§ 3.304(c)(4)(i); McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006).  There is no credible evidence of a TBI having ever been diagnosed.  Therefore, the elements of McLendon have not been satisfied and a VA examination is not warranted.

Accordingly, the Veteran's claim of entitlement to service connection for a TBI must be denied.

8. Entitlement to a compensable disability rating for cataract, with presence of left eye intraocular lens, (previously rated as cataracts) is denied.

A disability rating is determined by the application of VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities (Rating Schedule), 38 C.F.R. Part 4.  The percentage ratings contained in the Rating Schedule represent, as far as can be practicably determined, the average impairment in earning capacity resulting from diseases and injuries incurred or aggravated during military service and their residual conditions in civil occupations.  Separate diagnostic codes identify the various disabilities.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1.

VA has a duty to acknowledge and consider all regulations that are potentially applicable through the assertions and issues raised in the record, and to explain the reasons and bases for its conclusions.  Schafrath v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 589 (1991).

Where there is a question as to which of two evaluations shall be applied, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria for that rating.  Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7.

The Board will consider whether separate ratings may be assigned for separate periods of time based on facts found, a practice known as "staged ratings," whether it is an initial rating case or not.  Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119, 126-27 (1999); Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007).

The Veteran's cataract, with presence of left eye intraocular lens, is evaluated under Diagnostic Code 6027 prior to June 22, 2023, and under Diagnostic Code 6027-6066 thereafter.  Hyphenated diagnostic codes are used when a rating under one code requires use of an additional diagnostic code to identify the basis for the evaluation assigned.  38 C.F.R. § 4.27.  

Under Diagnostic Code 6027 for cataracts, the code instructs to evaluate preoperative cataracts under the General Rating Formula for Diseases of the Eye.  For postoperative cataracts, if a replacement lens is present (pseudophakia), the code instructs to evaluate under the General Rating Formula for Diseases of the Eye.  If there is no replacement lens, the code instructs to evaluate based on aphakia (Diagnostic Code 6029).

The General Rating Formula for Diseases of the Eye instructs to evaluate on the basis of either visual impairment due to a particular condition or on incapacitating episodes, whichever results in a higher evaluation.

Note (1) indicates that, for the purposes of evaluations under 38 C.F.R. § 4.79, an incapacitating episode is an eye condition severe enough to require a clinic visit to a provider specifically for treatment purposes.  Note (2) indicates that examples of treatment may include but are not limited to: systemic immunosuppressants or biologic agents; intravitreal or periocular injections; laser treatments; or other surgical interventions. 

The Board notes that the evidence shows the Veteran has preoperative cataracts in the right eye and postoperative cataracts with replacement lens in the left eye.  Therefore, Diagnostic Code 6029 for aphakia will not be considered.  Additionally, the Veteran does not assert, nor does the evidence reflect, that his service-connected eye disability produces incapacitating episodes.  Therefore, the Board will evaluate the Veteran's eye disability based upon visual impairment.

The evaluation of visual impairment is based on impairment of central visual acuity (excluding developmental errors of refraction), visual field, and muscle function.  38 C.F.R. § 4.75(a).  Examinations of visual impairment must be conducted by a licensed optometrist or ophthalmologist, and the examiner must identify the disease, injury, or other pathologic process for any visual impairment found.  38 C.F.R. § 4.75(a)-(b).  Examinations of visual field or muscle function will be conducted only when medically indicated.  Id.

In this case, the evidence of record shows impairments of central visual acuity and visual fields.  Impairment of muscle function are not applicable here.  

Diagnostic Code 6066 provides disability ratings where vision in one eye (the poorer eye) is 10/200 or better.  Where visual acuity in one eye (the poorer eye) is 20/40, a noncompensable disability rating is warranted where vision in the other eye is 20/40 or better. 

Subject to the provisions of § 3.383(a), if visual impairment of only one eye is service connected, the visual acuity of the other eye will be considered to be 20/40 for purposes of evaluating the service-connected visual impairment.  38 C.F.R. § 4.75(c).  The evaluation for visual impairment of one eye must not exceed 30 percent unless there is anatomical loss of the eye.  38 C.F.R. § 4.75(d).  The evaluation for visual impairment of one eye should be combined with other disabilities of the same eye that are not based on visual impairment.  Evaluation of visual acuity is based on corrected distance vision with central fixation.  38 C.F.R. § 4.76(b)(1).

Turning to the evidence of record, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination for eye conditions in March 2022.  Visual acuity testing showed corrected distance of 20/20 or better for the right and left eye.  The Veteran did not have a difference equal to two or more lines on the Snellen test type chart or its equivalent between distance and near corrected vision, with near vision being worse.  The Veteran did not have anatomical loss, light perception only, or extremely poor vision or blindness of either eye.  He did not have a corneal irregularity, astigmatism or diplopia.  The Veteran had a visual field defect with an average concentric contraction of the visual field of the right eye of 55.625 degrees and left eye of 57.5 degrees.  He did not have loss of a visual field or a scotoma.  The Veteran had bilateral pinguecula that did not contribute to his decrease in visual acuity or other visual impairment. 

The Veteran had preoperative cataract present in the right eye and postoperative cataract with replacement intraocular lens in the left eye.  There was no aphakia or dislocation of the crystalline lens.  The examiner noted that the Veteran's decrease in visual acuity or other visual impairment was not attributable to his cataracts.  Instead, the examiner noted visual field constriction post stroke that was responsible for visual impairment.  The examiner indicated the Veteran had not had any incapacitating episodes attributable to an eye condition in the past 12 months and that his eye conditions impacted his ability to work, with his visual field constriction making tasks more difficult and time consuming compared to others.  

The Veteran was afforded another VA examination for eye conditions in March 2024.  He reported he was uncomfortable with his vision lately because things were not as focused as they used to be, and he was struggling to see clearly.  Visual acuity testing showed corrected distance vision of 20/20 or better for the right eye and 20/40 for the left eye.  The Veteran did not have a difference equal to two or more lines on the Snellen test type chart or its equivalent between distance and near corrected vision, with near vision being worse.  The Veteran did not have anatomical loss, light perception only, or extremely poor vision or blindness of either eye.  He did not have a corneal irregularity, astigmatism or diplopia.  Visual field testing performed reflected no contraction of a visual field, no loss of a visual field, and no scotoma.  The Veteran had bilateral pinguecula and dry eye syndrome that did not contribute to his decrease in visual acuity or other visual impairment but affected the comfort of the eyes. 

The Veteran had preoperative cataract present in the right eye and postoperative cataract present in the left eye.  While the examiner selected the option reflecting there was no replacement intraocular lens in the left eye, he specifically noted the Veteran's left eye surgery with no complications and the presence of an intraocular lens in the "remarks" section of the examination report.  There was no aphakia or dislocation of the crystalline lens.  The examiner noted that the density of the Veteran's cataracts was affecting the quality of vision in his right eye.  The examiner noted there were no sins of complications from the left eye's cataracts surgery seen on examination.  The examiner indicated the Veteran had not had any incapacitating episodes attributable to an eye condition in the past 12 months and that his eye conditions did not impact his ability to work.  The Veteran had a history of stoke, but visual field testing was performed without any signs of peripheral vision loss. 

Based on the evidence above, a compensable disability rating for the Veteran's cataract, with presence of left eye intraocular lens, is not warranted.  The results of the March 2022 VA examination show a corrected distance vision of 20/20 or better in both the right and left eye, which do not meet the criteria for a compensable evaluation under impairment of central visual acuity.  The results of the March 2024 VA examination show a corrected distance vision of 20/20 or better for the right eye and 20/40 for the left eye, which similarly do not meet the criteria for a compensable evaluation under impairment of central visual acuity.  Further, while the March 2022 VA examination did show compensable contraction of the Veteran's visual field, this was attributed to a previous stroke, which is not service connected.  Therefore, the residuals of the Veteran's stroke cannot be considered in the evaluation of his service-connected eye disability.

A compensable disability rating requires more severe levels of visual impairment which are not shown by the evidence.  The Board has considered the Veteran's treatment records, but they do not contain studies or findings that suggest a higher rating should be assigned.

Accordingly, the Board finds that the benefit-of-the-doubt rule is not applicable as the evidence is not in approximate balance, and entitlement to a compensable disability rating for cataract, with presence of left eye intraocular lens, is not warranted.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

 

 

KRISTI L. GUNN

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	L. Silverblatt

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.