Citation Nr: A25032942
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 230718-362688
DATE: April 9, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service-connection for non-Hodgkin's lymphoma is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from March 2008 to April 2013.

The rating decision on appeal was issued in June 2023, and constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.  

In the July 2023 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Hearing Review docket.

Hearing review is the appeal option of the Board in which the Board may consider the evidence of record at the time of the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal, and any evidence submitted by the Veteran [or representative] at the hearing or within 90 days following the hearing.  38 C.F.R. § 20.302(a).  If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal and prior to the Board hearing, or (2) more than 90 days following the Board hearing, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.302(a), 20.801.

In March 2025, the Veteran testified at a Board Hearing.

Entitlement to service-connection for non-Hodgkin's lymphoma is remanded.

The Veteran contends that his non-Hodgkin's lymphoma disorder is related to his military service.  

Under the AMA a remand is proper only when there is a duty to assist error occurring prior to the date of an AOJ decision on appeal, or if another error fails to satisfy a regulatory or statutory duty.  See 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

The Board notes that the Veteran attended a VA examination for this issue in May 2023.  Following the examination, the examiner confirmed the Veteran's non-Hodgkin's lymphoma diagnosis. 

The Veteran attended another VA examination for this issue in June 2023.  The examiner opined that claimed condition was less likely than not (likelihood is less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activity(ies), after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran. 

The Board finds this opinion to be inadequate because it is not based on an accurate set of facts.  Specifically, the Board notes that the Veteran's April 2023 VA Form 21-526 EZ; Application for Disability Compensation indicates that the Veteran was exposed to toxic chemicals.  The Veteran stated, "I worked on the FFG 50 Taylor and went on several deployments where the main job required the usage of toxic chemicals and substances pertaining to the upkeep and maintenance of the ship which include but not limited to paints, solutions, thinners, welding, sanding, cleaning solutions, maintenance greases and other toxic elements." 

The Board further finds this opinion inadequate because the examiner did not provide a thorough and well-reasoned analysis that addressed the Veteran's contention that his current symptoms manifested while on active duty.  Thus, for the above-stated reasons, a remand is required to obtain a more complete medical opinion as to the nature and etiology of the Veteran's disability and that the failure to obtain same constituted a pre-decisional violation of the duty to assist.

The matters are REMANDED for the following actions:

Obtain an addendum medical nexus opinion from an appropriate clinician to determine the nature and likely etiology of the Veteran's non-Hodgkin's lymphoma disorder.  The electronic claims file must be made available to and reviewed by the examiner.  All indicated testing and studies must be conducted, and all pertinent symptomatology must be reported in detail.  The examiner should then address the following:

(A.)  Is it approximately at least as likely as not that the Veteran's non-Hodgkin's lymphoma disorder had its onset in service or was caused by or related at least in part to his active service?

The examiner is specifically asked to address if the Veteran's experiences of exposure to chemicals as a boatswain's mate, contributed to the development of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, and fully consider his statements regarding the continuity of his complaints since service.

The examiner's opinion must include a complete rationale for all opinions expressed.  

In providing all of the requested opinions, the examiner should fully consider the Veteran's competent lay statements regarding the observable symptoms he has experienced.  

 

 

Michael J. Skaltsounis

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	W. Taylor

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.