Citation Nr: A25032270
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 241210-492676
DATE: April 8, 2025

REMANDED

The issue of eligibility for benefits under the Program of Comprehensive Assistance for Family Caregivers (PCAFC) is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The first appellant in this matter is the Veteran who served on active duty with the Navy from August 1946 to January 1947.   

The second appellant in this matter is P.J.M., the Veteran's friend who resides with the Veteran and is applying to become the Veteran's Primary Family Caregiver.  

The Veterans Health Administration (VHA) decision on appeal was issued in August 2024; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.  

In the December 10, 2024, VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal, the appellants elected the Evidence Submission docket.  The AMA Evidence Submission docket allows submission of additional evidence by the appellants and/or representative in support of the appeal with submission of the VA Form 10182 or within 90 days following receipt of the VA Form 10182.  As this is an Evidence Submission appeal under the AMA, the record closed as of the August 19, 2024, VHA decision and reopened from December 10, 2024, to March 10, 2025.  

Therefore, the Board has only considered the evidence of record at the time of the August 2024 VHA decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the appellants or representative with, or within 90 days from receipt of, the December 2024 VA Form 10182.  38 C.F.R. § 20.303.  If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the VHA issued the decision on appeal and prior to the date the Board received the VA Form 10182, or (2) more than 90 days following the date the Board received the VA Form 10182, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.303, 20.801.  However, because the Board is remanding the claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by VHA in the adjudication of the claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

The issue of eligibility for benefits under the PCAFC is remanded.

The Board finds remand is warranted to satisfy a pre-decisional duty to assist error including inadequate medical opinion.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a) (the Board may remand for correction of any error by the AOJ in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty if correction of the error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the claim).  

The August 2024 denial relied on an August 2024 review by the Centralized Eligibility and Appeals Team (CEAT), which found that the Veteran did not meet the eligibility requirements under the program; however, the Board finds that the CEAT review is legally inadequate to support the decision made.  

As a general matter, a determination by VA about the "furnishing of assistance or support" under the Caregiver Support Program shall be considered a medical decision, which is not within the Board's jurisdictional authority to review.  See 38 U.S.C. § 1720G; Beaudette v. McDonough, 93 F.4th 1361 (Fed. Cir. 2024).  These issues turn on the medical judgment of VHA and the CEAT in determining whether the Veteran met the medical eligibility criteria under PCAFC.  The CEAT is responsible for making the initial medical decision regarding eligibility for PCAFC benefits.  See 85 Fed. Reg. 46226, 46230 (July 31, 2020).

However, decisions as to eligibility under PCAFC are subject to Board review.  See Beaudette v. McDonough, 93 F.4th 1361 (Fed. Cir. 2024).  The Board has the authority to determine the types of Caregiver Program eligibility decisions that fall within its jurisdiction.  Id.  Decisions not related to the "furnishing of assistance and support" are within the Board's jurisdiction.  Id.  To this end, the Board finds that it is within its jurisdictional authority to review the adequacy of all medical opinions related to the CEAT's decision regarding the "furnishing of assistance and support."  See Owens v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 429, 433 (1995); Wilson v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 614 (1992).  This includes the CEAT's medical opinion upon which the instant eligibility decision was based. 

A VA opinion is adequate if it "sufficiently inform[s] the Board of the medical expert's judgment on a medical question and the essential rationale for that opinion."  The VA opinion need not discuss each piece of favorable evidence in the record.  Likewise, a VA opinion is not nonprobative simply because it does not "explicitly lay out the examiner's journey from the facts to a conclusion."  Rather, the VA medical report "must be read as a whole" to determine the examiner's rationale.  See Monzingo v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 97, 105-06 (2012).  

A non-exhaustive list of factors that, depending on the case, may be relevant considerations in determining the adequacy and probative value of a medical opinion include: (1) whether there was personal examination of the patient; (2) the expert's knowledge and skill in analyzing the data; (3) whether the opinion contains clear conclusions with supporting data and a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two; (4) whether the opinion is clear and susceptible of only one meaning; (5) the expert's familiarity with pertinent medical history; (6) whether there is any inconsistency in the expert's statements; (7) whether the expert has provided a thorough and detailed opinion about an area within his or her expertise; (8) whether the expert has provided factually accurate, fully articulated, and sound reasoning for his or her conclusion; (9) whether the expert relied on sufficient facts or data; (10) whether the opinion is the product of reliable principles and methods; (11) whether the opinion is the result of principles and methods reliably applied to facts; and (12) whether medical text evidence that a medical opinion relies on contains qualifying or contradictory aspects where the text is entered into the record, at least in part.  See McCray v. Wilkie, 31 Vet. App. 243, 257 (2019).

An unexplained conclusory opinion is entitled to no weight in a service-connection context.  Horn v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 231, 240 (2012).  

In short, a medical opinion will be considered probative if it includes clear conclusions and supporting data with a reasoned analysis connecting the data and conclusions.  A medical opinion that is a factually accurate, fully articulated, and based on sound reasoning carries significant weight.  See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008).  

Here, the CEAT's August 2024 review does not meet these requirements as it failed to consider and address potentially favorable evidence of record.  The decision found, in part, that the Veteran did not require personal care services for a minimum of 6 continuous months based on a need for supervision or protection based on symptoms or residuals of neurological or other impairment or injury and/or a need for regular or extensive instruction or supervision without which the ability of the Veteran to function in daily life.  The CEAT determined that their review of the records did not reveal any significant issues with memory, cognition, or unstable mental health to require assistance.  They also determined that the evidence revealed that the Veteran was independently capable of self-preservation and did not have any documented needs requiring step-by-step instruction.  

However, although the evidence did not document any residuals of a neurological impairment, the evidence did document impairment or injury due to a history of falls and syncope hindering the Veteran's health, safety, and well-being.  Specifically, a February 2024 Nurse Procedure Note indicated that the Veteran passed out and fell on the floor after bending over too far to pick up an object.  In a May 2024 Primary Care Messaging Note, the Veteran's primary care physician cautioned the Veteran about not bending over too far for his safety.   Moreover, during the August 2024 Veteran Assessment, the Primary Family Caregiver Applicant stated that he moved in with the Veteran due in part to the Veteran's fall history.  An August 2024 Geriatric Evaluation Note also stated that the Veteran previously fell in January 2024 while using his walker, and that he was frail, with an abnormal gait, and a history of falls.     

The Board finds that a remand is required for a more thorough CEAT review that adequately considers the Veteran's history of falls and syncope episodes, and addresses whether the Veteran requires supervision, protection, or instruction due to these documented impairments.  Accordingly, a remand is required for a new medical opinion that adequately addresses the criteria for eligibility for PCAFC benefits as set forth in 38 C.F.R. § 1720G(a)(2)(C).  

The matters are REMANDED for the following actions:

1. After carefully considering the evidence contained in the claims file, the CEAT is asked to offer an opinion accompanied by a through rationale as to the following: 

(a)	Does the Veteran have a need for supervision or protection based on symptoms or residuals of neurological or other impairment or injury; or 

(b)	Does the Veteran have a need for regular or extensive instruction or supervision without which the ability of the Veteran to function in daily life would be seriously impaired?

In answering these questions, the medical facts and reasons underpinning every conclusion must be articulated.  That is, the CEAT must (1) identify what facts and information, whether found in the record or outside the record, support the conclusion, and (2) explain how that evidence justifies each conclusion.  

The CEAT must also specifically consider and address the Veteran's history of falls and syncope episodes as documented in his VA treatment records.  

2. Issue the Veteran, Primary Family Caregiver applicant, and appointed representative notice of the decision on the issue of entitlement to eligibility for PCAFC benefits as described in 38?U.S.C. §?5104.  The notice shall include but is not limited to a summary of the evidence; a summary of the applicable laws and regulations; identification of findings favorable to the claimant; and identification of the elements not satisfied but necessary for establishing eligibility for PCAFC benefits under 38?C.F.R. §§ 71.15-71.25.

 

 

Frederic P. Gallun

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	M.H.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.