Citation Nr: A25032578
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 230105-311329
DATE: April 9, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a recurrent headache disability is remanded. 

Entitlement to service connection for hypertension is remanded. 

Entitlement to service connection for diabetes mellitus is remanded. 

Entitlement to service connection for a right lower extremity diabetic neuropathy is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a left lower extremity diabetic neuropathy is remanded.

Entitlement to an effective date prior to January 15, 2021, for the award of service connection for erectile dysfunction is remanded.  

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent for pseudofolliculitis barbae (PFB) is remanded.  

Entitlement to a total rating for compensation purposes based on individual unemployability due to service-connected disabilities (TDIU) is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran had active service from January 1985 to December 1987.  He served at Camp Lejeune, North Carolina.

In June 2022, the Agency of Original Jurisdiction granted service connection for erectile dysfunction; assigned a noncompensable rating for that disability, effective February 25, 2022; denied service connection for headaches, hypertension, diabetes mellitus, right lower extremity diabetic neuropathy, and left lower extremity diabetic neuropathy; and denied a rating in excess of 10 percent for PFB.  In August 2022, the Veteran submitted a Decision Review Request: Higher Level Request: VA Form 20-0996, as to the effective date assigned for the award of service connection for erectile dysfunction; a rating in excess of 10 percent for PFB; and service connection for headaches, hypertension, diabetes mellitus, right lower extremity diabetic neuropathy, and left lower extremity diabetic neuropathy.  In September 2022, the Agency of Original Jurisdiction determined that January 15, 2021, was the appropriate effective date for the award of service connection for erectile dysfunction; denied a rating in excess of 10 percent of PFB; denied service connection for headaches; and identified duty to assist errors as to the issues of service connection for hypertension, diabetes mellitus, right lower extremity diabetic neuropathy, and left lower extremity diabetic neuropathy.  On December 9, 2022, the Agency of Original Jurisdiction denied service connection for hypertension, diabetes mellitus, right lower extremity diabetic neuropathy, and left lower extremity diabetic neuropathy.  In the January 2023 Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), VA Form 10182, the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  

As to the issues of an effective date prior to January 15, 2021, for the award of service connection for erectile dysfunction, a rating in excess of 10 percent for PFB, and service connection for headaches, the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the June 15, 2022, Agency of Original Jurisdiction decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  If evidence was submitted during the period after the Agency of Original Jurisdiction issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

Regarding the issues of service connection for hypertension, diabetes mellitus, right lower extremity diabetic neuropathy, and left lower extremity diabetic neuropathy, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the December 9, 2022, Agency of Original Jurisdiction decision.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the December 2022 Agency of Original Jurisdiction decision cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  However, as the Board is remanding the claims, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the Agency of Original Jurisdiction in the adjudication of those claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

In the January 2023 VA Form 10182, the Veteran expressly raised the issue of entitlement to a TDIU.  When entitlement to a TDIU is reasonably raised during the adjudicatory process of evaluating the underlying disability or disabilities, it is part of the claim for benefits for the underlying disability or disabilities.  Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447, 454 (2009).  Therefore, the issue of entitlement to a TDIU is on appeal and will be addressed below.

1. Entitlement to service connection for a recurrent headache disability is remanded. 

The Veteran asserts that service connection for a recurrent headache disability is warranted. 

VA's duty to assist includes, in appropriate cases, the duty to conduct a thorough and contemporaneous medical examination which is accurate and fully descriptive.  McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006); Green v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 121 (1991).

A disability examination and medical opinion will be requested for certain non presumptive conditions involving a Toxic Exposure Risk Activity (TERA).  When a veteran submits a claim for compensation; has evidence of a disability; has evidence of participation in a TERA; and such evidence is not sufficient to establish service connection for the disability, then the veteran can claim participation in a TERA explicitly or implicitly through service in a location presumed associated with toxic exposure, or records showing participation in a TERA; if the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) has conceded exposure in a prior claim; or if the file has a claim attributable to toxic exposure.  Other ways to claim or establish participation in a TERA include, when a veteran's military occupational specialty is associated with toxic exposure; when medical records suggest exposure to a toxic substance, chemical, or airborne hazard such as Veterans Health Administration (VHA) exposure screening; or, with any other relevant evidence of record to include garrison exposures. 38 U.S.C. § 1168(a).

The service personnel records reflect that the Veteran was stationed at Camp Lejeune, North Carolina.  The March 2023 VA TERA Memorandum concedes that the Veteran participated in a TERA and  concludes that the Veteran qualifies for a presumption of exposure to Camp Lejeune contaminated water, perchloroethylene (PCE), trichloroethylene (TCE,) vinyl chloride, and benzene. 

A December 2021 VA treatment record states that the Veteran was diagnosed with uncontrolled headaches.

The Veteran has not been afforded a VA headache examination.  That is a pre decisional error.

2. Entitlement to service connection for hypertension is remanded. 

The Veteran contends that service connection for hypertension is warranted as the claimed disability was incurred either during active service or, in the alternative, is related to the service-connected posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD).  The Veteran asserts that his obesity should be considered as an intermediate step between the service-connected PTSD and hypertension. 

Service connection may be granted for disability which is proximately due to or the result of a service-connected disease or injury.  38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a).  Service connection shall be granted on a secondary basis under the provisions of 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a) where it is demonstrated that a service-connected disorder has aggravated a nonservice connected disability.  Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439 (1995).  Service connection has been established for PTSD with persistent depressive disorder, obstructive sleep apnea, tinnitus, PFB, erectile dysfunction, and bilateral hearing loss. 

Under the obesity-intermediate step theory predicated on aggravation, consideration must be taken as to (1) whether the service-connected disability caused a veteran to become obese or aggravated the veteran's obesity; (2) if so, whether the obesity or aggravation of the obesity was a substantial factor in causing the current disability; and (3) whether the current disability would not have occurred but for the obesity caused or aggravated by the service-connected disability.  If these questions are answered in the affirmative, then the claimed disability may be service connected on a secondary basis.  Walsh v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 300 (2020).  

When VA undertakes to obtain an evaluation, it must ensure that the evaluation is adequate.  Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 312 (2007).

The report of a September 2021 VA hypertension examination states that the Veteran was diagnosed with hypertension.  The examiner concluded that "the claimed condition was less likely than not (less than 50 percent probability) proximately due to or the result of the Veteran's service-connected condition."  The examiner commented that "although mental health conditions such as PTSD can cause transient elevation in blood pressure, it would not lead to a chronic sustained elevation to the development of hypertension." 

The report of a June 2022 VA hypertension examination states that the Veteran was diagnosed with hypertension.  The nurse practitioner concluded that "the claimed condition was less likely than not (less than 50 percent probability) proximately due to or the result of the Veteran's service-connected condition."  The nurse practitioner commented that "the August 24, 2004, shows the Veteran was first diagnosed with hypertension;" "a review of literature does not support chronic hypertension is a result of PTSD with depressive disorder;" and "the Veteran's hypertension is less likely than not proximately due to or the result of PTSD with persistent depressive disorder." 

A November 2022 VA evaluation states that "the claimed condition was less likely than not (less than 50 percent probability) proximately due to or the result of the Veteran's service-connected condition."  The nurse practitioner commented that "the condition of hypertension has no relation to a service connected condition;" "the Veteran has no chronicity of care related to his time as an active service member or any medical service connection after his departure up to the year 2006, when the Veteran was diagnosed with hypertension;" and "a nexus or chronicity of care has not been established to connect hypertension to the Veteran's military service."  A December 2022 addendum to the November 2022 VA evaluation states that "the claimed condition of hypertension is secondary to obesity."  

The VA nurse practitioners did not address whether the diagnosed hypertension was related to the service-connected PTSD and the other service-connected disabilities.  The Veteran has not been afforded a VA examination which addresses the relationship between the diagnosed hypertension and his in-service TERA.  Considering such deficiencies, the Board finds that the September 2021, June 2022, and November 2022 examination reports, and the December 2022 addendum thereto are of limited probative value.  Further VA hypertension evaluation is needed.  That is a pre decisional error. 

3. Entitlement to service connection for diabetes mellitus is remanded. 

The Veteran contends that service connection for diabetes mellitus is warranted as the claimed disability was incurred during active service or, in the alternative, is related to the service-connected PTSD.  The Veteran asserts that his obesity is an intermediate step between the service-connected PTSD and diabetes mellitus. 

The report of a June 2022 VA diabetes examination states that the Veteran was diagnosed with Type II diabetes mellitus.  The nurse practitioner concluded that "the claimed condition was less likely than not (less than 50 percent probability) incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness."  The nurse practitioner commented that "there are no service treatment records showing the Veteran had complaints or a diagnosis of diabetes mellitus during his service;" "on December 29, 2016, was first diagnosed with diabetes mellitus type II;" and "there is no evidence that the Veteran's diabetes mellitus type II started during or was caused by his military service." 

The report of a November 2022 VA diabetes examination states that the Veteran was diagnosed with Type II diabetes mellitus.  The nurse practitioner concluded that "the claimed condition was less likely than not (less than 50 percent probability) proximately due to or the result of the Veteran's service-connected condition."  The nurse practitioner commented that: "the Veteran was not diagnosed until December 2006, this was 19 years after his military service;" "the Veteran had gained approximately 200 pounds at the time of his diagnosis compared to his military service weight;" "the Veteran has no chronicity of care related to his time as an active service member or any medical service connection after his departure up to the year 2006;" and "a nexus of chronicity of care has not been established to connect diabetes to military service."  A December 2022 addendum to the November 2022 VA evaluation states that "the claimed condition of diabetes mellitus type II is secondary to obesity."  

The VA nurse practitioners did not address whether the diagnosed diabetes mellitus was related to the service-connected PTSD and the other service-connected disabilities.  The Veteran has not been afforded a VA examination which addresses the relationship between the diagnosed diabetes mellitus and his in-service TERA.  Considering such deficiencies, the Board finds that the September 2021, June 2022, and November 2022 examination reports, and the December 2022 addendum thereto are of limited probative value.  Further VA diabetes evaluation is needed. That is a pre decisional error. 

4. Entitlement to service connection for a right lower extremity diabetic neuropathy and left lower extremity diabetic neuropathy is remanded. 

The Board finds that issues of service connection for right lower extremity diabetic neuropathy and left lower extremity diabetic neuropathy are inextricably intertwined with the issue of service connection for diabetes mellitus being remanded and must also be remanded.

5. Entitlement to an effective date prior to January 15, 2021, for the award of service connection for erectile dysfunction is remanded.  

The Veteran contends that an effective date prior to January 15, 2021, for service connection for erectile dysfunction is warranted.

In October 2014, the Veteran filed an Application for Disability Compensation and Related Compensation Benefits, VA Form 21-526EZ, seeking service connection for erectile dysfunction which was received by the Agency of Original Jurisdiction on October 29, 2014.

In February 2015, the Agency of Original Jurisdiction denied service connection for erectile dysfunction.  The Veteran did not submit a notice of disagreement with the adverse decision.  In May 2015, the Agency of Original Jurisdiction received additional relevant service personnel documentation.  At any time after VA issues a decision on a claim, if VA receives or associates with the claims record relevant official service department records that existed and had not been associated with the record when VA first decided the claim, VA will reconsider the claim.  Such records include but are not limited to service records that are related to a claimed in-service event, injury, or disease, regardless of whether those records mention the Veteran by name.  Therefore, the February 2015 rating decision is not final. 38 C.F.R. § 3.156(c).

Under the provisions of 38 C.F.R. § 3.156 (c)(1), notwithstanding any other section in this part, at any time after VA issues a decision on a claim, if VA receives or associates with the claims file relevant official service department records that existed and had not been associated with the claims file when VA first decided the claim, VA will reconsider the claim, notwithstanding paragraph (a) of the same section.

The receipt of the service personnel records requires a review of the original claim de novo without requiring new and relevant evidence.  The Agency of Original Jurisdiction's original adjudication of the issue in February 2015 was made without the service personnel records.  Therefore, service connection for erectile dysfunction must be remanded for readjudication to consider the additional records.  That is a pre decisional error. 

6. Entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent for PFB is remanded.  

The report of a March 2022 skin examination conducted by VA states that the Veteran exhibited erythematous papules on the anterior neck.  The examiner observed that the PFB involved less than 5 percent of the total body area and 5 percent, but less than 20 percent, of exposed areas affected.  The examiner noted there was no scarring or disfigurement of the head, face, or neck.  Color photographs were not taken.  Considering such omission, the Board finds that further VA skin evaluation is necessary.  That is a pre decisional error.

7. Entitlement to TDIU is remanded.

The issue of entitlement to a TDIU is inextricably intertwined with the issues being remanded and must also be remanded.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Readjudicate the issue of entitlement to an effective date earlier than January 15, 2021, for the award of service connection for erectile dysfunction.  In so doing, the Agency of Original Jurisdiction shall reconsider all evidence of record, recognizing that the February 2015 rating decision denying the Veteran's claim for service connection for erectile dysfunction was not final as determined by the Board within this decision, consistent with 38 C.F.R. § 3.156(c). 

2. Schedule the Veteran for a VA headache examination conducted by a medical doctor to assist in determining the relationship between any identified recurrent headache disability and active service.  The examiner must review the record and should note that review in the report.  A rationale for all opinions should be provided.  The examiner should:

(a.) Identify all recurrent headache disabilities found.

(b.) Opine whether it is at least as likely as not (at least an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence) that any identified recurrent headache disability had its onset during active service or is related to any incident of service, including the Veteran's conceded exposure to Camp Lejeune contaminated water and any other identified TERAs; the examiner must address the total potential exposure through all applicable military exposure, and the synergistic, combined effect of all TERAs.

3. Schedule the Veteran for a VA hypertension examination conducted by a medical doctor to assist in determining the etiology of the diagnosed hypertension and its relationship to active service, the service connected disabilities, and the Veteran's obesity.  The examiner must review the record and should note such review in the report.  A rationale for all opinions should be provided.  The examiner should:

(a.) Identify all hypertensive disabilities found.

(b.) Opine whether it is at least as likely as not (at least an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence) that the diagnosed hypertension had its onset during active service or is related to any incident of service, including the Veteran's conceded exposure to Camp Lejeune contaminated water and any other identified TERAs; the examiner must address the total potential exposure through all applicable military exposure, and the synergistic, combined effect of all TERAs.

(c.) Opine whether it is at least as likely as not (at least an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence) that the diagnosed hypertension is due to or the result of the service-connected disabilities, and/or any obesity associated with the service-connected disabilities.

(d.) Opine whether it is at least as likely as not (at least an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence) that the diagnosed hypertension has been aggravated by the service-connected disabilities, and/or any obesity associated with the service-connected disabilities.

4. Schedule the Veteran for a VA diabetes mellitus examination conducted by a medical doctor to assist in determining the etiology of the diagnosed Type II diabetes mellitus and its relationship to active service, the service-connected disabilities, and the Veteran's obesity.  The examiner must review the record and should note such review in the report.  A rationale for all opinions should be provided.  The examiner should:

(a.) Identify all diabetic disabilities found.

(b.) Opine whether it is at least as likely as not (at least an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence) that the diagnosed Type II diabetes mellitus had its onset during active service or is related to any incident of service, including the Veteran's conceded exposure to Camp Lejeune contaminated water and any other identified TERAs; the examiner must address the total potential exposure through all applicable military exposure, and the synergistic, combined effect of all TERAs.

(c.) Opine whether it is at least as likely as not (at least an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence) that the diagnosed Type II diabetes mellitus is due to or the result of the service-connected disabilities, and/or any obesity associated with the service-connected disabilities.

(d.) Opine whether it is at least as likely as not (at least an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence) that the diagnosed Type II diabetes mellitus has been aggravated by the service-connected disabilities, and/or any obesity associated with the service-connected disabilities.

5. Schedule the Veteran for a VA skin examination conducted by a medical doctor in order to determine the nature and severity of service connected PFB.  The examiner must review the record and should note that review in the report. Color photographs should be taken.  A rationale for all opinions should be provided. 

 

J. T. HUTCHESON

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Kotroco, Emily

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.