Citation Nr: A25032635
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240531-445536
DATE: April 9, 2025

ORDER

Service connection for obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

The evidence is at least in approximate balance as to whether the Veteran's OSA is at least as likely as not related to his service.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for service connection for OSA, as secondary to anxiety disorder, are met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.310.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from October 1986 to September 1992.

The rating decision on appeal was issued in October 2023, and constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.

The Veteran has continuously pursued appeal from a May 2023 rating decision that denied service connection for OSA.  In June 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, and requested readjudication of service connection for OSA, most recently addressed in a May 2023 rating decision.  In October 2023, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the supplemental claim decision, which found that new and relevant evidence had been received and denied the claim based on the evidence of record at the time of that decision.

In a May 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal, the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the October 2023 supplemental claim decision.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  If evidence was submitted after the AOJ issued the October 2023 supplemental claim decision, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

In conjunction with the VA Form 10182, the Veteran's attorney submitted a statement.  In Edwards v. McDonough, 36 Vet. App. 56 (2023), the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims held that new evidence submitted with a VA Form 10182 on which the Direct Review option is selected creates uncertainty as to which Board review option the claimant intended to select and triggers a duty to seek clarification under 38 C.F.R. § 20.202(f).  However, in this case, the statement submitted was argument, which is not evidence, and can be submitted with a Direct Review docket selection.  Thus, the Board finds that it can proceed with adjudication of the case without seeking further clarification.

Service Connection

Service connection will be granted if the evidence demonstrates that a current disability resulted from an injury or disease incurred in or aggravated by active service, even if the disability was initially diagnosed after service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.

Secondary service connection may be granted for a disability that is caused or aggravated by a service-connected disease or injury.  38 C.F.R. § 3.310.  Establishing service connection on a secondary basis requires evidence sufficient to show (1) that a current disability exists, (2) that there is an already service-connected disability, and (3) that there is "but for" causation or aggravation of the disability for which service connection is sought by a service-connected disability.  See Spicer v. McDonough, 61 F.4th 1360, 1363 (Fed. Cir. 2023) (invalidating the requirement of "proximate cause" and holding "but for" causation or aggravation is enough to show entitlement to secondary service connection).

Obesity cannot be recognized as a disability, but it can be recognized as an intermediate step between a service-connected disability and a disability claimed as secondary to that service-connected disability, based on the service-connected disability causing or aggravating the obesity.  See Walsh v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 300, 306-07 (2020).

In such a case, that evidence would need to reflect: (1) a service-connected disability or disabilities that caused the veteran to become obese; (2) the obesity was a substantial factor in causing another disability; and (3) the disability would not have occurred but for the obesity caused by the veteran's service-connected disability or disabilities.  See VAOGCPREC 1-2017.

Service connection for OSA is granted.

The Veteran contends that he has OSA secondary to his service-connected anxiety disorder.  February 2023 Statement in Support of Claim.  Specifically, the Veteran asserts that due to his service-connected anxiety disorder and fatigue, he has been less motivated to exercise which has caused weight gain; additionally, his anxiety disorder has led him to make poor food choices and eat high-calorie foods, which, in turn, resulted in OSA.  Id.

The October 2023 rating decision made favorable findings that the Veteran is currently diagnosed with OSA and is service connected for an anxiety disorder.  Toxic exposure during military service is also conceded.  The Board is bound by these favorable findings.  38 C.F.R. § 3.104. 

In a January 2023 private medical opinion, C.M.B., a Certified Physician's Assistant, found that the Veteran's weight gain is due to and/or related to his service-connected anxiety disorder and that the Veteran's OSA is secondary to, related to, and/or aggravated by the weight gain from the service-connected anxiety disorder.  C.M.B. stated that the Veteran's overall progressive weight gain and current overweight condition chronologically developed after the mental health stressors related to his service-connected disability condition.  The examiner additionally indicated that mental health disorders induce weight gain and obesity, even when adjusting for socio-demographic characteristics and psychotropic medication usage.  C.M.B also addressed medical literature supporting a nexus between sleep disturbances caused by psychiatric disorders, to support his conclusion that the Veteran's obesity is due to his service-connected anxiety disorder.  The opinion has a clear conclusion based on the provider's examination of the Veteran and his medical history and serves to link the claimed OSA to the service-connected anxiety disorder.  See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008).  Therefore, the Board assigns this opinion substantial probative weight.

The Veteran also underwent an April 2023 VA examination, which resulted in a negative nexus opinion relative to toxic exposure risk activities (TERA).  The VA examiner concluded that the Veteran's OSA is less likely than not caused by TERA after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all TERA of the Veteran, as there is no medical or scientific evidence available that provides any indication of a relationship between the development of the OSA at issue and the TERA.  Rather, the examiner opined that the Veteran's major risk factors outweigh the claimed TERA in that obesity/weight gain is the number one risk factor of developing OSA, and studies further show a relationship between mental health conditions and chronic sleep impairment.  Lastly, the VA examiner noted that medical literature does not name any of the Veteran's TERAs as a cause or risk factor for OSA.  The Board finds this opinion is entitled to weight of probative value relative to service connection for OSA due to TERA, as it reflects consideration of the Veteran's history, including his service history, the nature of OSA, and the nature of TERA.

A May 2023 VA medical opinion was also obtained which rendered a negative nexus opinion regarding secondary service connection for OSA due to service-connected anxiety disorder.  The VA examiner opined that there is no pathophysiological connection between mental health conditions and OSA, as anxiety conditions do not cause mechanical obstruction of the upper airway.  The VA examiner further opined that anxiety typically does not cause lack of motivation to exercise, yet fatigue, which is not service connected, may, and there is no objective evidence found in the Veteran's file to support a claim that the Veteran's obesity is related to his anxiety disorder.  The VA examiner rationalized that the Veteran's VA treatment record reported the use of alcohol at night due to tinnitus, which would affect sleep, which then causes fatigue, and noted that heavy alcohol use is also associated with a higher calorie intake and possible obesity.  The examiner provided a rationale based on the Veteran's particular history in determining that the Veteran's OSA was not "proximately due to or the result of" the Veteran's service-connected anxiety disorder, and the opinion is entitled to probative value.  The examiner failed to address whether the Veteran's OSA was aggravated by the service-connected anxiety disorder.  Therefore, the opinion is inadequate as related to whether the Veteran's OSA was aggravated by his anxiety disorder, as it did not address this question at all.  See El-Amin v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 136 (2013) (finding that an examination was inadequate on the question of aggravation when aggravation was not addressed by the examiner).

In a May 2023 private medical opinion, Dr. Z.M., a Certified Sleep Medicine Medical Doctor, concluded that the Veteran's OSA is secondary to, related to, and/or aggravated by his service-connected conditions, including his anxiety disorder.  Specifically, Dr. Z.M. opined that the service-connected anxiety disorder caused sleep disturbance and weight gain/obesity, which in turn led to the current OSA diagnosis.  In support of the opinion, Dr. Z.M. discussed that the Veteran's service-connected anxiety disorder has symptoms of dry mouth upon awakening, insomnia, anxiety, chronic sleep impairment, and disturbances of motivation and mood.  He continued to discuss how medical literature documents that mental health disorders often lead to social isolation, impaired functioning, and weight gain, and confirms a nexus between body weight and weight gain with OSA.  The opinion has a clear conclusion and rationale based on the provider's examination of the Veteran's medical history and review of medical literature and serves to link the claimed OSA to the service-connected anxiety disorder.  See Nieves-Rodriguez, 22 Vet. App. at 304.  Therefore, the Board assigns this opinion substantial probative weight.

An October 2023 VA medical opinion addressed obesity as an intermediate step, opining that people at risk for developing OSA often have an increased neck circumference, often from having an elevated body mass index (BMI) over 30, and/or are over age 50; at the time of the October 2023 VA medical opinion, the Veteran's BMI was in the obese category and he was over age 50.  The VA examiner opined that sometimes anxiety medication can cause obesity; however, the records did not show that the Veteran takes medication for his condition, so this problem would not apply to him.  The VA examiner indicated that although the Veteran gained weight after his mental health diagnosis, there was no evidence to show that his anxiety disorder directly caused the weight gain.  The examiner provided an analysis that considered the particular facts of the Veteran's case in determining that the Veteran's OSA was not "proximately due to or the result of" the Veteran's service-connected anxiety disorder, and the opinion regarding whether service-connected anxiety disorder caused the Veteran's OSA, including with obesity as an intermediate step, is entitled to probative weight.  The examiner failed to address, however, whether the Veteran's OSA was aggravated by the service-connected anxiety disorder.  Therefore, the opinion is inadequate as related to whether the Veteran's OSA was aggravated by anxiety disorder, as it did not address this question at all.  See El-Amin, 26 Vet. App. at 136.

(Continued on the next page)

?

On review, the record contains both positive and negative opinions as to whether the Veteran has a disability that is medically linked to his service-connected disabilities.  Furthermore, the opinions have varying degrees of probative value.  As such, the Board concludes that the evidence is at least in approximate balance as to whether the Veteran's OSA is linked secondarily to his service-connected anxiety disorder, with obesity as an intermediate step.  Therefore, the Board resolves all reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor and grants service connection for obstructive sleep apnea.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

 

 

M. SORISIO

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	K. Knerr

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.