Citation Nr: A25032650
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240821-465048
DATE: April 9, 2025

ORDER

Service connection for obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

The evidence is at least in approximate balance as to whether the Veteran's OSA is related to military service.  

CONCLUSION OF LAW

Resolving all doubt in the Veteran's favor, the criteria for service connection for OSA are met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.307, 3.310. 

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from May 2014 through August 2017.  The Veteran was an infantryman and deployed to Afghanistan.  The Veteran was awarded the Afghanistan Campaign Medal with 2 Campaign Stars, Army Commendation Medal, and Air Assault Badge, among others.

Applicable Evidentiary Windows

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal of an August 2024 rating decision issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office, which is the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).  The August 2024 rating decision denied the Veteran's claim for service connection for OSA.  Also in August 2024, the Veteran filed a timely VA Form 10182: Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement).  The Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the August 2024 rating decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

Preliminary Matter

In the August 2024 rating decision narrative, the AOJ found that new and relevant evidence for the Veteran's OSA claim was received by VA, and it decided the Veteran's claim on the merits.  The Board is bound by the favorable findings of the AOJ and will proceed to review the Veteran's appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 3.104.  

Entitlement to Service Connection for Obstructive Sleep Apnea (OSA)

Generally, service connection for a disability will be granted when a disease or injury is incurred in, or aggravated by, active military service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.  Service connection may also be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge, when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d). 

For a disability to be directly service connected a Veteran must show: (1) a current disability; (2) an in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury.  Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166-67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).  

Establishing service connection on a secondary basis requires evidence sufficient to show: (1) that a current disability exists and (2) that the current disability was either (a) caused by or (b) aggravated by a service-connected disability.  38 C.F.R. § 3.310 (a)-(b).  Secondary causation exists when, but for the service-connected disability, the non-service-connected disability was caused by a service-connected disability either in a direct, etiological way or via multiple steps in a causal chain.  Spicer v. McDonough, 61 F.4th 1360, 1365 (Fed. Cir. 2023) (citations omitted).  Secondary aggravation exists when the non-service-connected disability not caused by a service-connected disability would be less severe were it not for a service-connected disability.  Id. at 1364.  For example, secondary aggravation may be established where the natural progression of the non-service-connected disability could have been arrested or improved but for the service-connected disability.  Id.

The Board has the duty to assess the weight and credibility given to evidence.  See, e.g., Jefferson v. Principi, 271 F.3d 1072 (Fed. Cir. 2001); Madden v. Gober, 125 F.3d 1477, 1481 (Fed. Cir. 1997), cert. denied, 523 U.S. 1046 (1998); Wensch v. Principi, 15 Vet. App. 362, 367 (2001).  See also 38 U.S.C. § 7104(a).  

When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding the merits of an issue material to the determination of the matter, the benefit of the doubt in resolving each such issue shall be given to the veteran.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102, 4.3.  When a veteran seeks a benefit and the evidence is in relative equipoise, the veteran prevails.  Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49 (1990).  The benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply when the evidence persuasively favors one side or the other.  Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 781-82 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

The Board reviewed the evidence in the claims file, focusing on the evidence pertinent to the issue on appeal.  Although the Board has an obligation to provide reasons and bases supporting its decision, there is no need to discuss the extensive evidence of record.  Gonzalez v. West, 218 F.3d 1378, 1380-81 (Fed. Cir. 2000).  Therefore, the Board summarized the relevant evidence, focusing specifically on what the evidence showed, or failed to so, as to the claim. 

Evidence

Turning now to the pertinent evidence, the AOJ made the favorable findings that (1) the Veteran has a current OSA disability and (2) that he suffered an in-service event, injury, or disease, specifically, sleep symptoms such as interrupted sleep and snoring, as well as physiological characteristics including retrognathia (receding chin) and a "crowded upper airway."  See August 2024 VA Rating Decision Narrative.  The AOJ further found that the Veteran served in the Southwest Asia and participated in a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA).  The Board is bound by favorable findings of the AOJ.  38 C.F.R. § 3.104.

In a lay statement the Veteran claimed that his OSA was caused or aggravated by a combination of exposure to dust and fumes during deployment and a mental health condition related to that deployment.  See February 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ: Application for Disability Compensation and Related Compensation Benefits.  Further, in a November 2019 VA Form 21-0781: Statement in Support of Claim for PTSD, the Veteran described a specific sleep disturbance incident that occurred during military service in January 2015.  There he described abruptly waking up in the middle of the night due to a vivid nightmare related to deployment.  Although not competent to diagnose OSA or offer an opinion on its etiology, the Veteran is competent to describe his subjective sleep symptoms and their onset during service.  See, e.g., Davidson v. Shinseki, 581 F.3d 1313 (Fed. Cir. 2009); Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 (Fed. Cir. 2007); Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 307 (2007); Charles v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 370 (2002).  

Service and VA Medical Treatment Records

The Veteran's service treatment records contain notations of sleep difficulties, sleep apnea symptoms, and the observation by clinicians of the Veteran's retrognathia and a restricted upper airway.  See, e.g., June 2017 Service Treatment Records; September 2017 Service Treatment Records.  The Board notes that there are duplicative and partially duplicative service treatment records throughout the record.

In the July 2017 Report of Medical History, contained within September 2017 Service Treatment Records, the Veteran reported frequent problems sleeping, specifically trouble falling and staying asleep.  Review of the June 2017 Service Treatment Records further revealed several, seemingly duplicative, notations documenting the Veteran's sleep difficulty, sleep apnea symptoms, facial and upper airway abnormalities, and making a provisional diagnosis of sleep apnea.  For example, in a June 2016 entry, the Veteran was notated as having significant risk factors for OSA and interrupted sleep including snoring, retrognathia, and a crowded upper airway.  There, the Veteran was notated as reporting symptoms consistent with OSA including morning headaches, unexplained awakenings, snoring, and dry mouth.  That notation noted a provisional diagnosis of sleep apnea and recommended that a sleep study be conducted. 

The record also contains the Veteran's August 2023 VA Medical Records which contain his and his girlfriend's lay reports of OSA symptoms, as well as both a positive medically administered sleep test result and a negative home administered sleep test result.  

For example, in an August 2020 entry, the Veteran was notated as reporting suffering from OSA symptoms for several years, with his symptoms progressing since onset.  He reported experiencing snoring, apneas, snore arousals, and gasping.  A home sleep study was conducted in December 2020, with negative results for sleep apnea.  A July 2022 Appointment Note notated the Veteran's continued reports that he still suffered from sleep symptoms and his request that a follow-up sleep study be conducted at a medical facility.  An August 2022 entry notated that both the Veteran and his girlfriend were present for the appointment.  There, they told the provider that that the Veteran suffered from frequent, unexplained nighttime arousals, on-going for the previous 4-5 years.  The Veteran reported that his symptoms continued to include snoring, snoring arousals, gasping/choking arousals, and dry mouth upon awakening.  A January 2023 entry shows that the Veteran completed a sleep study and was diagnosed with OSA.     

VA Medical Examination Reports and Medical Opinions

The record contains VA examination reports and medical opinions from 2017 through 2023.  See December 2017 VA General Medical-Compensation Disability Benefits Questionnaire; December 2017 VA Sleep Apnea Disability Benefits Questionnaire; March 2023 VA Sleep Apnea Disability Benefits Questionnaire; March 2023 VA Disability Benefits Questionnaire; August 2023 VA Medical Opinion Disability Benefits Questionnaire; October 2023 VA Medical Opinion Disability Benefits Questionnaire; May 2024 VA Medical Opinion Disability Benefits Questionnaire.  The record also contains relevant VA PTSD and Mental Disorder examination reports which notate and discuss the Veteran's sleep symptoms (raising evidence of a potentially synergistic relationship between his sleep symptoms and PTSD).  See, e.g., December 2017 VA Mental Disorders (other than PTSD and Eating Disorders)-DSM V Disability Benefits Questionnaire; March 2023 VA Review Post Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) Disability Benefits Questionnaire. 

The December 2017 VA General Medical-Compensation Disability Benefits Questionnaire indicated, without further explanation, that the Veteran suffered from OSA.  However, the contemporaneous December 2017 Sleep Apnea Disability Benefits Questionnaire declined to diagnose the Veteran with OSA because he did not attend his scheduled sleep study appointment.  However, at the examination, the Veteran described sleep symptoms to include snoring loudly and pauses in breathing while sleeping.  The Veteran further reported that the sleep symptoms began in 2015 and had worsened since onset.  

The March 2023 VA Sleep Apnea Disability Benefits Questionnaire confirmed the Veteran's diagnosis for OSA with persistent daytime hypersomnolence.  That examination report did not discuss or express an opinion as to whether the Veteran's disability was service related.  An accompanying March 2023 VA Disability Benefits Questionnaire opined that, after considering the combined effect of all the Veteran's TERAs, the Veteran's OSA was less likely than not caused by any in-service exposure(s).  The examiner explained that after a review of several government public health website articles on OSA and toxic exposure (which the examiner cited to with accompanying URL addresses), that OSA is not caused by toxic exposures.  The examiner continued that the most common risk factors for sleep apnea were being male, obesity, older age, and smoking.  The examiner further observed that the Veteran was male and asserted that he was also obese.  This opinion only opined on service connection due to TERAs, it did not express discuss any other theory of service connection.       

The August 2023 VA Medical Opinion Disability Benefits Questionnaire opined that the Veteran's OSA was less likely than not incurred in or caused by military service because the Veteran did not display sleep symptoms at enlistment or prior to his separation physical, the Veteran's sleep study in 2020 failed to reveal sleep apnea, and the Veteran's BMI had increased since the negative sleep study in 2020.  The examiner stated that being overweight was the most likely cause of the Veteran's sleep apnea.  

In support of their opinion, the examiner cited to an informational article from the Mayo Clinic titled "Sleep Apnea" located at https://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/sleep-apnea/symptoms-causes/syc-20377631 (assessed April 4, 2025).

Despite notating much of the evidence of record, the opinion did not address the Veteran's multiple lay statements describing his sleep symptoms since service or other important medical evidence of record such as the Veteran's crowded upper airway or chin condition, which was also notated by providers in service.  

The October 2023 VA Medical Opinion Disability Benefits Questionnaire also opined on the relationship between the Veteran's OSA and TERA(s).  There, the examiner opined that after considering the combined effect of all the Veteran's TERAs, the Veteran's OSA was less likely than not caused by any in-service exposure.  Like the March 2023 VA Medical Opinion Disability Questionnaire, this examiner stated that the most common risk factors for sleep apnea were being male, obesity, older age, and smoking.  The examiner observed that the Veteran was male, overweight, and had some smoking history.  This opinion only opined on service connection due to TERAs and did not express any other opinion or discuss any other theory of service connection.  

Despite not expressing an opinion on any other theory of service connection for the Veteran's OSA, the October 2023 VA Medical Opinion Disability Benefits Questionnaire contained useful general information about OSA.  Specifically, the examiner explained that OSA is sleep-related breathing disorder where the patient will start and stop breathing.  OSA occurs when the upper respiratory muscles block the airway.  Further, the examiner specifically identified snoring as a sign of sleep apnea, along with episodes of stopped breathing, gasping or choking, and awakening with dry mouth.  The Board recognizes that the Veteran reported these same symptoms in and since service and that he has noted facially and upper respiratory abnormalities, also observed and documented in service.   

In support of their assertion about OSA and exposures, the examiner cited to several sources, with URL addresses, including an informational article from the Mayo Clinic titled "Obstructive Sleep Apnea-Symptoms and Causes" located at https://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/obstructive-sleep-apnea/symptoms-causes/syc-20352090 (assessed April 4, 2025).         

The May 2024 VA Medical Opinion Disability Benefits Questionnaire opined on direct service connection for OSA, finding that the Veteran's ISA was less likely than not incurred in or caused by any in-service event, injury, or illness.  Despite the evidence contained in service treatment records and the Veteran's lay accounts discussed above, the examiner stated there is no evidence that the Veteran's OSA had its onset in service.  

In support of their opinion, the examiner cited to a negative OSA diagnosis contained in a 2017 sleep study (which the Board did not locate in the record).  Presumably, the examiner is referring to the December 2017 Sleep Apnea Disability Benefits Questionnaire in which that examiner declined to diagnose the Veteran with OSA because he had not reported for his scheduled sleep study.  The examiner did not address or discuss the probative evidence related to sleep symptoms and sleep apnea contained in service treatment records, VA records from immediately after service, or the various lay statements of record.  

Lastly, the Veteran's sleep symptomology was discussed by VA examiners in the context of his mental health treatment and evaluation.  For example, the December 2017 VA Mental Disorders (other than PTSD and Eating Disorders)-DSM V Disability Benefits Questionnaire noted that the Veteran reported that he was not sleeping well, with trouble falling and staying asleep.  The Veteran said he slept an average of 4 to 6 hours of sleep nightly.  That examiner assessed that the Veteran suffered from chronic sleep impairment.  Further, the March 2023 Review Post Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) Disability Benefits Questionnaire also notated that the Veteran suffered from sleep symptoms including difficulty falling, staying asleep, or restless sleep.  That examiner also assessed the Veteran suffered from chronic sleep impairment.  However, these opinions did not discuss or consider whether the Veteran's OSA was caused or aggravated by his service-connected PTSD.  See also September 2023 VA CAPRI Records (notating the Veteran's sleep symptoms in the context of mental health symptomology).  

Analysis

In order to be entitled to probative weight, a medical opinion must contain not only clear conclusions with supporting data, but also a reasoned explanation connecting the two.  See Nieves-Rodrigues v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295 (2008).  Further, the examiner must consider whether any lay evidence was satisfactory.  Dalton v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 23 (2007); Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331, 1336 (Fed. Cir. 2006).  Lastly, the absence of a documented diagnosis or symptomology in service or at separation cannot be the basis for a negative opinion for service connection.  See Ledford v. Derwinksi, 3 Vet. App. 87, 89 (1992); Dalton at 23.  Accordingly, an inadequate medical examination or opinion may be assigned low probative value.  See Reonal v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 458, 460-61 (1993) (medical opinion based on inaccurate factual premise may properly be rejected as non-probative); Swann v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 229, 233 (1993) (Board may properly reject medical opinion where it is based on facts contradicted by the record).  

The 2016 and 2017 in-service medical assessments provisionally diagnosed the Veteran with OSA and identifying that the Veteran had several risk factors for OSA, including physiological risk factors, was critical evidence for evaluating the Veteran's claim.  However, no opinion meaningfully addressed this evidence.  Further, no opinion considered or addressed the adequacy of the Veteran's continued, credible, and consistent lay description of his sleep symptoms and their onset, or the Veteran's girlfriend's corroborating lay statements.  Lastly, despite the Veteran's claim that his sleep apnea was partially related to his PTSD and the continued finding of chronic sleep impairment in his VA mental health evaluations, no examiner addressed whether the Veteran's service-connected PTSD caused or aggravated the Veteran's sleep apnea.  See El-Amin v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 136, 140 (2013) (a medical opinion on secondary service connection must address both causation and aggravation).  The Board finds the combined VA opinions inadequately evaluated whether the Veteran's OSA was directly or secondarily related to service and assigns them low probative value.   

Because the record before the Board contains only inadequate medical opinions, the Board considered remanding this claim to address both direct and secondary service connection, fully address the medical evidence contained in the service treatment records, and to consider both the Veteran's and his girlfriend's lay statements.  However, such a request could be construed as obtaining additional negative evidence for the sole purpose of denying the Veteran's claim, which is impermissible.  38 C.F.R. § 3.304(c); see Andrews v. McDonough, 34 Vet. App. 216, 225 (2021) ('remand is inappropriate where the predominant purpose is not to allow the Board to make a fully informed decision unencumbered by error but to allow VA to obtain more evidence so that it can properly deny the claim').

The benefit of the doubt rule is a unique standard of proof in the American jurisprudence.  "[T]he nation, 'in recognition of our debt to our veterans,' has 'taken upon itself the risk of error . . .' in awarding such benefits."  See Wise v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 517, 531 (2014).  Despite no positive medical opinion of record, after weighing the whole of the evidence and recognizing that the Veteran: (1) manifested symptoms consistent with OSA continuously during and since service, (2) credibly reported sleep symptoms beginning after deployment to Afghanistan, (3) was provisionally diagnosed with sleep apnea during service, (4) was assessed to have OSA risk factors (including physiological and psychological risk factors) during service, and (5) because the second sleep study definitively confirmed the Veteran's OSA; the Board concludes the evidence is at least in an approximate balance that the Veteran's OSA is related to his service. 38 U.S.C. §5107(b); Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021). 

Accordingly, after resolving all doubt in the Veteran's favor, service connection for obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is granted.  To the extent that this grant of service connection is primarily based on lay evidence, "[i]f the Board concludes that the lay evidence presented by a veteran is credible and ultimately competent, the lack of contemporaneous medical evidence should not be an absolute bar to the veteran's ability to prove his claim of entitlement to disability benefits based on that competent lay evidence."  See Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331, 1337 (Fed. Cir. 2006).        

 

 

Colleen M. Glaser-Allen

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	M. Stanley, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.