Citation Nr: A25032619
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 231105-391536
DATE: April 9, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to a compensable initial rating for service connected allergic rhinitis with chronic bronchitis (respiratory disability) is remanded.

Entitlement to an increased initial rating, higher than 10 percent, for service connected right ankle strain is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran had active duty service in the United States Army from February 2023 to April 2023.

The rating decision on appeal was issued in October 2023 and constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.  In the November 2023 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the October 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

However, because the Board is remanding the claims, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Increased Initial Rating 

Disability evaluations are determined by evaluating the extent to which a veteran's service-connected disability adversely affects his or her ability to function under the ordinary conditions of daily life, including employment, by comparing his or her symptomatology with the criteria set forth in the Rating Schedule. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.10.

When the appeal arises from an initial assigned rating, consideration must be given to whether staged ratings should be assigned to reflect entitlement to a higher rating at any point during the pendency of the claim. Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119 (1999). Staged ratings are also appropriate in any increased rating claim in which distinct time periods with different ratable symptoms can be identified. Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007).

1. Entitlement to a compensable initial rating for the service connected respiratory disability.

The Veteran has been service connected for a respiratory disability as residuals an in-service COVID-19 infection diagnosed as allergic rhinitis with chronic bronchitis. October 2023 Rating Decision; October 2023 Medical Opinion Disability Benefits Questionnaire (DBQ). The Veteran contends that the manifestations of the residuals of her in-service COVID-19 infection are more varied and more severe than contemplated by the noncompensable (zero percent) disability rating current assigned for respiratory disability. November 2023 VA Form 10182.  

Under the AMA, the Board may only remand an issue for the correction of (1) duty to assist errors occurring prior to the date of the AOJ decision on appeal (i.e., pre-decisional duty to assist errors) and (2) AOJ errors in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty, if correction of such error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the appellant's claim. See 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

Here the Board finds remand is warranted to correct a duty to assist error that occurred prior to the rating decision on appeal.

Consistent with VA's duty to maximize benefits, the Board must consider all possible schedular bases for separate ratings, including?secondary?service connection. See?Morgan v. Wilkie, 31?Vet. App.?162, 167 (2018).?In this regard, the Court has held?that?38 C.F.R. § 3.155(d)(2)?requires that, when entitlement to?secondary?service connection is raised, a formal claim for?secondary?service connection need not be filed, rather, VA must consider those "complications" in connection with the claim on appeal. See?Bailey?v. Wilkie, 33?Vet. App.?188 (2021). 

Specifically, the Veteran has described occasional shortness of breath, chest tightness, congestion, productive cough, postnasal drip, in addition to ear pain, constipation, hair loss, night sweats, bilateral frontal headaches, occasional facial numbness, related to her in-service COVID-19 infection. October 2023 Sinusitis/Rhinitis and Other Conditions Disability Benefits Questionnaire and Infectious Diseases DBQ. Nevertheless, the Board observes that a VA opinion was never obtained to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's ear pain, constipation, hair loss, night sweats, headaches, or occasional facial numbness. 

VA is obligated to provide an examination or obtain an opinion where there is: (1) competent credible evidence of a current disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability; (2) evidence establishing that an event, injury, or illness, or disease occurred in service; (3) an indication that the disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability may be associated with the Veteran's service or with another service-connected disability, but (4) insufficient competent medical evidence to make a decision on the claim.?McLendon?v. Nicholson,?20?Vet. App.?79, 82-83?(2006). 

Applying these factors to the present claim, the Board finds the low threshold under?McLendon?has been met prior to the rating decision on appeal.? The evidence of record contains competent and credible evidence of recurrent residual symptoms of ear pain, constipation, hair loss, night sweats, bilateral frontal headaches, occasional facial numbness. October 2023 Sinusitis/Rhinitis and Other Conditions Disability Benefits Questionnaire and Infectious Diseases DBQ; see also Layno v. Brown,?6?Vet. App.?465, 470?(1994) (explaining a veteran is competent?to?report on matters?observed?or within his personal knowledge including symptoms?he personally experienced which are?observable?to?his senses). Moreover, the medical opinion of the October 2023 examining physician notes that one medical study "demonstrated that the commonest symptoms during COVID-19 infection were fever (76.1%), cough (67.7%), body aches (65%), and an alteration in sense of smell (49.5%) or taste (44.1%)" and that "[s]uch symptoms were reported by the Veteran on examination."  The examining physician concluded that "it is important to access every complaint and take every complaint into consideration (with a high degree of suspicion for COVID residual)."  In light of the above, the Veteran should have been afforded a VA examination to determine whether service connection for recurrent residual symptoms of ear pain, constipation, hair loss, night sweats, bilateral frontal headaches, and occasional facial numbness were associated with service connected residuals of COVID-19 respiratory disability prior to the October 2023 rating decision; therefore, remand is warranted to obtain examinations.

2. Entitlement to an increased initial rating, higher than 10 percent, for service connected right ankle strain.

The Veteran contends that she is entitled to an increased initial disability evaluation for her service connected right ankle strain based on the severity of her symptoms. November 2023 VA Form 10182. Unfortunately, a remand is required before the Board may address the merits of the Veteran's claim.

The Veteran underwent a VA-contracted examination for her right ankle disorder in August 2023.  At that time, the Veteran described consistent right ankle pain with weightbearing activities and daily flareups of moderate to severe pain which last up to 2 to 4 hours, which are precipitated by prolonged standing.  August 2023 Ankle Conditions DBQ.   The Veteran also reported that the daily flareups were alleviated by rest and medications.   

The August 2023 examining clinician documented the Veteran's limitation in right ankle dorsiflexion as limited to 10 degrees with both active and passive range of motion testing and estimated to be limited to 10 degrees with flareups, each which is consistent with a 10 percent disability evaluation under Diagnostic Code 5271.    

Nevertheless, the diagnostic codes pertaining to ankle disability do not specifically contemplate the ameliorative effects of medication, and the Board is cognizant that it may not deny a higher rating on the basis of relief provided by medication when the ameliorative effects are not specifically contemplated by the rating criteria. Jones v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 56, 61 (2012); see also Ingram v. Collins, No. 23-1798 (CAVC, March 12, 2025).  The examining clinician did not provide an opinion on the ameliorative effects of medication related to the Veteran's daily flareups of right ankle pain, nor is it clear whether the provided estimated range of motion during flareups discounted the beneficial effects of medication.  In addition, treatment records associated with the claims file prior to the October 2023 rating decision do not provide any information on the medication the Veteran was taking for her right ankle disability.  Therefore, a remand is required.

The matters are REMANDED for the following actions:

1. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's claimed residual COVID-19 symptoms of ear pain, constipation, hair loss, night sweats, bilateral frontal headaches, and facial numbness.  The examiner must review a copy of this Remand and the complete claims file. 

The examiner is asked to provide a response to the following: 

(a.) Please?identify?any current residual disabilities related to the Veteran's alleged ear pain, constipation, hair loss, night sweats, bilateral frontal headaches, and facial numbness since the date of the Veteran's claim by either (1) diagnosis or (2) functional impairment.?  

(b.) As to any disabilities diagnosed above, provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher), that same was due to the Veteran's in-service COVID-19 infection. 

(c.) If not, provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher), that same was aggravated (made worse) by the Veteran's service-connected respiratory disability. A complete rationale for all opinions expressed must be provided. 

(Continued on the next page)

?

2. Forward the record and a copy of this Remand to the VA examiner who provided the August 2023 medical opinion, or, if that examiner is unavailable, to another clinician, for completion of an addendum medical opinion to determine the severity of the Veteran's right ankle disability, to include baseline (when discounting the ameliorative effects of medication) measurements of right ankle range of motion (passive, active, and during flareups, and pain with weight-bearing and without weight-bearing).  Schedule the Veteran for an examination if the clinician finds one is required to provide the requested opinion.

A complete rationale must be given for all opinions and conclusions expressed. If it is not possible to provide a specific measurement without resorting to mere speculation, the examiner must state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training).

 

Tiffany Dawson

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Stamm, Haley S.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.