Citation Nr: A25032435
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240806-462390
DATE: April 8, 2025

ORDER

Service connection for a psychiatric disorder is denied.

FINDING OF FACT

The evidence is clear and unmistakable that the Veteran's psychiatric disorder existed prior to service and was not aggravated by service.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for service connection for a psychiatric disorder are not met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 1110, 1111, 1153, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.304.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from March 2008 to April 2009.

This matter comes on appeal before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from a July 2024 rating decision of a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO), hereinafter referred to as the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).  The Veteran submitted a timely VA Form 10182 in August 2024 in which he elected the Direct Review docket.  Accordingly, the Board can consider the evidence of record as of July 18, 2024.

Williams v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 305 (2024), allows for a docket switch 60 days from the date of the VA Form 10182 or one year from the AOJ decision, whichever is later.  The Board acknowledges that one year has not yet passed from the date of the July 2024 rating decision on appeal.  However, the Veteran requested that a decision be made "as soon as practicable" in March 2025, which the Board interprets as a waiver of the allotted time period to switch dockets, and thus proceeds with adjudication of this issue.

The Board has limited the discussion below to the relevant evidence required to support its finding of fact and conclusion of law, as well as to the specific contentions regarding the case as raised directly by the Veteran and those reasonably raised by the record.  See Scott v. McDonald, 789 F.3d 1375, 1381 (Fed. Cir. 2015); Robinson v. Peake, 21 Vet. App. 545, 552 (2008); Dickens v. McDonald, 814 F.3d 1359, 1361 (Fed. Cir. 2016).

Service connection will be granted for a disability resulting from a disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active military, naval, or air service.  38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a).  Service connection may also be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge, when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).

Service connection requires: (1) the existence of a present disability, (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury, and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service.  Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004); see also Caluza v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 498 (1995).

For the purposes of § 1110 every veteran shall be taken to have been in sound condition when examined, accepted, and enrolled for service, except as to defects, infirmities, or disorders noted at the time of the examination, acceptance, and enrollment, or where clear and unmistakable evidence demonstrates that the injury or disease existed before acceptance and enrollment and was not aggravated by such service.  38 U.S.C. § 1111.  Only such conditions as are recorded in examination reports are to be considered as noted.  38 C.F.R. § 3.304(b).

The United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit (Federal Circuit) has distinguished between those cases in which the preexisting condition is noted upon entry into service, and those cases in which the preexistence of the condition must otherwise be established.  See Wagner v. Principi, 370 F.3d 1089, 1096 (Fed. Cir. 2004); Davis v. Principi, 276 F.3d 1341, 1345 (Fed. Cir. 2002); Horn v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 231, 234 (2012); see also 38 U.S.C. § 1111 (presumption of sound condition).

When a defect, infirmity, or disorder is noted on the enlistment examination, the presumption of soundness never attaches, and the only benefits that can be awarded are for aggravation pursuant to 38 U.S.C. § 1153 and 38 C.F.R. § 3.306.  See Wagner v. Principi, 370 F.3d 1089, 1096 (Fed. Cir. 2004).  In such claims, a veteran must simply show that there was an increase in disability during service to trigger the presumption of aggravation.  See Wagner, 370 F.3d at 1096; Jensen v. Brown, 19 F.3d 1413, 1417 (Fed. Cir. 1994).  "If the presumption of aggravation under section 1153 arises, the burden then shifts to the government to show a lack of aggravation by establishing 'that the increase in disability is due to the natural progress of the disease.'"  Wagner, 370 F.3d at 1096 (citing 38 U.S.C. § 1153).  This requires the government to show by clear and unmistakable evidence that any increase in disability was due to the natural progress of the condition.  See Cotant v. Principi, 17 Vet. App. 116, 130-32 (2003); see also 38 C.F.R. § 3.306(b).

In a case where there is no preexisting condition noted upon entry into service, the veteran is presumed to have entered service in sound condition, and the burden falls to the government to demonstrate by clear and unmistakable evidence that (1) the condition preexisted service and (2) the preexisting condition was not aggravated by service.  Wagner, 370 F3d. at 1345; Horn, 25 Vet. App. at 234; 38 U.S.C. § 1111.  This statutory provision is referred to as the "presumption of soundness."  Horn, 25 Vet. App. at 234.  The veteran is not required to show that the disease or injury increased in severity during service before VA's duty under the second prong of this rebuttal standard attaches.  VAOPGCPREC 3-2003 (July 16, 2003).

The government may show a lack of aggravation by establishing by clear and unmistakable evidence "that there was no increase in disability during service or that any 'increase in disability [was] due to the natural progress of the' preexisting condition."  Wagner, 370 F.3d at 1096 (quoting 38 U.S.C. § 1153).  This burden of proof must be met by "affirmative evidence" demonstrating that there was no aggravation.  The burden is not met by finding "that the record contains insufficient evidence of aggravation."  Horn, 25 Vet. App. at 236-37.  If the government rebuts the presumption of soundness, then the veteran is not entitled to service-connected benefits.  However, if the government fails to rebut the presumption of soundness under section 1111 by showing any of the above, the veteran's claim is one of direct service connection.  Horn, 25 Vet. App. at 236-37; Wagner, 370 F.3d at 1096.

"Clear and unmistakable evidence" is an "onerous" evidentiary standard, requiring that the preexistence of a condition and the no-aggravation result be "undebatable."  Cotant v. Principi, 17 Vet. App. 116, 131 (2003); Quirin v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 390, 396 (2009) (noting that clear and undebatable means that the evidence cannot be misinterpreted or misunderstood).

Temporary or intermittent flare-ups of a preexisting injury or disease during service are not sufficient to be considered "aggravation in service" unless the underlying condition, as contrasted to symptoms, is worsened.  Crowe v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 238, 247-48 (1994); Hunt v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 292, 297 (1991).  The occurrence of symptoms, in the absence of an increase in the underlying severity, does not constitute aggravation of the disability.  Davis v. Principi, 276 F.3d 1341, 1345 (Fed. Cir. 2002); 38 C.F.R. § 3.306(a).

Evidence of the veteran being asymptomatic on entry into service, with an exacerbation of symptoms during service, does not constitute evidence of aggravation.  Green v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 320, 323 (1991).  If the disorder becomes worse during service and then improves due to in-service treatment to the point that it was no more disabling than it was at entrance into service, the disorder has not been aggravated by service.  Verdon v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 529 (1996).  Aggravation may not be conceded where the disability underwent no increase in severity during service, based on the evidence pertaining to the manifestations of the disability prior to, during, and subsequent to service.  38 C.F.R. § 3.306(b).

In rendering a decision on appeal, the Board must analyze the credibility and probative value of the evidence, account for the evidence which it finds to be persuasive or unpersuasive, and provide the reasons for its rejection of any material evidence favorable to the claimant.  Gabrielson v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 36, 39-40 (1994); Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49, 57 (1990).  A lay person is competent to report on the onset and reoccurrence of current symptomatology.  Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 470 (1994).  The Board must determine on a case-by-case basis whether a veteran's particular disability is the type of disability for which lay evidence may be competent.  Kahana v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 428 (2011).

VA is responsible for determining whether the evidence supports the claim or is in relative equipoise, with a claimant prevailing in either event.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.  The claimant is entitled to the benefit of the doubt when there is an "approximate" (meaning nearly equal) balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any material determination.  See Lynch v. McDonough, 999 F.3d 1391 (2021); Ortiz v. Principi, 274 F.3d 1361 (Fed. Cir. 2001).

The July 2024 rating decision reflects favorable findings of a current disability that existed prior to service and in-service treatment of such.  Specifically, the February 2022 VA examination report reflects a diagnosis of bipolar disorder with depression, which existed prior to military service based on a 2003 Individual Education Program (IEP) showing a diagnosis of mood disorder.  He also received mental health treatment during service in August and October 2008.  The Board is bound by these favorable findings.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).

Therefore, the Veteran's service connection claim for a psychiatric disorder was denied by the AOJ for being a pre-existing disability that was not aggravated during service.  See Wagner, supra.

As an initial matter, the Board reflects that the Veteran's January 2008 enlistment examination does not disclose any psychiatric disability; the Veteran was noted to be psychiatrically normal at that time.  The Board reflects therefore that the presumption of soundness attaches in this case.  See 38 U.S.C. § 1111.  Therefore, the burden is on VA to demonstrate that clear and unmistakable evidence of both pre-existence in this case, as well as non-aggravation of that disability.  The Board finds that such a burden has been met and service connection for a psychiatric disability is denied in this case.  

In his January 2022 claim application, the Veteran contended that his bipolar disorder worsened due to service.  He stated that his disorder was manageable before service as he was able to manage life, see doctors, and complete his General Educational Development (GED).  However, after service, he struggled to keep a job, expected to fail at everything, and could not handle everyday life.  Most things were a struggle.  It had been this way since he enlisted, and he had subsequent hospitalizations in and out of service.  He also contended that his depression worsened because of military service, specifically due to treatment by his superiors.  His depression was not a daily occurrence before service, and now it was.

In July 2022, the Veteran stated that he was diagnosed with an unspecified mood disorder as a teenager.  Although the way he spoke caused him stress and anxiety by the time he got into high school, once he left school, it did not bother him any longer, and he did not have any mental deficiencies.  He was able to live life as a normal person with normal interpersonal relationships.  He had no suicidal ideation, was not violent, was a rational thinker, and could be a productive member of society.  Although bootcamp and Advanced Individual Training (AIT) were "a breeze," his sergeant at Fort Carson hated him and "made [his] life hell."  He was not allowed to have toilet paper in his barracks, and the heat was never turned on.  He was spit on in his face, was told to kill himself, and was told that his son had a loser father.  He was eventually an outcast from his entire unit.  He could no longer "take it," and attempted to end his life.  Once he returned from hospitalization, the behavior from his superiors worsened, so he went absent without leave (AWOL) for 45 days.  When he returned, the punishment was "severe and swift," so he tried to commit suicide again and threatened his superior.

Turning to the evidence, Social Security Administration (SSA) records include an August 2007 Intake Assessment noting an IEP and reflecting that the Veteran tried to hang himself in the garage a month ago.  His mother stated that he took lithium on and off most of his life.  A DDS Consultation Form reflects alleged impairments of being not able to be around people, get along with other people, and stay focused on a task for very long.  It noted that the suicide attempt and bipolar diagnosis were new developments.

Service treatment records (STRs) include January 2008 enlistment examination reports reflecting the Veteran's denial of nervous trouble of any sort; frequent trouble sleeping; and depression or excessive worry.  He denied having been evaluated or treated for a mental condition, attempting suicide, and receiving counseling of any type.

An August 2008 STR reflects that the Veteran had been diagnosed with bipolar since the age of 12, and treated for bipolar disorder with medication.  He dropped out of school and joined the Army, at which time he stopped his psychiatric medications.  At the age of 16, he tried to kill himself through hanging.  He had struggled since coming into the Army and going to bootcamp.  An August 2008 discharge summary reflects that the Veteran had depression with suicidal ideation.  Since coming into the Army six months ago, he had become increasingly depressed and had thoughts of suicide.

He was hospitalized from in October 2008 for the second time with suicidal ideation.  He was AWOL for 45 days.  He cut himself frequently out of frustration.  He overdosed a month ago, and attempted hanging.  He endorsed suicidal ideation every day, and homicidal ideation.  The Veteran was noted to have been treated for symptoms of a mood disorder not otherwise specified (NOS) and a history of bipolar disorder.  His condition was described as moderate to severe, and interfered with his adjustment to military life; it existed prior to service.  He had only made mild improvement with his treatment so far.  Due to his difficulties and limited response to treatment, he continued to have difficulty adjusting to his military duties, and did not appear able to function effectively in the military setting.

A February 2022 VA examination report reflects review of the claims file and a diagnosis of unspecified bipolar and related disorder.  The Veteran reported issues with a sergeant during service, who "made his life hell."  He had an IEP for speech problems prior to service and was hospitalized twice for one week due to suicidal thoughts.  He was prescribed medication, and diagnosed with bipolar disorder at Fort Carson in September 2008.  He denied any legal or behavioral problems prior to service, but was arrested for assault after separation from service.  

The examiner opined that the Veteran's bipolar disorder was at least as likely as not incurred in or caused by service, specifically noting treatment in his STR during service and records showing a historical diagnosis of bipolar disorder in 2008 and ongoing symptoms.  She also opined that the Veteran's depression was less likely than not incurred in or caused by service as he did not have a separate diagnosis of depression; rather, his depression was subsumed in his bipolar diagnosis.  The Board reflects that this opinion was rendered before obtaining the Social Security records discussed above.

An April 2022 VA addendum includes the examiner's opinion that the Veteran's mood disorder, which clearly and unmistakably existed prior to service, was clearly and unmistakably not aggravated beyond its natural progression by service.  The examiner noted that baseline levels were not present in the Veteran's records.  The only document was an IEP during high school, which reported a diagnosis of mood disorder.  Again, that this opinion was rendered before obtaining the Social Security records discussed above.

In July 2022, the Veteran submitted correspondence from W.D. and F.D., his aunt and uncle, dated June 2022, stating that the Veteran had normal struggles related to age and social effects as a child.  With normal aging, he developed some learning issues and a diagnosis of depression.  He sought care and had them "well controlled prior to entering the Army."  They contended that the Veteran's mental health was disregarded, which could be detrimental with severe and often irreparable consequences.  F.D., who had a Bachelor of Science in Psychology and a Master's Degree in Healthcare Administration, stated that this lack of adequate care during service, during a "critical time in his cognitive formation," affected him since, and the effects could not be corrected to the point where he could maintain gainful employment.

In July 2022, his mother D.D. opined that his bipolar was aggravated during service past the natural progression and caused him major life disruptions since.  Prior to enlisting, she described him as a "nice, loving, smart boy" who was excited to join the service.  He was never hospitalized or tried to commit suicide.  He finished his GED, and only suffered from "a natural depression due to his speech delay and issues that plagued him all his adolescence during school."  However, he was bullied and hated at his base, and they "caused him to try and commit suicide twice."  She stated that he was never the same after coming home after the Army; he could become violent suddenly and struggled with rational thoughts.  He could not keep a job as "the smallest of things cause[d] him to fly off the handle."  He was untrusting, forgetful, and unmotivated.  He often spent his time at home in seclusion.

A September 2022 VA posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) examination report reflects review of the claims file and a diagnosis of unspecified bipolar-related disorder.  The Veteran denied any mood disorder prior to service and stated that any records indicating such were false.  However, a high school record dated January 2003 indicated that he was prescribed lithium, which he did not take every day.  Lithium was prescribed for bipolar disorder, never "just" depression as the Veteran had maintained.  Additionally, prescribing lithium to a child was typically not done lightly.

An October 2022 VA addendum reflects the examiner's opinion that the Veteran's bipolar disorder, which clearly and unmistakably existed prior to service, was clearly and unmistakably not aggravated beyond its natural progression by service.  Per the records, the Veteran had been diagnosed with bipolar disorder since the age of 12 and treated with psychotropic medication from the age of 12 until 20 when he enlisted in military service.  He had a documented suicide attempt at the age of 16.  He served approximately 10 months in the Army with two psychiatric hospitalizations prior to his administrative discharge.  Several studies had shown that discontinuation of lithium maintenance treatment in patients with bipolar disorder whose condition had been stabilized led to a significantly higher and earlier risk of recurrence, particularly for mania.  Additionally, rapid versus gradual discontinuation of lithium led to a substantially higher risk of recurrence, especially in the first few months.  Furthermore, stopping and starting various drugs, regardless of therapeutic benefit, may alter the course of the illness being treated.  Many medications, including mood stabilizers such as lithium and Depakote, had rebound effects.  This risk of manic recurrences was increased in the first weeks after discontinuation of medication therapy, and this risk was higher than the one predicted by the natural history of the bipolar illness.  Relapses could occur even when medication was stopped only for a few days.  Abrupt discontinuation of lithium seemed to be associated with an increased risk of recurrence.  Buddy statements indicating an increase in symptoms of bipolar disorder after military separation were therefore supported by mental health and medical research.  It was very likely that the Veteran experienced a rebound effect when he abruptly discontinued medication for bipolar disorder.  The critical distinction was that the Veteran did not report his diagnosed illness to the military at the time of enlistment, and voluntarily discontinued his medication while in service because he had not disclosed the illness.  It was not the military that aggravated his mental illness, but rather his discontinuation of prescribed psychotropic medication.  Therefore, based on scientific research and the Veteran's record review, the examiner opined that bipolar disorder which clearly and unmistakably existed prior to service was less likely than not aggravated beyond its natural progression by military service.

A June 2024 VA addendum reflects review of the claims file and the examiner's opinion that the Veteran's psychiatric disorder, which clearly and unmistakably existed prior to service, was clearly and unmistakably not aggravated beyond its natural progression by service.  The Veteran had clear and unmistakable evidence of mental health issues, specifically unspecified mood disorder, ADHD, ODD, and personality disorder prior to military service.  There was evidence indicating that he continued to suffer from mental health disorder during service with occasional waxing and waning of symptoms, which was typical of the disorder.  Based on SSA records, his current mental health condition was less severe than prior to service; therefore, it was apparent that it was not permanently aggravated by service.  The 2014 SSA record reflects that he had been diagnosed with bipolar II disorder and attempted suicide a month ago, suggesting that in August 2007, six months prior to enlistment in the military, his mental health symptoms had worsened because he stopped his psychiatric medications in order to be approved to join the military.  He had already been diagnosed with bipolar disorder prior to military service.  Private treatment records reflected that he was diagnosed with bipolar since the age of 12 and treated for such with Prozac and Depakote.  He dropped out of school and joined the Army, stopping his psychiatric medications in order to enlist.  The Veteran reported that he told the recruiting officer about this, who dismissed his psychiatric condition.  At the age of 16, he tried to kill himself through hanging.  A 2013 counseling note reflects that he was suspended from school multiple times for fighting, but the Veteran stated that he was in other fights at school that the staff did not know about.  Based on the newly provide plethora of historical information documenting the Veteran's pre-military level of functioning as well as the post-military SSA determinations, the Veteran's mental health symptoms during service were entirely consistent with his mood instability documented in the six to 10 months prior to enlistment.  The examiner noted that the Veteran and his mother took steps to hide or withhold the extent of his mental health history in order to be accepted into the military.  Based on the descriptions of his mood, interactions with others, and abilities to complete a variety of daily activities, the Veteran's level of functioning and mental health symptoms had improved since military service.  Therefore, it was apparent that his mental health condition was not aggravated beyond its natural progression by military service.

After a review of all the evidence, both lay and medical, the Board finds that service connection for a psychiatric disorder is not warranted.  First, as indicated, the Veran has a current psychiatric diagnosis.  Additionally, the psychiatric disorder was not "noted" at the time of enlistment into service.  Thus, an analysis of the presumption of aggravation under 38 U.S.C. § 1153 is not required; instead, the presumption of soundness under 38 U.S.C. § 1111 attaches.

That notwithstanding, with regard to the existence of a preexisting condition, as noted above, the AOJ made a favorable finding that there was clear and unmistakable evidence of record that the psychiatric disorder preexisted the Veteran's service.  See 38 U.S.C. § 1111; 38 C.F.R. § 3.304(b).  Moreover, as noted by a wealth of evidence in the claims file, it appears that the Veteran's bipolar disorder, mood disorder, and other psychiatric issues clearly and unmistakably (i.e. undebateably) pre-existed his entrance into military service.  

The Veteran's psychiatric disorder having been shown by clear and unmistakable evidence to preexist service, consideration must be given to whether clear and unmistakable evidence exists to show that the disorder was not aggravated during service, to fully rebut the presumption of soundness.

The April 2022 VA addendum was inadequate as the negative opinion that the Veteran's preexisting mood disorder was clearly and unmistakably not aggravated beyond its natural progression by service was based on the absence of a baseline level.  The examiner does not appear to consider or address other evidence indicating the level of severity of his psychiatric symptoms before enlistment and during service in order to evaluate the baseline and any subsequent aggravation of symptoms.  Therefore, this opinion is inadequate and lacks in any probative value.

Regardless, the October 2022 VA addendum reflects an opinion that the Veteran's bipolar disorder, which clearly and unmistakably existed prior to service, was clearly and unmistakably not aggravated beyond its natural progression by service.  Again, however, this opinion was rendered without a full review of the record, including the SSA records.  Thus, although having some probative value, the weight of this opinion is extremely limited.  

Rather, the June 2024 VA examiner most completely discussed the progression of the Veteran's psychiatric disorder, discussing how the evidence clearly and unmistakably demonstrated that it existed prior to military service.  The evidence also reflects the continuation of his symptoms during service with "occasional waxing and waning of symptoms, which was typical of the disorder."  The examiner explained that the Veteran's symptoms had worsened six months prior to enlistment as he stopped his psychiatric medications in order to be approved to join the military.  The examiner then found that his mental health symptoms during service were "entirely consistent" with his mood instability documented in the six to 10 months prior to enlistment and that his level of functioning and symptoms had improved since military service.  Therefore, the examiner opined that the Veteran's psychiatric disorder, which clearly and unmistakably existed prior to service, was clearly and unmistakably not aggravated beyond its natural progression by service.

The Board acknowledges that the Veteran and his mother dispute any indication of hospitalization or suicide attempt prior to service.  See July 2022 lay statement from D.D.; July 2022 Veteran statement.  However, the evidence contradicts their statements.  Specifically, an August 2007 SSA intake assessment reflects that the Veteran attempted to hang himself a month ago and the mother's report that he took lithium on and off most of his life.  The Board finds these statements to be incredibly credible and probative, particularly given that these statements were made on federal forms when applying for government benefits, and these forms include a statement regarding being made under the penalty of perjury.  The Veteran and his mother, therefore, had an incredible incentive to be truthful in disclosing that information to SSA.  

Therefore, the credibility of the Veteran and his mother's lay statements regarding his symptoms prior to service are called into question, and when weighed against their statements in the SSA forms under the penalty of perjury, the Board finds these statements to be not credible and to have no probative value.

Moreover, the Veteran himself contended that his psychiatric disorder was aggravated by his decision to discontinue medication during service.  The October 2022 and June 2024 VA examiners both discuss the effect of stopping medication on his symptoms.  The Veteran's aunt, F.D., also opined that the Veteran was a "classic case of interrupted care at a formidable stage" when he enlisted in the military.

Finally, with regards to F.D.'s opinion-as a medical professional-the Board finds her statement's to be outweighed by the other evidence of record.  Her opinion regard aggravation during military service does not appear to consider the SSA record evidence regarding a suicide attempt shortly before entering military service, nor does she appear to acknowledge the Veteran's medical course since age 12, the medications that he was taking, or the fact that he abruptly discontinued his medication just prior to entrance into military service.  All of these factors weigh against finding any substantial amount of probative value, particularly when weighed against the June 2024 examiner's opinion.  See Guerrieri v. Brown, 4 Vet. App. 467 (1993) (the probative value of medical opinion evidence is based on the medical expert's personal examination of the patient, the physician's knowledge and skill in analyzing the data, and the medical conclusion the physician reaches.); Hernandez-Toyens v. West, 11 Vet. App. 379, 382 (1998) (the failure of the physician to provide a basis for his/her opinion affects the weight or credibility of the evidence).

Because the evidence clearly and unmistakably demonstrates that the Veteran's psychiatric disorder preexisted service and was not aggravated during service, the burden of proof is met in this case and the presumption of soundness is rebutted.  Accordingly, service connection for a psychiatric disorder is denied.  38 U.S.C. § 1111; 38 C.F.R. § 3.306.  

In reaching the above conclusions, the Board has considered the applicability of the benefit of the doubt doctrine.  However, as the evidence is against the Veteran's claims, that doctrine is not applicable in the instant appeal.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

 

 

MARTIN B. PETERS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Lee, Jane R.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.