Citation Nr: A25032548
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240227-420743
DATE: April 8, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to Department of Veterans Affairs burial death benefits, to include a burial allowance, a plot/interment allowance, or reimbursement for transportation expenses, is denied.  

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran died in January 2024, and he was not in receipt of any VA compensation or pension benefits at the time of his death.  

2.  The Veteran was not service connected for any disabilities during his lifetime.

3. The Veteran's death was not caused by or otherwise etiologically related to a disorder incurred in service, and his death is not otherwise etiologically related to service.

4. At the time of his death, the Veteran was not admitted to a VA or state veterans' hospital, nursing home, or domiciliary care facility.

5.  The Veteran passed away at a private medical facility and his remains were interred in a private cemetery.  

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for nonservice-connected burial death benefits, to include a burial allowance, a plot/interment allowance, or reimbursement for transportation expenses, have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 2302, 2303; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.1700-3.1713.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Marine Corps from April 1954 to April 1956.  He died in January 2024.  The appellant is Veteran's niece (caregiver) and is the party who bore the costs of the Veteran's funeral and last expenses.  

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a February 2024 letter decision by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) [agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ)].

This claim has been processed pursuant to the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA).  Here, the appellant selected the direct review docket, meaning that the Board may only consider the evidence of record before the AOJ at the time of its decision on the issue on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.300(a), 302(a).  If additional evidence was submitted after the rating decision on appeal, the Board may not consider it.  If the appellant would like VA to consider any evidence that was added to the claims file that the Board could not consider, the appellant may file a supplemental claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a supplemental claim are included with this decision.  See Cook v. McDonough, 36 Vet. App. 175 (2023).

The appellant has come before the VA asking that she be awarded burial benefits following the death of the Veteran.  More specifically, the appellant has asked that she be compensated for the monies she paid for the costs incurred following the Veteran's death and his subsequent interment at a private cemetery after he passed.  At the time of his death, he was not in receipt of VA compensation or pension benefits nor was an application for any type of benefits in-processing.  He was not in receipt of military retired benefits.  As indicated, the appellant bore the expenses of the Veteran's funeral and burial.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.1000.  

Following the Veteran's death and the preparation of his remains, the appellant submitted an application for burial benefits along with a copy of the expenses she paid for the funeral of the Veteran.  In her application for benefits, the appellant informed the VA that the Veteran passed while he was receiving in-patient care at his local private hospital, he was interred in a private cemetery, and that the Veteran's death was not due to or the result of his military service.  VA provides the following types of burial benefits, which are discussed in 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.1700 through 3.1712: (1) burial allowance based on service-connected death; (2) burial allowance based on non-service-connected death; (3) burial allowance for a veteran who died while hospitalized by VA; (4) burial plot or interment allowance; and (5) reimbursement for transportation of remains.  At the time of the Veteran's death, service connection was not in effect for any disability, and he was not interred at a national cemetery or at a state veterans cemetery.  As such, 38 C.F.R. § 3.1704 (burial allowance based on service-connected death) and 38 C.F.R. § 3.1709 (reimbursement for transportation of remains) are not for application. 

The claim is therefore considered pursuant to the regulations regarding nonservice-connected burial benefits as set forth in 38 C.F.R. § 3.1705.  A burial allowance is payable for a veteran who, on the date of death:  (1) was receiving VA pension or disability compensation; (2) would have been receiving disability compensation but for the receipt of military retired pay; or (3) had a pending claim for benefits, a claim to reopen a previously denied claim, or a claim involving substitution, any of which if processed to completion would result in a grant of benefits.  38 C.F.R. § 3.1705(b).  In addition, the governing regulations provide that a burial allowance may be paid if a veteran died from nonservice-connected causes while properly admitted to a VA facility for hospital, nursing home, or domiciliary care; or while admitted or traveling to a non-VA facility with prior authorization and at VA expense for the purpose of examination, treatment, or care.  See 38 U.S.C. § 2303(a); 38 C.F.R. § 3.1706(b), (d).

At the time of death, the Veteran was not in receipt of VA compensation or service-connected or nonservice-connected pension benefits, nor was a claim for VA compensation or pension benefits pending at the time of his death.  Additionally, the Veteran did not die while under the care of a VA facility or at a private facility that was being reimbursed for services by the VA.  The record does not show that he was in receipt of retired pay that was deferred in lieu of VA compensation benefits.  Here, as shown by the application for benefits, the Veteran died while receiving treatment at a private medical facility.  There is nothing in the record suggesting that he was under the in-home care of VA or that the VA paid for the care he received at the private hospital.  

As the Veteran was not hospitalized at VA expense at the time of death, was not in receipt of VA monetary (compensation or pension) benefits, did not have a pending claim, and would not have been receiving disability compensation, the Board finds that burial allowance benefits are not warranted.

Regarding a plot or interment allowance, for the purposes of this determination, the term "plot" or burial plot means the final disposal site of the deceased's bodily remains, whether it is a grave, mausoleum vault, columbarium niche, or other similar place.  Plot or internment expenses are those expenses associated with the final disposition of the remains and are not confined to the acts done within the burial grounds but may include the removal of remains for burial or internment.  38 C.F.R. § 3.1707(d).

Where a veteran's death is not service connected, as is the case here, a plot allowance to cover the cost of the final site of interment of the Veteran's remains may be payable, but only under certain circumstances.  38 U.S.C. § 2303(a); 38 C.F.R. § 3.1707.  Unless VA has evidence on the date it receives notice of the veteran's death that the expenses incurred were less, VA will pay the maximum plot or interment allowance specified in 38 U.S.C. § 2303(b)(2) to a claimant who incurred plot or interment expenses relating to the purchase of a burial plot for a deceased veteran if the veteran is buried in a cemetery other than a State veterans cemetery or a national cemetery, and the veteran is eligible for a burial allowance under § 3.1705 (burial allowance based on non-service-connected death); the veteran is eligible for a burial allowance under § 3.1706 (burial allowance for a veteran who died while hospitalized by VA); the veteran was discharged from active service for a disability incurred or aggravated in line of duty; or the veteran, at the time of discharge from active service, had a disability, shown by official service records, which in medical judgment would have justified a discharge for disability.  In this instance, the above criteria have not been met.  As such, a plot allowance would be precluded by other applicable provisions of 38 C.F.R. § 3.1707.  Consequently, the Board finds that the legal requirements for entitlement to a plot allowance have not been met.

For reimbursement of transportation expenses under 38 C.F.R. § 3.1709, VA will reimburse the costs of transportation for burial in a national cemetery only where a veteran (1) died as a result of a service-connected disability; (2) was receiving service-connected disability compensation on the date of death; (3) would have been receiving service-connected disability compensation on the date of the death, but for the receipt of military retired pay or nonservice-connected disability pension; or (4) the Secretary determines the veteran was eligible for burial allowance under § 3.1708.

Here, the Veteran did not die as a result of a service-connected disability and did not die while hospitalized by VA.  Additionally, the current evidence does not indicate that the Veteran's remains have been interred in a national cemetery.  As such, reimbursement of burial transportation expenses is not available at this time.

While the Board is sympathetic to the fact that the appellant may have incurred expenses associated with the Veteran's burial and interment, federal laws authorizing monetary benefits are enacted by Congress.  Unless an individual meets all of the requirements of a particular law, that individual is not entitled to the benefit.  The benefit cannot be awarded, notwithstanding incomplete or even erroneous information provided, and regardless of the circumstances or claims of fairness.  Davenport v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 522 (2002).  

Accordingly, the Board finds that entitlement to nonservice-connected burial benefits is not warranted.  The Board acknowledges and appreciates the Veteran's service in the Marine Corps and is sympathetic to the loss his friends and any family has suffered.  However, the payment of burial benefits, including interment expenses or any other funeral expenses, is strictly based on specific statutory and regulatory guidelines, which have not been met in this case.  The Board finds that the evidence does not indicate that the conditions for burial benefits have been met.  38 C.F.R. § 3.1700 et seq.  As, on these facts, which are not in dispute, there is no legal basis available to award VA burial benefits, the appellant's claim is denied as a matter of law.  See Sabonis v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 426, 430 (1994).  

 

 

MATTHEW W. BLACKWELDER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Patrick J. Costello

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.