Citation Nr: A25032885
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 221207-302437
DATE: April 9, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for tinnitus is granted.

Entitlement to an increased rating for left foot pain in excess of 20 percent disabling at any point during the review period is denied.

Entitlement to an increased rating for right foot pain in excess of 10 percent disabling at any point during the review period is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for limb length discrepancy (claimed one leg longer than the other leg due to hip displacement) is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a bilateral hip condition is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a bilateral knee condition is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for deviated nasal septum is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disability is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1.  Resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Veteran's tinnitus is related to the Veteran's in service noise exposure.

2.  During the review period, the Veteran's left foot strain was manifested by no more than moderately severe symptoms.

3.  During the review period, the Veteran's right foot strain was manifested by no more than moderate symptoms.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1.  The criteria for service connection for tinnitus are met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

2.  The criteria for a rating in excess of 20 percent for left foot strain have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.40, 4.45, 4.59, 4.71a, Diagnostic Code (DC) 5284.

3.  The criteria for a rating in excess of 10 percent for right foot strain have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.40, 4.45, 4.59, 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5284.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the Marine Corps from February 1982 to April 1990.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a June 2022 rating decision issued by the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ), Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO), which denied entitlement to service connection for a bilateral hip condition, a bilateral knee condition, a deviated septum, anxiety and depression with suicide attempts, and tinnitus, granted service connection for a right foot strain rated at 10 percent disabling, and granted service connection for a left foot strain rated at 20 percent disabling.

The Veteran timely appealed the June 2022 rating decision to the Board by filing a VA Form 10182 and requesting the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA) Direct Review Lane for a reevaluation of the evidence considered by the AOJ.  The AMA Direct Review does not allow submission of any additional evidence in support of an appeal.  As this is a Direct Review appeal under the AMA, the record closed as of the June 2022 rating decision. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a supplemental claim are included with this decision.

The Veteran is attempting to appeal his claim for bilateral hearing loss.  The Board notes that the Veteran's claim for bilateral hearing loss was denied in a December 2021 AOJ rating decision.  The Veteran then submitted a VA 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim (Compensation) for service connection for hearing loss in March 2022.  In an April 2022 letter, the AOJ informed the Veteran that his March 2022 VA 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim (Compensation) for hearing loss was not on the correct form and the claim was invalid.  See April 2022 Correspondence.  The AOJ subsequently did not adjudicate the claim for bilateral hearing loss, as the form used by the Veteran was invalid.  If the Veteran wishes to file an additional claim for service connection for hearing loss, he must follow the supplemental claim instructions in the paragraph above. 

Entitlement to service connection for tinnitus is granted.

The Veteran asserts that his tinnitus is due to his service as an aircraft hydraulic/pneumatic mechanic.

Service connection may be granted on a direct basis as a result of disease or injury incurred in service based on nexus using a three-element test: (1) the existence of a present disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by service.  See 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303(a), (d); Holton v. Shinseki, 557 F.3d 1363, 1366 (Fed. Cir. 2009).

Service connection may also be granted on a secondary basis for disability which is proximately due to or the result of service-connected disease or injury, or for additional disability resulting from the aggravation of a nonservice-connected disability by a service-connected disability.  38 C.F.R. § 3.310; Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439, 448 (1995) (en banc).

To establish entitlement to service connection on a secondary basis, there must be (1) evidence of a current disability, (2) evidence of a service-connected disability, and (3) medical evidence establishing a nexus between the service-connected disability and the current disability.  Wallin v. West, 11 Vet. App. 509 (1998).

A Veteran can provide competent reports of factual matters of which he has first-hand knowledge, such as experiencing pain in service, reporting to sick call, being placed on limited duty, and undergoing physical therapy.  See Washington v. Nicholson, 19 Vet. App. 362, 368 (2005).  Lay evidence can be competent and sufficient to establish a diagnosis of a condition when (1) a lay person is competent to identify the medical condition (noting that sometimes the lay person will be competent to identify the condition where the condition is simple, for example a broken leg, and sometimes not, for example, a form of cancer), (2) the lay person is reporting a contemporaneous medical diagnosis, or (3) lay testimony describing symptoms at the time supports a later diagnosis by a medical professional.  See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F. 3d 1372 (Fed. Cir. 2007).  Similarly, laypersons are competent to diagnose and provide nexus opinions to some extent, notably where the diagnosis or opinion is not of a complex nature.  Id., see also Davidson v. Shinseki, 581 F.3d 1313 (Fed. Cir. 2009).

Regarding the first element of service connection, current disability, the AOJ has conceded that the Veteran has tinnitus based on the Veteran's May 2022 VA tinnitus examination.  See June 2022 Rating Decision - Narrative.  

Regarding the second element of service connection, an in-service injury, the AOJ has conceded that the Veteran was exposed to hazardous noise in service due to his military occupational specialty (MOS) of 6054 - Aircraft Hydraulic Mechanic, which has a high probability of hazardous noise exposure.  See June 2022 Rating Decision - Narrative.  Additionally, the Veteran's service treatment records showed ear nose and throat trouble indicated on a February 1992 report of medical history along with possible hearing loss.  The Veteran noted that his hearing may have been damaged by working on aircraft.  See July 2019 STR - Medical. 

Regarding the third element of service connection, a nexus between the Veteran's current disability and the in-service event, the Veteran was afforded a first VA examination for tinnitus in July 2021.  The Veteran stated he could not remember when tinnitus began, probably in the 1980s, but could not be more specific.  The date of onset was listed at some time during the 1980s with worsening over time.  The examiner indicated the Veteran had a diagnosis of clinical hearing loss, and his tinnitus was at least as likely as not (50% probability or greater) a symptom associated with the hearing loss, as tinnitus is known to be a symptom associated with hearing loss.  The examiner opined that the Veteran's tinnitus was less likely than not caused by military noise exposure and stated, 

Based upon audiological data contained in the Veteran's C-File no significant shifts in hearing thresholds occurred during military service.  No record of tinnitus is contained in military records.  While hazardous noise exposure is conceded due to the Veteran's MOS of Aircraft Hydraulic/Pneumatic Mechanic and award of sharpshooter badge, such exposure does not guaranty the development of tinnitus.  A nexus, therefore, cannot be established between the onset of tinnitus and military service.  It is therefore less likely than not that the Veteran's tinnitus is a result of hazardous noise exposure or other events during military service.  See C&P Exam, July 2021.

The Board notes that regarding noise exposure, the July 2021 examiner used the phrase "does not guaranty the development of tinnitus."  The Board notes that the examiner used an incorrect standard in determining whether the Veteran's tinnitus was due to active duty noise exposure, as the correct standard used should have been whether the Veteran's active duty noise exposure was approximately balanced or nearly equally likely to have caused the Veteran's tinnitus, not guaranteed to have caused it.  Therefore, the July 2021 VA examination is afforded low probative weight.  See July 2021 C&P Exam.  

The Veteran was afforded a second VA examination for tinnitus in May 2022.  The May 2022 examiner did not ask Veteran when his tinnitus began.  The May 2022 examiner opined that the Veteran's tinnitus was less likely than not caused by military noise exposure.  The examiner stated, 

The DD-214 confirmed service in the Marine Corps from 2/82-4/90, and his MOS was aircraft hydraulic/pneumatic mechanic, which is listed for a high potential for hazardous noise exposure. He reported exposure to machine guns, rifles, hand guns, jet engines, and general noise from the flight line.  He wore single supra-aural hearing protection.  In his records, there was an entrance audiogram from 2/82, showing normal hearing, bilaterally, and there were no significant threshold shifts when looking at his audiograms (the last one being from 2/90).  Due to the fact that there were no complaints of tinnitus during his service, or within a year of separating, it is my professional opinion that the claimant's tinnitus is less likely than not (less than 50% probability) caused by or a result of military noise exposure.  See C&P Exam, May 2022. 

As the May 2022 VA examiner never asked the Veteran when his tinnitus began, the examination is afforded low probative weight.  

The Board has considered the evidence of record and finds the Veteran's contentions concerning the onset of his tinnitus to be both competent and credible.  When a condition may be diagnosed by its unique and readily identifiable features, as is the case with tinnitus, the presence of the disorder is not a determination "medical in nature," and is capable of lay observation.  Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 305 (2007).  When a claim involves a diagnosis based on purely subjective complaints, the Board is within its province to weigh the Veteran's statements and determine whether it supports a finding of service incurrence and continued symptoms since service.  Id.  If it does, such lay evidence is sufficient to establish service connection.  Id.

The Veteran's assertions as to his tinnitus symptoms are competent and credible as to in-service incurrence and continuity of symptomatology.  Despite the negative nexus opinion from the VA examiners, as set forth above, the law provides an alternate avenue for establishing a nexus for certain chronic diseases, including an organic disease of the nervous system such as tinnitus.  38 U.S.C. § 1112; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307(a) (3), 3.309(a).  The Veteran has competently and credibly reported that his tinnitus has continued since his in-service noise exposure.  The law provides that when a chronic disease is shown as such in service, subsequent manifestations of the same chronic disease at any later date, however remote, are service connected, unless clearly attributable to intercurrent causes.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(b).  Absent documented evidence of an intercurrent cause, the Board finds that the competent and credible evidence establishes that the Veteran's tinnitus had its inception during active service and has existed since that time.

The Board finds no reason to dissociate the Veteran's hazardous noise exposure in service from his current diagnosis of tinnitus.  In light of the Veteran's credible statements regarding in-service noise exposure and his MOS as an aircraft hydraulic/pneumatic mechanic, the Board gives the Veteran the benefit of the doubt and finds that service connection for tinnitus is warranted, and the claim is granted.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1112, 1113, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.307, 3.309, 3.385.  Lynch v. McDonough, 999 F.3d 1391 (Fed. Cir. 2021), affirmed en banc Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

Increased ratings

Disability ratings are determined by applying the criteria set forth in VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities.  Individual disabilities are assigned separate diagnostic codes (DC).  See U.S.C. §1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1.  When there is a question as to which of two evaluations applies, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for the rating.  Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7.

In evaluating the severity of a particular disability, it is essential to consider its history.  38 C.F.R. § 4.1; Peyton v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 282 (1991).  Where entitlement to compensation has already been established and an increase in the disability rating is at issue, the present level of disability is of primary importance.  Francisco v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 55, 58 (1994).

Staged ratings are also appropriate in any increased rating claim in which distinct time periods with different ratable symptoms can be identified.  Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007).  Here, analysis in this decision has therefore been undertaken with consideration of the possibility that different ratings may be warranted for different time periods as to the pending claim.

When the evidence is in approximate balance in the Veteran's favor or nearly equal regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, the Secretary shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; see also Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49, 53 (1990); Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc).

Entitlement to an increased rating for left foot pain in excess of 20 percent disabling at any point during the review period is denied.

Entitlement to an increased rating for right foot pain in excess of 10 percent disabling at any point during the review period is denied.

The Veteran asserts that he should be in receipt of a higher rating for his bilateral foot disability.  See December 2022 VA Form 10182 Notice of Disagreement. 

The Veteran is currently rated for a left foot strain rated as 20 percent disabling from April 5, 2022, under DC 5284, and right foot strain rated as 10 percent disabling from April 5, 2022, under DC 5284.  See February 2025 Rating Decision - Codesheet.  The Board notes that the Veteran first submitted his VA 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim (Compensation) for bilateral foot pain on April 5, 2022, the date the AOJ awarded service connection for the Veteran's foot disability, which is the earliest possible date that service connection for a foot disability is possible.  Therefore, the Board will turn to whether the Veteran is entitled to an increased rating in excess of 20 percent for his left foot and 10 percent for his right foot from April 5, 2022. 

The Veteran's left and right foot strain are rated under 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5284, for other foot injuries.  Under Diagnostic Code 5284, a 10 percent rating is warranted for moderate foot injuries.  A 20 percent rating is warranted for moderately severe foot injuries.  A 30 percent rating is warranted for severe foot injuries.  A Note to Diagnostic Code 5284 instructs that with actual loss of use of the foot rate as a maximum 40 percent.  38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5284.

The Board notes that as of February 7, 2021, many of the regulations pertaining to evaluations of the musculoskeletal system were amended.  While a new Diagnostic Code 5269 was added for evaluation of plantar fasciitis, this is not applicable to the Veteran's foot disability.  Diagnostic Code 5284 was unchanged by the amendments.

According to MERRIAM WEBSTER, "moderate" means "tending toward the mean or average amount or dimension."  See www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/moderate.  "Severe" means "of a great degree."  See www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/severe.

When evaluating musculoskeletal disabilities based on limitation of motion, 38 C.F.R. § 4.40 requires consideration of functional loss caused by pain or other factors listed in that section that could occur during flare-ups or after repeated use and, therefore, not be reflected on range-of-motion testing.  38 C.F.R. § 4.45 requires consideration also be given to less movement than normal, more movement than normal, weakened movement, excess fatigability, incoordination, and pain on movement.  See DeLuca v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 202 (1995); see also Mitchell v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 32, 44 (2011).  Nonetheless, even when the factors listed in § 4.40 or 4.45 are relevant when evaluating a disability, the rating is assigned based on the extent to which motion is limited, pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a; a separate or higher rating under § 4.40 or 4.45 itself is not appropriate.  See Thompson v. McDonald, 815 F.3d 781, 785 (Fed. Cir. 2016) ("[I]t is clear that the guidance of § 4.40 is intended to be used in understanding the nature of the veteran's disability, after which a rating is determined based on the § 4.71a criteria.")

Under 38 C.F.R. § 4.59, painful motion is a factor to be considered with any form of arthritis; however, 38 C.F.R. § 4.59 is not limited to disabilities involving arthritis.  See Burton v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 1 (2011).

The Board finds that the evidence of record persuasively weighs against a rating in excess of 10 percent for right foot strain and 20 percent for left foot strain at any point during the review period. 

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination for his feet in May 2022.  The examiner noted bilateral foot pain secondary to leg length discrepancy was diagnosed in 1986.  The Veteran stated he had bilateral foot pain, described as all over the foot, dull and aching.  The Veteran stated his left foot was more painful than the right and sitting down relieved the pain.  The Veteran reported no flare ups of either foot.  Functional impact was noted as "Impact he has constant pain in both feet, which makes it difficult to walk and stand, as required by his job as an aircraft mechanic and inspector.  His job requires he walks 5-6 miles a day.  Pain causes irritability."  The examiner found that moderate pain was present in the right foot and moderately severe pain was present in the left foot.  The foot condition did chronically compromise weight bearing.  No arch supports, orthotics or shoe modifications were required for the Veteran's foot condition.  The Veteran had pain on passive motion, active motion, and weight bearing in both feet.  The Veteran did not use assistive devices to ambulate.  Functional impact was not so diminished that amputation with prosthesis would equally serve the Veteran.  See May 2022 C&P Exam. 

The Board finds that the evidence of record persuasively weighs against a rating in excess of 20 percent for left foot strain and 10 percent for right foot strain at any point during the review period, as the worst pain exhibited for the Veteran's left foot was moderately severe, and the worst pain exhibited for the Veteran's right foot was moderate.  As the evidence of record persuasively weighs against a rating in excess of 20 percent for left foot strain and in excess of 10 percent for right foot strain during the review period, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

The Board has also considered the other Diagnostic Codes pertaining to the foot.  Other disability ratings may be assigned only if the symptomatology for a disability is not duplicative or overlapping with the symptomatology of any other disability.  See Esteban v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 259, 261-62 (1994); see also Lyles v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 107 (2017).  In Scott v. Wilkie, the Federal Circuit expressly adopted the Court's holding that disabilities specifically listed in the rating schedule may only be rated under Diagnostic Codes which specifically pertain to them.  Scott v. Wilkie, 920 F.3d 1375 (Fed. Cir. 2019) (citing Copeland v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 333, 336 (2015)).  The Federal Circuit also expressly adopted the Court's holding that unlisted conditions may be rated by analogy to Diagnostic Codes that may not describe the unlisted disability but address disabilities that may be productive of similar symptoms.  Scott, 920 F.3d 1375 (citing Yancy v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 484, 493 (2016).  Finally, the Federal Circuit concluded that the Board must also consider assigning separate ratings under analogous Diagnostic Codes, when rating an unlisted service-connected foot disability exhibiting distinct manifestations, even when service connection has also been granted for one of the eight conditions listed in the rating schedule.  Id.

The evidence of record does not reflect that the Veteran has any other service-connected foot disabilities that would warrant a separate rating under a different Diagnostic Code.  See May 2022 C&P Exam. 

REASONS FOR REMAND

Entitlement to service connection for limb length discrepancy (claimed one leg longer than the other leg due to hip displacement) is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a bilateral hip condition is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a bilateral knee condition is remanded.

The Veteran has asserted that his bilateral knee disabilities are secondary to his service connected back disability.  See December 2021 VA 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim (Compensation).  The Veteran has also asserted that his hips are displaced causing one of his legs to be longer than his other leg, which has caused back pain and bilateral knee pain.  See December 2021 VA 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim (Compensation).   The Board has recharacterized the Veteran's claims into three separate claims: a limb length discrepancy, a bilateral hip condition, and a bilateral knee condition. 

The Board notes that the Veteran's military personnel records, which may include the Veteran's service entry and exit medical examinations and other service treatment records, were not properly uploaded and are illegible in Caseflow, and largely illegible in VBMS.  See January 2021 Military Personnel Record.  Upon remand, these records must be re-uploaded.  

The Veteran was not afforded a VA examination specifically to determine if his limb length discrepancy was due to service.  The Board notes that the Veteran has been found to have right leg shortening by a VA examiner.  See May 2022 C&P Exam.  A VA examination is required to determine if the Veteran's limb length discrepancy is due to service, and to determine the severity of the Veteran's limb length discrepancy. 

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination for his bilateral knee condition in February 2022.  The Veteran was diagnosed with bilateral patellofemoral pain syndrome in 2022.  The examiner stated,

[The Veteran] injured his left knee in 1985 at the same time with a back injury.  He was removing the fuel tank off and it was not defueled and when the tank was lowered and the weight pushed him into the ground with 300 pounds.  That injured the lumbar area and the left knee.  He went to a clinic at the Naval Aerostation in Dallas.  He received pain medication and sent back to work and after the third visit the Naval Doctor recommended surgery without specifically mentioned the type of surgery needed.  The left knee has more pain.  He wears a brace that is self prescribed.  Popping in the left knee.  Pain to the right of the knee cap.  Medications Ibuprofen.  Works at Gulfstream Aerospace as an Inspector.  See February 2022 C&P Exam.

In their opinion, the examiner said the Veteran's left knee pain was unrelated to his lumbar sacral strain but gave no reasoning as to why.  Additionally, the examiner stated the 2 cm leg length discrepancy could impact the Veteran's knees, but did not offer a nexus opinion on this.  The examiner opined the Veteran's right knee pain was less likely than not due to his lumbosacral strain.  The examiner stated 

There is one entry in May 8 1986 of pain.  According to the Veteran, he has managed the knee pain at the same time as his back pain using similar medication for relief.  Aggravation of knee pain over the years from a service inflicted injury.  The Veteran has chronic low back pain that is not likely to cause the knee condition.  There is a 2 CM discrepancy in leg length with the right leg shorter that could impact the knee condition.

Unfortunately, the February 2022 VA examiner did not offer an opinion as to whether the Veteran's knee pain was due to his injury in service, and did not offer sufficient rationale as to whether the Veteran's injury was secondary to his service connected back condition or other service connected conditions.  As such, remand is required for a new VA knee examination. 

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination for his bilateral hip condition in May 2022.  The examiner noted the Veteran was diagnosed with right limb length shortening in March 2022 and a bilateral hip strain in March 2022.  The examiner noted that the Veteran asserted these conditions began in the mid 1980s.  The Veteran stated his hip condition was secondary to his lumbosacral strain which began after a severe injury in 1985 in service.  The Veteran stated that when he had a back injury it translated to his hip, and when he sits in a car he has to rotate to left when sits because his right hip is shorter.  

In their opinion, the examiner stated,

The Veteran's hip condition bilateral or hip strain both, limb length shortening right, is less likely than not (50 percent or less probability) proximately due to or the result of: lumbosacral strain because e folder reviewed and prior medical opinions, pre and post service records, and knee exam noting leg length discrepancy and veteran's lay statements, and 2. The weight of the current peer reviewed medical literature does not support a direct cause and effect relationship.  In other words the claimed hip condition bilateral or hip strain both, limb length shortening right is less likely not directly caused by the claimed lumbosacral strain.  A limb shortening or leg length discrepancy is congenital or acquired in nature (Vogt, B., et al, 2020). In congenital conditions, one limb grows at a faster rate than the other limb.  In acquired conditions the limb is shortened due to loss of bone from a trauma or an infection (Vogt, B., et al, 2020).  The back or lumbosacral strain has not caused any known leg trauma or leg infection in e folder reviewed.  There are studies that read that the limb shortening may cause a strain on the other joints of the body like the back, hips and or knees as a result of the imbalance, pelvic tilt and/or a possible joint overloading from an abnormal gait (Vogt, B., et al, 2020).  Therefore the limb length shortening right would be more likely the contributing factor to the lumbosacral strain and also to the condition of the hip strain both rather than the lumbosacral strain as claimed by the veteran.  See May 2022 C&P Exam.

Unfortunately, the examiner did not offer an opinion as to whether the Veteran's bilateral hip injury was directly due to service, or due to his limb length discrepancy.  Therefore, remand is required for a new VA examination for the Veteran's bilateral hip condition to determine if his bilateral hip disability is directly due to service, or due to another service connected condition. 

Entitlement to service connection for deviated nasal septum is remanded.

The Veteran asserted that he had deviated septum surgery during service in 1984 and it had gotten worse since that time causing nausea, congestion, and allergies.  See January 2022 VA 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim (Compensation).

The Veteran's service treatment records showed that during June 1984 consultation the physician noted that the Veteran had a nasal fracture at age 14 and a deviated septum.  The Veteran had a septoplasty in July 1984 and a follow up in October 1984 showed that it was healing well.  See January 2021 STR - Medical - Photocopy.

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination for his deviated septum in May 2022.  The examiner stated that the Veteran was diagnosed with a traumatic deviated nasal septum in 1984.  The examiner stated, 

The Veteran's Deviated septum (which clearly and unmistakably existed prior to service) or diagnosis of deviated nasal septum status post septoplasty was less likely than not aggravated beyond its natural progression by Veteran was noted to have fractured nose at age 14 which resulted in deviated nasal septum, he underwent surgery in 6/1984 for the condition due to difficulties breathing during service because of the following: while a temporary aggravation is plausible during service, there is no evidence of a permanent aggravation beyond it's natural progression because current and thorough review of medical literature fails to support that the condition was permanently aggravated by service.  A nexus is not established.  See C&P Exam, May 2022.

The Veteran stated he did not recall breaking his nose at 14 years old and at no point in the Veteran's medical records did the Veteran state that he broke his nose at 14 years old.  As the Veteran's military personnel records which may include the Veteran's service entry examination are unavailable, remand is required in order to provide a new VA examination to determine if the Veteran deviated his septum prior to service or during service, and to determine if the Veteran's deviated septum was aggravated by his service.  See May 2022 C&P Exam.

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disability is remanded.

The Veteran asserts that he has neurological disorders to include memory loss due to his chemical exposure in the Marines, and that the Marine Corps worsened his existing trauma.  See April 2021 VA 21-0781, Statement in Support of Claim for PTSD, March 2022 VA 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim (Compensation).

The Veteran was first afforded a VA examination for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) in July 2021.  The examiner stated that during the military, the Veteran noted he had "Suicidal thoughts most of my life and kinda, like, loneliness...but I never attempted that [suicide] in the military."  The Veteran asserted that growing up in a religious cult from age 8-17 was when his trauma started, and that he was physically, mentally and sexually abused.  The Veteran then described physical abuse by his superior in the military.  In their opinion, the examiner stated,

There is no objective evidence to support a nexus between Veteran's diagnosed PTSD and his claimed in-service stressors; therefore, it is less likely than not (50% or less probability) that Veteran's PTSD is related to the claimed in-service stressors.  See C&P Exam, July 2021.

The examiner further noted the Veteran denied military sexual trauma and only asserted that the Military aggravated his pre-existing trauma from his upbringing in a mentally, sexually, and physically abusive cult.  However, the July 2021 VA examiner did not expand on the Veteran's physical abuse in the military, nor his deployment experiences, which are unknown, as the Veteran's military personnel records are illegible.  Therefore, the July 2021 VA examination is afforded low probative weight.  See July 2021 C&P Exam.

The Veteran was afforded a subsequent VA PTSD examination in June 2022.  The examiner noted the Veteran was diagnosed with PTSD and Unspecified Other Substance Related Disorder in sustained remission.  The examiner did not question the Veteran about any possible traumas during his military service.  The examiner only noted that the Veteran's first marriage ended due to his wife's infidelity during his deployments, and that in the military the Veteran's supervisor would physically abuse him, but did not expand on either of these traumas.  The examination had no other discussion of military service, other than the examiner noting the Veteran's service treatment records.  As a result of this oversight, the June 2022 VA examination is afforded low probative weight.  See June 2022 C&P exam.

To date, the Veteran has not been afforded a probative VA examination to address whether his pre-existing psychiatric disabilities were aggravated by his military service, to include his claimed chemical exposures.  Given the Veteran's assertions of trauma during his deployments, and physical abuse by his supervisor, a VA examination should be scheduled to determine whether he has an acquired psychiatric disorder that is related to service or that has been aggravated by service or a service-connected disability.  See McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 81-83 (2006), see also 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(4).

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1.  Rescan and upload the Veteran's military personnel records to ensure they are legible.  See January 2021 Military Personnel Record.  If the records continue to be illegible, contact the NPRC to obtain a new copy of the Veteran's military personnel records.  Document all requests for information and responses in the claims file.  If such records are unavailable, inform the Veteran.

2.  Perform any TERA record development necessary to determine the Veteran's toxic exposures during service, including completing a new ILER search, with visible results.

3.  A TERA Memorandum should be prepared with the record in accordance with the PACT Act.  

4.  Upon completion of the above, provide the Veteran an appropriate examination by an appropriate clinician to determine the nature and etiology of any acquired psychiatric disability to include anxiety, depression, or PTSD present during the pendency of the claim.  The claims file must be made available to the examiner for review. 

The examiner should indicate whether the Veteran has had a diagnosis of an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include anxiety, depression, or PTSD, at any time during the pendency of the claim.

(a.)  If the Veteran is diagnosed with PTSD, the examiner must explain how the diagnostic criteria are met and opine whether the likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher that the Veteran's PTSD is related to a verified in-service stressor.  

(b.)  If any other acquired psychiatric disorders are diagnosed, the examiner must opine whether each diagnosed disorder is related to an in-service injury, event, or disease.  

The examiner should opine as follows:

Whether any diagnosed psychiatric disorder was due to the Veteran's service, or any service connected disabilities, and 

Whether any diagnosed psychiatric disorder was aggravated (worsened) by the Veteran's service or service connected disabilities.  The worsening need not be a permanent worsening of the disability.

Separate opinions with supporting rationale must be provided addressing causation and aggravation.  If the Veteran's diagnosed psychiatric disorder was aggravated by his service or service connected disabilities, the examiner should also indicate the extent of such aggravation by identifying the baseline level of disability.  This may be ascertained by the medical evidence of record, and also by the Veteran's statements as to the nature, severity, and frequency of his observable symptoms over time.

4.  Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination for his leg length discrepancy condition.  The clinician must review the claims file.

(a.)  The clinician should provide an opinion as to whether the likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher that (1) the Veteran's leg length discrepancy was due to service or (2) due to or aggravated by a service connected condition.

If the Veteran's diagnosed leg length discrepancy was aggravated by his service or service connected disabilities, the examiner should also indicate the extent of such aggravation by identifying the baseline level of disability.  This may be ascertained by the medical evidence of record, and also by the Veteran's statements as to the nature, severity, and frequency.  

5.  Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination for his bilateral hip condition.  The clinician must review the claims file.

(a.)  The clinician should provide an opinion as to whether the likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher that (1) the Veteran's bilateral hip condition was due to service or (2) due to or aggravated by a service connected condition.

If the Veteran's bilateral hip condition was aggravated by his service or service connected disabilities, the examiner should also indicate the extent of such aggravation by identifying the baseline level of disability.  This may be ascertained by the medical evidence of record, and also by the Veteran's statements as to the nature, severity, and frequency

6.  Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination for his bilateral knee condition.  The clinician must review the claims file.

(a.)  The clinician should provide an opinion as to whether the likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher that (1) the Veteran's bilateral knee condition was due to service or (2) due to or aggravated by a service connected condition.

If the Veteran's bilateral knee condition was aggravated by his service or service connected disabilities, the examiner should also indicate the extent of such aggravation by identifying the baseline level of disability.  This may be ascertained by the medical evidence of record, and also by the Veteran's statements as to the nature, severity, and frequency

7.  Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination for his deviated septum condition.  The clinician must review the claims file.

(a.)  The clinician should provide an opinion as to whether the likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher that (1) the Veteran's deviated septum condition was due to or aggravated by service.

If the Veteran's deviated septum was aggravated by his service, the examiner should also indicate the extent of such aggravation by identifying the baseline level of disability.  This may be ascertained by the medical evidence of record, and also by the Veteran's statements as to the nature, severity, and frequency

A complete rationale must be provided for each opinion rendered.  If the examiner cannot provide a requested opinion without resorting to speculation, the examiner should explain why an opinion cannot be provided (e.g., lack of sufficient information/evidence, the limits of medical knowledge, etc.).  In providing the opinion(s), the examiner should address the Veteran's lay statements.

Then, readjudicate the Veteran's claim on appeal.  If the benefits sought on appeal remain denied, provide the Veteran a supplemental statement of the case and allow an appropriate period for response.

 

 

Frederic P. Gallun

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Axelrad, E

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.