Citation Nr: A25032465
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240429-437374
DATE: April 8, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an evaluation of 40 percent, but not higher, for right lower extremity radiculopathy, sciatic nerve, is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

Throughout the period on appeal, the Veteran's right lower extremity radiculopathy has manifested by moderately severe incomplete paralysis of the sciatic nerve.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

For the entire appeal period, the criteria for a disability rating of 40 percent, but no higher, for the right lower extremity radiculopathy, sciatic nerve, have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.124a, Diagnostic Code (DC) 8520.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Marine Corps from February 1993 to September 2004. 

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a September 2023 rating decision by the VA Regional Office (RO). 

In the April 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the January 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Increased Rating

Disability ratings are determined by evaluating the extent to which a Veteran's service-connected disability adversely affects his ability to function under the ordinary conditions of daily life, including employment, by comparing the symptomatology with the criteria set forth in the Schedule for Rating Disabilities (Rating Schedule). 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.10. 

Where a claimant appeals the initial rating assigned following an award of service connection, evidence contemporaneous with the claim for service connection and with the rating decision granting service connection would be most probative of the degree of disability existing at the time that the initial rating was assigned and should be the evidence used to decide whether an initial rating on appeal was erroneous. Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119, 126 (1999).

In evaluating a disability, the Board considers the current examination reports in light of the whole recorded history to ensure that the current rating accurately reflects the severity of the condition. The Board has a duty to acknowledge and consider all regulations that are potentially applicable. Schafrath v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 589 (1991). The medical, as well as industrial history is to be considered, and a full description of the effects of the disability upon ordinary activity is also required. 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.10. 

Where there is a question as to which of two evaluations shall be applied, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating. Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.7. 

When the evidence is in approximate balance in the veteran's favor or nearly equal regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, the Secretary shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.3; see also Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49, 53 (1990); Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc).

1. Entitlement to an evaluation in excess of 20 percent for right lower extremity radiculopathy, sciatic nerve.

The Veteran asserts that he is entitled to an increased rating of 40 percent for his right lower extremity sciatic nerve radiculopathy. See April 2024, VA Form 10182, Notice of Disagreement and attached Appellate Brief.

The Board first notes that the period on appeal begins as early as November 2, 2020, one year prior to VA's receipt of the Veteran's claim for increased evaluation that has been continuously pursued since. 

The Veteran is currently in receipt of a 20 percent disability rating for his service-connected right lower extremity radiculopathy, sciatic nerve, in accordance with the criteria set forth in 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8520 (Neuritis and neuralgia of that group are evaluated under DC 8620 and 8720 respectively).

Under these criteria, mild incomplete paralysis is rated as 10 percent disabling. Moderate incomplete paralysis is rated as 20 percent disabling. Moderately severe incomplete paralysis is rated as 40 percent disabling. Severe incomplete paralysis, with marked muscular atrophy is rated as 60 percent disabling. Complete paralysis, with the foot dangles and drops, no active movement possible of muscles below the knee, flexion of knee weakened or (very rarely) lost is rated as 80 percent disabling. See 38 C.F.R § 4.124a.

The words "mild," "moderate," and "severe" as used in the various Diagnostic Codes are not defined in the Rating Schedule. Regulations provide that ratings for peripheral neurological disorders are to be assigned based the relative impairment of motor function, trophic changes, or sensory disturbance. 38 C.F.R. § 4.120. Consideration is also given for loss of reflexes, pain, and muscle atrophy. See 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.123, 4.124.

The term "incomplete paralysis" indicates a degree of lost or impaired function substantially less than the type of picture for complete paralysis given with each nerve, whether due to varied level of the nerve lesion or to partial regeneration. When the involvement is wholly sensory, the rating is for the mild, or at most, the moderate degree. The disability ratings for the peripheral nerves are for unilateral involvement; when bilateral, the ratings combine with application of the bilateral factor. 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Note at "Diseases of the Peripheral Nerves." The Note to 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a establishes a maximum disability rating for conditions that are wholly sensory, as opposed to a minimum disability rating for conditions that are more than wholly sensory. See Miller v. Shulkin, 28 Vet. App. 376 (2017).

VA's Adjudication Procedures Manual (M21-1) provides guidance in the assignment and definition of the terms for mild, moderate, and severe peripheral nerve conditions. Although the Board is not bound by the M-21-1, it is "required to discuss any relevant provisions as part of the duty to provide adequate reasons or bases if the Board chooses to rely on an M21-1 provision as a factor to support its decision." Overton v. Wilkie, 30 Vet. App. 257, 264 (2018). Here, the Board finds the M21-1 guidance helpful.

Under the M21-1, the "mild" level of evaluation is reasonably assigned when sensory symptoms are recurrent but not continuous, assigned a lower medical grade reflecting less impairment, and/or affecting a smaller area in the nerve distribution. M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, Chapter 12, Section A.2.c. Very minimal reflex or motor abnormality could also be consistent with mild incomplete paralysis. Id.

The "moderate" level of evaluation is reserved for the most significant and disabling cases of sensory-only involvement. These are cases where the sensory symptoms are continuous, the symptoms are assigned a higher medical grade reflecting greater impairment and/or they affect a larger area in the nerve distribution. Id. These cases also include those with combinations of significant sensory changes and reflex or motor changes of a lower degree, or motor and/or reflex impairment such as weakness or diminished or hyperactive reflexes graded as medically moderate. Id. 

A "moderately severe" evaluation reflects motor and/or reflex impairment reflecting a high level of limitation or disability. Id. Atrophy may also be present. Id. 

Marked muscle atrophy is expected for "severe" paralysis of the sciatic nerve. In general, severe incomplete paralysis of a peripheral nerve involves motor and/or reflex impairment (for example atrophy, weakness, or diminished or hyperactive reflexes) at a grade reflecting a very high level of limitation or disability. Neuritis characterized by loss of reflexes, muscle atrophy, sensory disturbances, and constant pain should be rated as high as severe incomplete paralysis of the nerve. Id.

The Board notes that it has reviewed all the evidence in the record relevant to the period on review. This includes VA examinations from November 2021 and January 2023, as well as a private medical opinion from September 2022, and VAMC treatment records and lay statements. Although the Board has an obligation to provide adequate reasons and bases supporting its decision, there is no requirement that the Board discuss every piece of evidence in the record.  Hence, the Board will summarize the relevant evidence, as deemed appropriate, and the Board's analysis will focus on what the evidence shows, or fails to show, as to the claims.  See Gonzalez v. West, 218 F.3d 1378, 1380-81 (Fed. Cir. 2000).

Regarding impairment of motor functions, the Veteran reported that due to his radiculopathy he tries to limit movements that cause his symptoms to worsen, such as bending forward, leaning back, twisting to the left and right, and bending left and right. See November 2021 VA Form 21-4138, Statement in Support of Claim. Further, he reported that pain caused by radiculopathy makes it difficult for him "to do certain everyday activities like prolonged sitting or standing, lying still without regularly adjusting positions, long card rides, doing household chores, doing yard work, sports, running, jogging, and using stairs. Id. Finally, the Veteran reported noticing that his feet scrape the ground when he walks. Id. The Board notes that the Veteran is competent to report lay-observable symptoms such as pain and numbness. See Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 470 (lay testimony is competent to prove that a claimant exhibited certain symptoms and the time period that those symptoms appeared). 

The VA examiner opined that it would be hard for the Veteran to do prolonged standing, sitting and lifting. See November 2021 VA Examination. There is no indication that Veteran requires an assistive device to ambulate. Finally, the May 2022 private opinion reports that Veteran is experiencing "intermittent loss of function in the right lower extremity with muscle weakness profound enough to cause impeded function of the muscle's strength which normally, if innervated properly and fully, would allow ground clearance of the foot during the swing phase of walking." 

Regarding sensory disturbance, at the time of a November 2021 VA examination, the Veteran reported numbness and sharp pain down the leg, The examiner opined that the Veteran experienced mild paresthesias and numbness in the right lower extremity. During the January 2023 VA examination, the Veteran reported experiencing numbness primarily in the right leg, which in turn brings severe pain flare up lasting about five hours. The examiner performed sensory exam, which resulted in the finding of decreased sensation in both feet. In addition, the Veteran reported continuously experiencing "shooting pain, burning, numbness, tingling, aching, and a pins-and-needles sensation on the right side from my low back to my toes." See November 2021 VA Form 21-4138, Statement in Support of Claim

Regarding loss of reflexes, at the November 2021 VA examination, reflexes were normal except for slight reduction in the right lower leg/ankle. At the time of the January 2023 VA examination, the reflexes in the right knee were assessed as hypoactive. 

Regarding pain, in November 2021 the VA examiner opined, that the Veteran experienced mild constant pain and intermittent dull pain in the right lower extremity.  At the time of the January 2023 VA examination, the examiner opined that the Veteran experienced mild constant pain in the right lower extremity. He also noted Veteran's reports of numbness in his leg that turns into a severe lower back pain that then "travels down outer thigh down lateral leg through side and top of feet; does not affect big toe." The Veteran reported chiropractic care and medication, including oxycodone, duloxetine and Tylenol, for flare ups of the pain. The May 2022 private examination notes Veteran's lay reports of experiencing shooting pain and other sensory symptoms, with flare ups occurring multiple times per day and lasting up to a few hours.  

The evidence of record does not include any findings of muscle atrophy, trophic changes, or complete paralysis of the sciatic nerve, as shown by the foot dangling and dropping, no active movement possible of muscles below the knee, or flexion of the knee weakened or lost. 

Regarding the Veteran's overall degree of disability, in November 2021 VA examiner opined, that the Veteran experienced moderate incomplete paralysis of the right extremity bilateral sciatic nerve. In January 2023, a VA examiner also opined that the Veteran experienced moderate incomplete paralysis of the bilateral sciatic nerve. In addition, he noted that the Veteran experienced incomplete moderate paralysis of external popliteal nerve, musculocutaneous (superficial peroneal) nerve, internal popliteal (tibial) nerve, and posterior tibial nerve. He also noted that Veteran experienced incomplete mild paralysis of external cutaneous nerve of the thigh and illio-inguinal nerve. See January 2023 VA Peripheral Nerves Conditions DBQ. In the May 2022 private examination, the examiner opined that Veteran's right lower extremity radiculopathy symptoms were moderately severe, continuous and "encompass a large area in the dermatomal nerve distribution (the Sciatic Nerve dermatomal distribution encompasses the entire leg area)." 

Based on the above, the Board finds that the Veteran's radiculopathy of the right extremity is primarily manifest by impairment of motor functions, sensory disturbances, loss of reflexes, and pain. The Board also finds that the most probative evidence of record is against a finding that the disability is manifest by muscle atrophy or complete paralysis. Resolving reasonable doubts in the Veteran's favor, the Board thus finds that the level of impairment is most analogous to moderately severe incomplete paralysis of the sciatic nerve for the right lower extremity.

The Board has considered all other potentially applicable Diagnostic Codes. The Board first notes that under 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, there are five nerve branches in the lower extremities. Each branch has its separate and distinct functions. The sciatic branch includes the sciatic nerve, external popliteal nerve (common peroneal), musculocutaneous (superficial peroneal), anterior tibial nerve (deep peroneal), internal popliteal (tibial), and posterior tibial nerves. The femoral branch includes the anterior crural (femoral) and the internal saphenous nerves. The obturator, external cutaneous thigh, and illio-inguinal nerve branches only include one nerve each.

The Board acknowledges the January 2023 VA examination which, with regard to the right lower extremity showed moderate incomplete paralysis of the right extremity external popliteal nerve, musculocutaneous (superficial peroneal) nerve, internal popliteal (tibial) nerve, and posterior tibial nerve. However, separate compensable ratings are not warranted for the same nerve branch, as it would constitute impermissible pyramiding. 38 C.F.R. § 4.14; Esteban v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 259, 262 (1994). The evidence shows that the Veteran's radiculopathy was manifested by pain and numbness in the lower extremity and had the same functional effects. Therefore, separate ratings for external popliteal, internal popliteal, musculocutaneous, or posterior tibial nerve, in addition to that already assigned for the sciatic nerve, would doubly compensate the Veteran for the same symptomatology, and thus result in pyramiding. Further, without a finding of a complete paralysis, an evaluation in excess of 30 percent would not be warranted under diagnostic criteria pertaining to any of those affected nerves, other than the sciatic nerve. The record does not contain any evidence that would support a finding of a complete paralysis of any of the nerves in the sciatic branch. Thus, the 40 percent evaluation for moderately severe incomplete paralysis of sciatic nerve is the most favorable to the Veteran. 

Finally, the Board notes that it has already considered the pain experienced by the Veteran in determining that a rating of 40 percent, but no higher, is warranted under DC 8520. Consequently, a separate rating for neuritis or neuralgia under DC 8620 or 8720 would constitute improper pyramiding under 38 C.F.R. § 4.14; see Banschbach v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 422, 429 (2024) ("nothing in the rating schedule or related regulations that prohibits consideration of separate ratings for neuritis or neuralgia of a peripheral nerve when a Veteran is rated for paralysis of the same nerve under § 4.124a.... assignment of a paralysis rating under § 4.124a does not preclude as a matter of law separate evaluations for neuritis and neuralgia of the same nerve").

In conclusion, the Board finds that, after resolving any reasonable doubt in favor of the Veteran, the Veteran's overall disability picture throughout the period on appeal more nearly approximates the 40 percent rating criteria. Thus, a claim for disability rating of 40 percent, but no higher, for lower right extremity radiculopathy of the sciatic nerve is granted. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021). 

 

D. SMART

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Blaszkiewicz, Adam

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.