Citation Nr: A25032350
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 250321-521581
DATE: April 8, 2025

ORDER

Service connection for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is granted.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran's PTSD is due to fear of hostile military or terrorist activity during his active service, specifically a near collision with a surface ship while the submarine he served on was approaching periscope depth. 

2. The January 2025 VA examiner, a psychologist with whom VA contracted, confirmed that the claimed stressor is adequate to support a diagnosis of PTSD and that the Veteran's symptoms are related to his claimed stressor. 

3. The Veteran's claimed stressor is consistent with the places, types, and circumstances of his service. 

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for service connection for PTSD are met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1154(a), 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.304, 4.125.  

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from August 1968 to June 1972. This matter comes before the Board of Veterans Appeals (Board) on appeal from a February 2025 rating decision from a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO). 

In the March 21, 2025 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal, the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Based upon the selection of the Direct Review option, the Board may only consider the evidence of record as of February 4, 2025-the date of the rating decision on appeal.  See 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If the Veteran submitted evidence that was added to the record after February 4, 2025, the Board did not consider it. If the Veteran wishes to have VA consider any evidence that was not considered, a supplemental claim should be submitted identifying such evidence.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.

In January 2024, the Board granted the Veteran's motion to advance this claim on the docket based on his age. The Board found then and still does that there was sufficient cause shown since the Veteran had "advanced age" being defined as 75 or more years of age. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.800(c)(1), 20.902(c)(1).  

At the outset, the Board observes that the Veteran has one year from the date the RO mails notice of the rating decision on appeal, or 60 days from when the Board receives the VA Form 10182 Notice of Disagreement, whichever is later, to switch dockets. 38 C.F.R. § 20.202(c)(2); see also Williams v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 305 (2024). However, the Board finds that in adjudicating this matter prior to the expiration of the Veteran's right to modify his NOD to change dockets does not prejudice him since the Board is fully granting his claim of service connection for PTSD, which is a full grant of the benefit sought. 

Service connection for PTSD is granted.

The Veteran contends that his PTSD is due to in-service stressors from his duties on a nuclear submarine.  In the VA Form 10182 Notice of Disagreement, the Veteran argued that his service in a nuclear submarine during the early Cold War was consistent with his reported stressors, which were activities that involved the risk of death. Since the 2025 VA examiner provided a positive nexus between his PTSD and his in-service experiences, he argued that service connection for PTSD should be granted.  

Service connection for PTSD requires evidence of a current diagnosis of PTSD consistent with the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, fifth edition; credible supporting evidence that a claimed in-service stressor occurred; and competent evidence of a causal nexus between the current condition and the in-service stressor. The following provisions apply to claims for service connection of PTSD diagnosed during service or based on the specified type of claimed stressor:

(1) If the evidence establishes a diagnosis of PTSD during service and the claimed stressor is related to that service, in the absence of clear and convincing evidence to the contrary, and provided that the claimed stressor is consistent with the circumstances, conditions, or hardships of the veteran's service, the veteran's lay testimony alone may establish the occurrence of the claimed in-service stressor.

(2) If the evidence establishes that the veteran engaged in combat with the enemy and the claimed stressor is related to that combat, in the absence of clear and convincing evidence to the contrary, and provided that the claimed stressor is consistent with the circumstances, conditions, or hardships of the veteran's service, the veteran's lay testimony alone may establish the occurrence of the claimed in-service stressor.

(3) If a stressor claimed by a veteran is related to the veteran's fear of hostile military or terrorist activity and a VA psychiatrist or psychologist, or a psychiatrist or psychologist with whom VA has contracted, confirms that the claimed stressor is adequate to support a diagnosis of posttraumatic stress disorder and that the veteran's symptoms are related to the claimed stressor, in the absence of clear and convincing evidence to the contrary, and provided the claimed stressor is consistent with the places, types, and circumstances of the veteran's service, the veteran's lay testimony alone may establish the occurrence of the claimed in-service stressor. For purposes of this paragraph, "fear of hostile military or terrorist activity"' means that a veteran experienced, witnessed, or was confronted with an event or circumstance that involved actual or threatened death or serious injury, or a threat to the physical integrity of the veteran or others, such as from an actual or potential improvised explosive device; vehicle-imbedded explosive device; incoming artillery, rocket, or mortar fire; grenade; small arms fire, including suspected sniper fire; or attack upon friendly military aircraft, and the veteran's response to the event or circumstance involved a psychological or psycho- physiological state of fear, helplessness, or horror.

(4) If the evidence establishes that the veteran was a prisoner-of-war under the provisions of § 3.1(y) of this part and the claimed stressor is related to that prisoner-of-war experience, in the absence of clear and convincing evidence to the contrary, and provided that the claimed stressor is consistent with the circumstances, conditions, or hardships of the veteran's service, the veteran's lay testimony alone may establish the occurrence of the claimed in-service stressor.

(5) If a PTSD claim is based on in-service personal assault, evidence from sources other than the veteran's service records may corroborate the veteran's account of the stressor incident. Examples of such evidence include, but are not limited to: records from law enforcement authorities, rape crisis centers, mental health counseling centers, hospitals, or physicians; pregnancy tests or tests for sexually transmitted diseases; and statements from family members, roommates, fellow service members, or clergy. Evidence of behavior changes following the claimed assault is one type of relevant evidence that may be found in these sources. Examples of behavior changes that may constitute credible evidence of the stressor include, but are not limited to: a request for a transfer to another military duty assignment; deterioration in work performance; substance abuse; episodes of depression, panic attacks, or anxiety without an identifiable cause; or unexplained economic or social behavior changes. VA will not deny a posttraumatic stress disorder claim that is based on in-service personal assault without first advising the claimant that evidence from sources other than the veteran's service records or evidence of behavior changes may constitute credible supporting evidence of the stressor and allowing him or her the opportunity to furnish this type of evidence or advise VA of potential sources of such evidence. VA may submit any evidence that it receives to an appropriate medical or mental health professional for an opinion as to whether it indicates that a personal assault occurred. 38 C.F.R. § 3.304. 

In the Veteran's October 2019 VA 21-0781, Statement in Support of Claim for PTSD, the Veteran reported two stressor incidents: (1) while stationed on the USS George Bancroft he was on his third patrol when there was a near collision with a surface ship while the submarine was approaching periscope depth; and (2) while stationed on the USS Corporal in 1971, heavy sea conditions caused the submarine to roll and it almost flipped over while he was performing his duties as a torpedo man and helping to stabilize the submarine. The Board observes that the RO's attempts to corroborate his stressors were unsuccessful. See Records Research Center Response received 10/15/2024. 

In the February 2025 rating decision, the RO made the favorable finding that the Veteran has a diagnosis of PTSD as shown in his VAMC records. The Board also finds that the Veteran has a positive nexus opinion from the January 2025 VA examiner who opined that his PTSD was at least as likely as not incurred or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness. As rationale, the January 2025 VA examiner stated that the Veteran's symptoms met the criteria for PTSD, the stressors related to his submarine service are likely to have occurred, and in his opinion, "unlikely they can be verified in records". See C&P Exam received 1/10/2025 at page 3.  

Given the favorable finding of a diagnosis of PTSD and the positive nexus opinion from the January 2025 VA examiner, the only issue for the Board is whether the Veteran meets the additional requirements of 38 C.F.R. §3.304. 

The Board finds that the evidence of record supports that the Veteran was in fear of hostile military or terrorist activity meaning that he experienced an event that involved actual or threatened death or serious injury, and his response to the event involved a psychological or psycho- physiological state of fear, helplessness, or horror. 38 C.F.R. §3.304(f)(3). 

The Board finds that the Veteran's MOS as a torpedo man and his top-secret clearance all support the assertion that he was in fear of hostile military or terrorist activity when stationed on the USS George Bancroft. See Military Personnel Record received 7/02/2014 at pages 4 and 38. Therefore, the Veteran's claimed stressor: that he was on his third patrol when there was a near collision with a surface ship while the submarine was approaching periscope depth is consistent with the places, types, and circumstances of his service. Also, the January 2025 VA examiner opined that the Veteran's PTSD is at least as likely as not related to exposure to traumatic events with potential of death on board his ship during submarine service. See C&P Exam received 1/10/2025 at page 3. 

Given the abovementioned, the Board finds the evidence to at least be in approximate balance that the Veteran's PTSD was caused by fear of hostile military or terrorist activity during service. Accordingly, after resolving all doubt in favor of the Veteran, the Board finds that service connection for PTSD is warranted. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102, 3.304. 

 

 

Paul Sorisio

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	S. Dixon

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.