Citation Nr: A25032179
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240406-428885
DATE: April 8, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for a left eye disability to include a corneal scar, macular pucker, dry eye syndrome, and cataracts (left eye disability) is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral hand strains with limitation of motion in the fingers and thumbs (bilateral hand disability) is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. There is clear and unmistakable evidence to show the Veteran's left eye corneal scar pre-existed his active-duty service but was not aggravated during his active service. The presumption of soundness is rebutted for the left eye disability.

2. The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that left eye macular pucker, dry eye syndrome, and cataracts began during active service, or are otherwise related to an in-service injury or disease. The evidence is not in approximate balance.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

1. The criteria for service connection for a left eye disability are not met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from July 1978 to February 1985, November 1990 to May 1991, from August 1992 to September 1992, from August 1994 to August 1996, from January 1999 to September 2005, and from January 2008 to February 2009. He additionally served for many years and retired from the Navy Reserve.

This matter is before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a March 2024 rating decision by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ). The modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.  

In the April 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2024 AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

For the left eye disability issue, if the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of entitlement to service connection for bilateral hand disability, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Service Connection

In seeking VA disability compensation, a Veteran generally seeks to establish that a current disability results from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131. "Service connection" basically means that the facts, shown by evidence, establish that a particular injury or disease resulting in disability was incurred coincident with service in the Armed Forces, or if preexisting such service, was aggravated therein. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.

Establishing service connection generally requires competent evidence showing: (1) the existence of a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service. Shedden v. Principi, 381, F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004). Service connection may also be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge, when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (d).

If the positive and negative evidence is in approximate balance, the claimant receives the benefit of the doubt. Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

1. Entitlement to service connection for a left eye disability.

As an initial matter, the March 2024 rating decision made a favorable finding that the Veteran has a current left eye disability of corneal scar, macular pucker, dry eye syndrome, and cataracts. The decision also found the Veteran received eye treatment in service in September 2005. These are favorable findings by the AOJ by which the Board is bound. See 38 U.S.C. § 5104A; 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c). As a result, the first element of service connection has been met. 

The Veteran contends his current left eye corneal scar resulted from an injury to the eye while stationed in Guam. The Board will address the Veteran's corneal scar first as the evidence of record raises the issue of pre-existence for only this disability. 

Left corneal scar

The presumption of soundness applies only when a disease or injury not noted upon entry to service manifests in service, and a question arises as to whether it preexisted service. In this case, there is a question as to whether the claimed left corneal scar preexisted the Veteran's military service beginning in July 1978. Specifically, several in service eye examinations note the Veteran's reports of an eye injury prior to service at the age of 3 or 4. He asserted being struck in the eye with a spring, resulting in the corneal scar, and had low visual assessment since the childhood injury. 

The appellant established "veteran" status based on several periods of active-duty service beginning in July 1978.  

The Veteran's April 1978 entrance examination is absent of any notations of defects, infirmities, or disorders to include in the eye. Additionally, the evidence is at least in approximate balance as to whether the Veteran reported eye symptoms in service. Specifically, the Veteran underwent several in service eye examinations in July 1990, October 199, and September 2005 that noted the existence of a corneal scar. Therefore, with respect to his left eye corneal scar, the presumption of soundness attaches. 38 C.F.R. § 3.304(b). Because the presumption of soundness attaches with respect to this disability, it can only be rebutted by clear and unmistakable evidence that the disorder both pre-existed service and was not aggravated in service. Id; see also Wagner v. Principi, 370 F.3d 1089, 1096 (Fed. Cir. 2004).  

Clear and unmistakable evidence is defined as obvious or manifest. 38 C.F.R. § 3.306(b). Clear and unmistakable evidence means that the evidence "'cannot be misinterpreted and misunderstood, i.e., it is undebatable.'" Quirin v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 390, 396 (2009). 

In this case, there is clear and unmistakable evidence that the Veteran's left eye corneal scar preexisted service. The Veteran's April 1978 entrance examination does not note a left eye corneal scar. However, a July 14, 1978 the Veteran was seen for an eye examination after "broke Rx" which the Board interprets as broken glasses. The examination documented that his prescription was one year old (pre-dating service) and that the Veteran was struck in the left eye as a child by a spring. It diagnosed hyperopia, astigmatism, and anisocoria and advised he wear his new prescription full time. These three diagnoses are discussed in the "other diagnoses" section below.

In January 1985, the Veteran had lost his glasses and his pupils were normal PERRLA (pupils equal, round, reactive to light and accommodation) with no mention of anisocoria. 

In an October 1990 RTN optometry examination, the examiner noted that, despite having no current visual issues, the Veteran had a history of traumatic injury in the left eye "±1963" with low visual assessment since. In 1963 the Veteran would have been around 3-4 years old. This eye examiner also noted scar tissue in the left cornea stating it was due to "past traumatic injury." The pupil examination was normal PERRLA (pupils equal, round, reactive to light and accommodation) with no mention of anisocoria.

The September 2005 in service treatment note identified by the March 2024 AOJ decision also noted a childhood eye injury. The Veteran was being seen for "decreased distance vision" and was diagnosed with farsightedness, astigmatism, presbyopia, and a left eye corneal scar. The provider again noted a corneal scar "from injury when 4 [years old,] spring into eye."  

After service, a June 2023 VA optometry outpatient note indicated a left eye cornea scar that has been "longstanding since childhood per [patient]." 

A March 2024 VA examiner, after review of the claims file, also stated that "records state explicitly throughout on multiple eye exams that [the Veteran's] corneal scar left eye is from a childhood injury (hit by a spring) at age 3 or 4 around 1969." Given that the medical history section of the Disability Benefits Questionnaire described corneal scar onset in 1963, the Board concludes that this is a typographical error and 1969 was meant to be 1963.

The Board acknowledges that in his November 2023 claim, the Veteran asserted his left eye was struck by a tree branch in Guam in 1991. In an April 2024 argument from the Veteran, he explained during a post typhoon clean up in Guam his left eye was injured leaving a "serious scar on the front cornea." He reported seeking medical care in service but "never let anything deflect from [his] need to be a part of the action." He did not understand the far-reaching effects of this injury until years later. The Veteran did not describe the specifics of his injury at that time and did not provide any additional information as to the "far reaching effects" of this injury. 

The Veteran is competent to report on the observable aspects of his left eye corneal scar. However, the Board finds the Veteran is not a credible historian in his recent reports of an in-service eye injury. At the time of examination in service, the Veteran reported a corneal scar during his childhood. He continued to report this to providers throughout his active-duty service. Even after service, the Veteran reported to his VA eye care providers that the scar had been present since childhood. In considering the above, the Board finds the Veteran's own reports of a childhood injury at the time of treatment in service and his continued assertion of a childhood eye injury after service more probative than his claims of an eye injury in Guam made nearly 14 years after his separation. The Veteran only reported a left eye injury in service during typhoon clean up in Guam in the course of seeking VA compensation benefits. In weighing credibility, VA may consider bias and self-interest. See Caluza v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 498, 511 (1995), aff'd, 78 F.3d 604 (Fed. Cir. 1996). In this case, the Veteran only made assertions regarding an eye injury in Guam in statements regarding VA disability benefits but continued to report a childhood eye injury to his VA treatment providers. Therefore, his assertions regarding an in-service eye injury are not found to be credible and are afforded no probative weight. The remaining clear and unmistakable evidence shows the Veteran suffered a childhood left eye injury resulting in a corneal scar prior to his active-duty service that began in July 1978. 

Regarding the second prong, the government may show a lack of aggravation by establishing by clear and unmistakable evidence "that there was no increase in disability during service or that any "increase in disability [was] due to the natural progress of the preexisting condition. Wagner, 370 F.3d at 1096 (quoting 38 U.S.C. § 1153). This burden of proof must be met by affirmative evidence demonstrating that there was no aggravation. The burden is not met by finding "that the record contains insufficient evidence of aggravation." Horn v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 231, 236-37 (2012).

Temporary or intermittent flare-ups during service of a pre-existing injury or disease are not sufficient to be considered "aggravation in service" unless the underlying condition, as contrasted to symptoms, is worsened. Hunt v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 292, 297 (1991). The occurrence of symptoms, in the absence of an increase in the underlying severity, does not constitute aggravation of the disability.  Davis v. Principi, 276 F.3d 1341, 1345 (Fed. Cir. 2002). Evidence of a veteran being asymptomatic on entry into service, with an exacerbation of symptoms during service, does not constitute evidence of aggravation. Green v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 320, 323 (1991). If the disorder becomes worse during service and then improves due to in-service treatment to the point that it was no more disabling than it was at entrance into service, the disorder has not been aggravated by service.  Verdon v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 529 (1996).  

In this case, the evidence of record during all periods of the Veteran's active-duty service does not show an aggravation of his left eye corneal scar. He denied eye trouble and endorsed wearing glasses on his April 1978 entrance report of medical history. The Veteran continued to deny eye trouble in his October 1979, February 1981, July 1991, September 1992, August 1994, October 1994, August 1996, September 1996, November 1998, July 2001, and January 2008 reports of medical history. The Veteran underwent an eye examination in January 1981 which appeared to be a mostly external review of the eye, but no issues were indicated. He had an additional examination in January 1985 because he lost his glasses, and a new prescription was provided. In the July 14th eye examination, a history of corneal scar was reported but no additional scar symptoms. Similar findings were made in an October 1991 eye examination. While the Veteran received treatment for his eyes in service, he did not report, and his providers did not note, any symptoms or treatment related to his left eye corneal scar at entry or at any time throughout his service. 

Finally, the Veteran underwent a VA examination in March 2024 in which the examiner found multiple descriptions of his corneal scar show no change since entering the military. Despite the Veteran's reported exposures to include being stationed in Guam, battery acid in the eyes, deployments to Antarctica, and desert exposure, his corneal scar has remained the same. 

The most competent and credible evidence of record illustrates clear and unmistakable evidence that the left corneal scar disability was not aggravated by military service. As such, VA has met its high burden of showing by clear and unmistakable evidence both that the Veteran's left eye corneal scar preexisted service and was not aggravated by such. Thus, the presumption of soundness is rebutted in its entirety. As the presumption of soundness is rebutted, the second element of service connection is not met and entitlement to service connection for left eye corneal scar is not warranted. See Combee v. Brown, 34 F.3d 1039, 1043 (Fed. Cir. 1994).

Other eye disabilities

Regarding the Veteran's left eye macular pucker, dry eye syndrome, and cataracts, service connection on a direct basis is not warranted. As stated above, the first element of service connection has been met for these three diagnoses. 

The Veteran has made no specific assertions regarding the onset of his macular pucker, dry eye syndrome, or cataracts, to include any of these conditions beginning in service and persisting to the present time. Instead, he generally claimed an eye injury occurred while helping clean up the aftermath of a typhoon in Guam. While the Veteran was provided routine eye examinations in service, the record does not show he reported any injuries to his eyes other than his childhood injury. His service treatment records are also silent for any of these diagnoses. 

Furthermore, a June 2023 VA optometry note diagnosed the Veteran with "age related cataracts." The March 2024 VA examiner indicated the cataract, dry eye, and macular pucker diagnoses were recent and unrelated to the Veteran's active-duty service. Rather, these conditions were not noted during service and are directly related to the Veteran's age. The Board finds this opinion probative, as it provided a clear conclusion with supporting data, and reasoned medical explanations connecting the two. Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 124-25 (2007); Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008). As a result, it is afforded probative weight. 

While the Veteran is competent to assert the observable symptoms of his eye condition, such as feeling dry eye or experiencing sensory symptoms or impaired vision, he is not medically competent to diagnose these specific diseases as being present in service or link these diagnoses to his active service. A diagnosis and nexus opinion here require medical expertise and diagnostic testing that are outside the realm of common knowledge of a layperson. The Veteran does not claim, and the record does not show, he has the relevant medical training, experience, or education to make a diagnosis or provide a competent medical nexus opinion. Kahana v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 428 (2011); Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1376-77 (Fed. Cir. 2007). The competent and credible evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding the Veteran's macular pucker, dry eye syndrome, and cataracts are related to his active-duty service. 

The July 14, 1978 service treatment record of an ophthalmology examination showed diagnosis of hyperopia (farsightedness), astigmatism (refractive error due to cornea shape), and anisocoria (pupils of different size). The Veteran was prescribed corrective lenses to be worn at all times. Eye examinations in 1985 and continuing up through the present show pupils were normal PERRLA, so the anisocoria clearly resolved early in service. Eye examinations later in service, including in February 2008 shortly before separation, continued to diagnose astigmatism, hyperopia (also called hypermetropia), and left corneal scar, plus presbyopia (age-related refraction errors). Refractive errors of the eye are not a "disease" or "injury" within the meaning of veterans' benefits statutes and cannot be service-connected. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(c). Refractive errors include myopia (nearsightedness), hyperopia, astigmatism, and presbyopia. See Terry v. Principi, 340 F.3d 1378, 1884 (2003). Therefore, none of these disabilities are subject to service connection.

The Board acknowledges under 38 U.S.C. § 1168 (a) a medical nexus opinion and examination are required if a Veteran submits a claim for compensation for a service-connected disability under section 1110 with evidence of a disability and evidence of participation in toxic exposure risk activity (TERA) during service, and such evidence is not sufficient to establish a service connection for the disability. There is an exception to the examination requirement of 38 U.S.C. § 1168(b) when the evidence of record indicates that the claimed condition is clearly related to an etiology that is not associated with toxic exposure. In this case, the etiology of the Veteran's macular pucker, dry eye syndrome, and cataracts has been established as being age related with no competent and credible evidence to the contrary. Thus, there was no pre-decisional duty to assist error or error in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty in need of correction. 

Based on the foregoing, the Board finds that the competent and credible evidence is neither evenly nor approximately balanced as to whether entitlement to service connection for a left eye disability to include a corneal scar, macular pucker, dry eye syndrome, or cataracts is warranted. Rather, the evidence persuasively weighs against finding his corneal scar was aggravated by service or that his remaining eye diagnoses were a result of his active-duty service. The benefit of the doubt doctrine does not apply. 38?U.S.C. §?5107(b), Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (holding the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine is not for application when the evidence is persuasively for or against the claim). The claim is denied.

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to service connection for bilateral hand disability.

The Veteran seeks service connection for his bilateral hand strains with limitation of motion in the fingers and thumbs due to "Seabees hard work." The Veteran also contends he suffered left- and right-hand injuries while in service to include frostbite.  

More specifically, in an April 2024 correspondence, the Veteran asserted his work in service resulted in a strain on his hands, exposure to temperatures as low as "-90[degrees] below zero" for over 2 years, and an in service left thumb injury. He contends while his left hand healed, it was never the same. He currently has constant pain. 

The claim was filed in November 2023. Therefore, for a current disability to be present, it must exist recent to November 2023 or during the 4-month appeal period, which ended on March 22, 2024. The March 2024 decision made a favorable finding that the Veteran has a current disability of bilateral hand strains. This is a favorable finding by the AOJ, by which the Board is bound. See 38 U.S.C. § 5104A; 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c). A February 2024 VA examination revealed limitation of motion and pain in all of the Veteran's fingers, as well as reduced grip and hand strength bilaterally. The first element of service connection, a current disability, has been met. 

Regarding the right hand and thumb, the March 2024 AOJ decision made a favorable finding that the Veteran received medical treatment for his right hand in service. This is a favorable finding by which the Board is bound. Id. 

Regarding the left hand and thumb, the Veteran contends in service he experienced an injury when repairing a "split-rim grader tire." He stated the split rim separated in the inflation cage and the locking ring blew causing the wheel to separate. Additionally, a June 1980 in service treatment record shows reports of being struck by a tire bending machine piece. 

His DD Form 214 from July 1978 to February 1985 also show he received an Antarctica Service Medal with Winterover Clasp. His military occupational specialty was as an equipment operator. His DD 214 from November 1990 to May 1991 shows an additional Antarctica Service Medal with Gold without Clasp. The Veteran is competent to report on the observable aspects of his service to include laborious work using his hands, an accident while repairing a tire, and exposure to cold weather. His assertions are consistent with the other evidence of record. In this regard, the Veteran's statements are found to be credible.

The Board finds the second element of service connection, an in-service injury, is met for the left and right hands.

Cold injury residuals

In the February 2024 VA examination report, the examiner wrote that "the Veteran has a history of a cold injury, however cold injuries are outside the scope of this DBQ. No diagnosis for a cold injury has been made." The AOJ should have ordered a cold injury residual as a result of this indication by the examiner that additional examination for residuals of a cold injury was needed. Failure to provide this examination was a pre-decisional duty-to-assist error.

Undiagnosed illness and TERA

The Veteran served in Kuwait during the relevant time periods to be presumed exposed to burn pits and other toxins, and fine particulate matter. However, the AOJ did not consider whether his hand and finger pain, limited range of motion, paresthesias, and functional loss are manifestations of an undiagnosed illness or if his bilateral hand strain is a medically unexplained chronic multisymptom illness (MUCMI) under 38 C.F.R. § 3.317. 

Further, the AOJ did not provide a TERA examination pursuant to 38 U.S.C. § 1168(b) despite evidence of a current disability and a TERA.

These are pre-decisional duty-to-assist errors that require remand for correction.

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for appropriate examinations to determine the nature and etiology of the bilateral hand and fingers disabilities. These must include the appropriate DBQs for hands and fingers, undiagnosed illness, and cold weather injury. 

For each examination report, the examiner must review the entire claims file, including a copy of this Remand. The examiner should conduct all appropriate diagnostic testing.  The examiner should then record all noted signs and reported symptoms, document all clinical findings.

A complete rationale must be provided for all opinions expressed

(a.) Please identify all right and left hand and finger diagnoses present at any time since November 2023.

Undiagnosed illness

(b.) Are there any objective indications of a hand or finger disability that are NOT included in the diagnoses identified in directive (a.)? If yes, what are they?

"Objective indications" of a qualifying chronic disability include both objective evidence perceptible to an examining physician and other non-medical indicators that are capable of independent verification.  38 C.F.R. § 3.317(a)(3).  Non-medical indicators include evidence such as time lost form work, the veteran having sought treatment for the symptoms, and change in the veteran's appearance, physical abilities, and mental or emotional attitude.  60 Fed. Reg. 6661, 6663 (Feb. 3, 1995).

(c.) If the Veteran's objective indications cannot be attributed to a known clinical diagnosis, is there affirmative evidence that the undiagnosed illness is not incurred during active service during the Persian Gulf War or that it was caused by a supervening condition or event that occurred since the Veteran's departure from service during the Persian Gulf War? The examiner should note that a positive response to this question requires affirmative evidence.  The mere absence of evidence is not sufficient.

(d.) If the Veteran's objective indications can be attributed to a known clinical diagnosis, is the etiology of the Veteran's diagnosis (1) inconclusive, (2) partially understood, or (3) fully understood?

This determination as to each must be based on the Veteran's specific case and cannot be based on the etiology of the disease or disability population as a whole.

(e.) If the Veteran's objective indications can be attributed to a known clinical diagnosis, is the pathophysiology of the Veteran's condition (1) inconclusive, (2) partially understood, or (3) fully understood?

This determination as to each must be based on the Veteran's specific case and cannot be based on the pathophysiology of the disease or disability population as a whole.

Cold Weather Injuries

(f.) Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's 2 years in Antarctica with cold weather injuries to his fingers is related to his current bilateral hand and finger symptoms? Please consider his reports of paresthesias, pain, numbness, lost range of motion, reduced grip, and reduced strength.

Please provide your reasoning for the opinion.

TERA

(g.) For each diagnosis identified in directive (a.), is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) related to the Veteran's in-service exposure to fine particulate matter and/or burn pits and other toxins when he served in Kuwait?

When providing this opinion, the examiner must consider the total potential exposure through all applicable deployments; and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran..

 

 

LAURA E. COLLINS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Conti, S.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.