Citation Nr: A25032827
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240321-425811
DATE: April 9, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for right other specified mononeuropathies of bilateral lower limbs (claimed as peripheral neuropathy) is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for left other specified mononeuropathies of bilateral lower limbs (claimed as peripheral neuropathy) is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for right index finger (claimed as right hand) is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for right long finger (claimed as right hand) is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for right little finger (claimed as right hand) is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for right ring finger (claimed as right hand) is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for right thumb (claimed as right hand) is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a left foot disability is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from August 1975 to June 1980.

In January 2024, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR), and requested review of a November 2023 rating decision. In January 2024, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the HLR decision on appeal, which considered the evidence of record at the time of the initial rating decision. 

In the March 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) (NOD), the Veteran elected the Direct Review option; therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.301.

1. Entitlement to service connection for right other specified mononeuropathies of bilateral lower limbs (claimed as peripheral neuropathy) is remanded.

2. Entitlement to service connection for left other specified mononeuropathies of bilateral lower limbs (claimed as peripheral neuropathy) is remanded.

The Veteran is seeking service connection for bilateral lower extremity neuropathy.

The AOJ found that participation in a toxic exposure risk activity is conceded. 

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in November 2023. The Veteran was diagnosed with other specified mononeuropathies of bilateral lower limbs. The examiner found that the claimed condition was less likely than not incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness. The examiner stated that based on review of the available evidence, it is less likely than not that the claimed condition is due to service as there is a lack of substantiating evidence supporting a nexus between the current diagnosis of other specified mononeuropathies of bilateral lower limbs and military service. The examiner noted that without chronicity during service or after service, a post-service event, illness, or injury is considered to be a more likely etiology. The examiner stated that the condition onset was noted to be approximately 40 years after last date of service.

The examiner also found the Veteran's other specified mononeuropathies of bilateral lower limbs was less likely than not caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activity(ies), after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran. The examiner stated that no TERA memorandum in in the folder.

The Board finds that a pre-decisional duty-to-assist error occurred prior to the rating decision on appeal. The Board finds the VA examiner's opinion is inadequate. The examiner found that no TERA memorandum was in the claims file, however, the record shows a TERA memorandum in August 2023. In addition, the examiner did not provide adequate rationale for the opinion. Thus, a remand is necessary to obtain an adequate VA examination and medical opinion.

3. Entitlement to service connection for right index finger (claimed as right hand) is remanded.

4. Entitlement to service connection for right long finger (claimed as right hand) is remanded.

5. Entitlement to service connection for right little finger (claimed as right hand) is remanded.

6. Entitlement to service connection for right ring finger (claimed as right hand) is remanded.

7. Entitlement to service connection for right thumb (claimed as right hand) is remanded.

Prior to the rating decision on appeal, the Veteran has not undergone a VA examination to determine if his current right-hand disability is related to service. Further, pain that causes functional impairment can be considered a disability. Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356 (Fed. Cir. 2018).

The Board finds that this is a pre-decisional duty-to-assist error, and remand is necessary to obtain a VA examination and medical opinion.

8. Entitlement to service connection for a left foot disability is remanded.

Prior to the rating decision on appeal, the Veteran has not undergone a VA examination to determine if his current left foot disability is related to service. Further, pain that causes functional impairment can be considered a disability. Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356 (Fed. Cir. 2018).

The Board finds that this is a pre-decisional duty-to-assist error, and remand is necessary to obtain a VA examination and medical opinion.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Provide the Veteran a VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of his right and left other specified mononeuropathies of bilateral lower limbs (claimed as peripheral neuropathy.) The claims file, including a copy of this Remand, must be made available to, and be reviewed by, the examiner.

After a review of the entire claims file, the examiner is asked to respond to the following:

Whether it at least as likely as not (at least an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence) that the Veteran's right and left other specified mononeuropathies of bilateral lower limbs had its onset during or is otherwise related to the Veteran's service.

Whether it is at least as likely as not (at least an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence) that there is a nexus between the Veteran's claimed disability and his TERA.

2. *** In providing this opinion, the VA examiner must consider:

The total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran; AND

The synergistic, combined effect of all TERAs of the Veteran.

The examiner should elicit a full history from the Veteran and consider the lay statements of record. The Veteran is competent to attest to factual matters of which he has first-hand knowledge, and if there is a medical basis to support or doubt the history provided by the Veteran the examiner should provide a fully reasoned explanation.

3. Provide the Veteran a VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of his claimed right index finger, right long finger, right little finger, right ring finger, right thumb (all claimed as right-hand disability), and left-hand disability. The claims file, including a copy of this Remand, must be made available to, and be reviewed by, the examiner.

After a review of the entire claims file, the examiner is asked to respond to the following:

Elicit from the Veteran and the record the history of his right hand and left foot symptoms during and since service. In doing so, also elicit information as to any functional impairment caused by the claimed right hand and left foot symptoms. See Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356 (Fed. Cir. 2018) (holding that a "disability" under 38 U.S.C. ยง 1110 refers to functional impairment of earning capacity; pain need not be diagnosed as connected to a current underlying condition to function as an impairment).

 Identify all current diagnoses relating to the Veteran's claimed right hand and left foot, to include symptoms resulting in functional impairment of earning capacity.

For each current diagnosis relating to the Veteran's claimed right hand and left foot, please provide an opinion as to the following:

Whether it at least as likely as not (at least an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence) had its onset during or is otherwise related to the Veteran's service.

The examiner should elicit a full history from the Veteran and consider the lay statements of record. The Veteran is competent to attest to factual matters of which he has first-hand knowledge, and if there is a medical basis to support or doubt the history provided by the Veteran the examiner should provide a fully reasoned explanation.

 

 

Ardie A. Bland

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	M.D.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.1303.