Citation Nr: A25032788
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 220711-260200
DATE: April 9, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for rhinitis is granted. 

Entitlement to service connection for sinusitis is denied. 

Entitlement to service connection for neck pain is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for right ankle pain is denied. 

Entitlement to service connection for left ankle pain is denied. 

Entitlement to service connection for chest pain is denied. 

Entitlement to service connection for headaches with dizziness is denied. 

Entitlement to service connection for right leg pain from burns is denied. 

Entitlement to service connection for right shoulder or arm pain is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for right thigh and groin pain due to cramps is denied. 

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran was diagnosed with rhinitis in 2018 following a period of active service in the Persian Gulf War. 

2. At no time during the pendency of the claim did the Veteran have a current sinusitis diagnosis, and the record does not contain evidence of such disability prior to the Veteran's filing of a claim.  To the extent that the Veteran presented on one occasion in service with symptoms of congested sinuses, that symptom resolved without reoccurrence. 

3. At no time during the pendency of the claim did the Veteran have a current neck pain disability or diagnosis, and the record does not contain evidence of such disability prior to the Veteran's filing of a claim.

4. At no time during the pendency of the claim did the Veteran have a current right ankle pain disability or diagnosis and the record does not contain evidence of such disability prior to the Veteran's filing of a claim.

5. At no time during the pendency of the claim did the Veteran have a current left ankle pain disability or diagnosis and the record does not contain evidence of such disability prior to the Veteran's filing of a claim.

6. At no time during the pendency of the claim did the Veteran have a chest pain disability or diagnosis and the record did not contain evidence of such disability prior to the Veteran's filing of a claim.

7. At no time during the pendency of the claim does the Veteran have a current headache with dizziness disability or diagnosis and the record did not contain evidence of such disability prior to the Veteran's filing of a claim.

8. At no time during the pendency of the claim does the Veteran have a current right leg pain from burns disability or diagnosis and the record did not contain evidence of such disability prior to the Veteran's filing of a claim.

9. At no time during the pendency of the claim does the Veteran have a current right thigh and groin pain with cramps disability or diagnosis and the record did not contain evidence of such disability prior to the Veteran's filing of a claim.

10. At no time during the pendency of the claim does the Veteran have a current right shoulder or arm pain disability or diagnosis and the record did not contain evidence of such disability prior to the Veteran's filing of a claim.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for service connection for rhinitis have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.320. 

2. The criteria for service connection for sinusitis have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.320.

3. The criteria for service connection for neck pain have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.304.

4. The criteria for service connection for right ankle pain have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

5. The criteria for service connection for a left ankle pain have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

6. The criteria for service connection for chest pain have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

7. The criteria for service connection for headache with dizziness have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

8. The criteria for service connection for a right leg pain due to a burn have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

9. The criteria for service connection for a right shoulder or arm pain have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

10. The criteria for service connection for right thigh and groin pain due to cramps have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran had active service in the United States Army from September 1978 to August 1995. He has verified service in the Persian Gulf War. 

In the July 2022 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the April 2022 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decisions, which were subsequently subject to higher-level review in the June 2022 rating decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decisions, which were subsequently subject to higher-level review, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

    Service Connection 

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from a disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by service. See 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a). Service connection may also be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d). To substantiate a claim of service connection there must be competent evidence showing: (1) the existence of a present disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service. Davidson v. Shinseki, 581 F.3d 1313, 1315-1316 (Fed. Cir. 2009); Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

Service connection may also be established for any disease initially diagnosed after service, when the evidence establishes that the disease was incurred in service. 38 U.S.C. § 1113(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).  The disease entity for which service connection is sought must be chronic rather than acute and transitory in nature. For the showing of chronic disease in service, a combination of manifestations must exist sufficient to identify the disease entity and sufficient observation to establish chronicity at the time, as distinguished from merely isolated findings or a diagnosis including the word chronic. Furthermore, service incurrence will be presumed for certain chronic diseases if manifest to a compensable degree within the year after active service. 38 U.S.C. § 1112; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307, 3.309.

The Veteran had active service in the U.S. Army, including service in the Southwest Asia from August 1990 to July 1991, and is considered a Persian Gulf veteran. 38 U.S.C. § 1117; 38 C.F.R. § 3.317(e).

Service connection may be granted on a presumptive basis for a Persian Gulf veteran with objective indications of a qualifying chronic disease. 38 U.S.C. § 1117(a)(1); 38 C.F.R. § 3.317(a)(1). In claims based on qualifying chronic disability, unlike those for "direct service connection," there is no requirement that there be competent evidence of a nexus between the claimed illness and service. Gutierrez v. Principi, 19 Vet. App. 1, 8-9 (2004).

Entitlement to service connection for rhinitis 

The Veteran contends that he suffers from rhinitis that had onset in or is otherwise related to his period of active service. 

The Board finds that service connection for rhinitis is warranted based on the Veteran's exposure to fine particulate matter under the presumptive provisions of 38 C.F.R. § 3.320. 

For Veterans, such as in the instant case, with qualifying service in the Southwest Asia theater of operations during the Persian Gulf War, service connection may be presumed for certain listed chronic diseases associated with exposure to fine, particulate matter even though there is no evidence of such disease during the period of military service. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.320. Rhinitis is among the diseases subject to compensation under this provision. 38 C.F.R. § 3.320(a)(2). Service connection may be presumed under 38 C.F.R. § 3.320 if the listed disease becomes manifest to any degree, including noncompensable, at any time following separation from a qualifying period of military service. Id.

Exposure to fine, particulate matter shall be presumed under 38 C.F.R. § 3.320(a)(4) for Veterans with qualifying service in the Southwest Asia theater of operations during the Persian Gulf War or in Afghanistan, Syria, Djibouti, or Uzbekistan on or after September 19, 2001, unless there is affirmative evidence to establish that the Veteran was not exposed to fine, particulate matter during that service. The "Southwest Asia theater of operations" refers to Iraq, Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, the neutral zone between Iraq and Saudi Arabia, Bahrain, Qatar, the United Arab Emirates, Oman, the Gulf of Aden, the Gulf of Oman, the Persian Gulf, the Arabian Sea, the Red Sea, and the airspace above these locations from August 2, 1990, through a date Presidential proclamation or law will prescribe. See 38 U.S.C. § 101(33); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.2 (i), 3.320(a)(5).

However, a listed disease shall not be presumed service connected based on exposure to fine, particulate matter if there is affirmative evidence that: (1) the disease was not incurred during or aggravated by a qualifying period of service; or (2) the disease was caused by a supervening condition or event that occurred between the Veteran's most recent departure from a qualifying period of service and the onset of the disease; or (3) the disease is the result of the Veteran's own willful misconduct. 38 C.F.R. § 3.320(b).

During service, the Veteran's upper respiratory symptoms were not diagnosed as rhinitis nor do the Veteran's treatment records reflect a diagnosis of rhinitis prior to service. Clinic visits in September 1979, December 1979, October 1980, January 1984, a May 1986 emergency department visit for a cough and nasal congestion, a January 1990 visit for chills and nasal congestion despite taking a decongestant, and multiple clinic visits in January 1992 for symptoms that were diagnosed and treated as mononucleosis are noted. 

VA treatment records include June 2018 and July 2019 VA clinic visits as well as other clinic notes which reflect a diagnosis of chronic or allergic rhinitis. In a June 2018 ear, nose, and throat (ENT) specialty visit, the Veteran was diagnosed with allergic rhinitis and epistaxis, and was prescribed nasal spray and allergy medication. In a January 2019 clinic visit, chronic rhinitis with dry nasal mucosa was documented. A January 2019 ENT consultation note documented that the Veteran had decreased rhinorrhea after a prior visit with dry nasal mucosa and chronic rhinitis.

There is no evidence of an intercurrent cause for these complaints. 

When a Veteran is diagnosed with allergic rhinitis and is found to have been presumptively exposed to fine, particulate matter during active service, service connection will be granted unless there is clear evidence to the contrary, which is not present here. Considering the foregoing, the Veteran meets all the necessary criteria for presumptive service connection for allergic rhinitis under the provisions of 38 C.F.R. § 3.320 due to presumed exposure to fine particulate matter in Southwest Asia. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102, 3.320. The claim is granted.

Entitlement to service connection for sinusitis

Entitlement to service connection for chest pain 

Entitlement to service connection for neck pain

Entitlement to service connection for headaches with dizziness 

Entitlement to service connection for left ankle pain

Entitlement to service connection for right ankle pain 

Entitlement to service connection for right thigh pain due to burn 

The Veteran contends that he suffers from sinusitis, neck pain, chest pain, headaches with dizziness, left ankle pain, right ankle pain, and right thigh pain due to a burn that had onset in or is otherwise related to his period of active service.

Sinusitis

The Veteran was seen on one occasion in service in October 1992 for complaints that included congested sinuses and was diagnosed with a viral upper respiratory infection.  

The VA treatment records are silent as to complaints or treatment for sinuses. 

In December 2021, the Veteran underwent an in-person VA Sinusitis/Rhinitis Ear, Nose and Throat (ENT) Examination. The examiner noted after review of the Veteran's service and VA treatment records that there were had been no complaints, diagnosis, or treatment of sinusitis. In addition, the examiner documented the Veteran's lay statement of a history of runny nose, coughing, with mucus, facial pain and pressure, headaches, sneezing, nasal congestion, and difficulty breathing through the nose. With respect to the claimed sinusitis condition, the examiner documented that no sinus was currently affected, no episodes of sinusitis of any nature had occurred over the prior 12 months, and there was no history of sinus surgery.

The examiner concluded that the Veteran's claimed sinusitis was not due to an exposure event during service in the Gulf War and that the claimed conditions were less likely than not incurred or otherwise caused by service. As rationale, the examiner noted that a current diagnosis of sinusitis could not be endorsed due to the findings of physical examination, service treatment record review, and patient interview regarding current symptoms of sinusitis experienced.

Neck Pain

In October 1980, the Veteran's STRs reflect a diagnosis of neck strain injury with stiffness for which he was prescribed a course of physical therapy. 

The next reference to the Veteran's neck was in an August 2015 VA comprehensive primary care note, the Veteran's neck was noted to be supple, without thyromegaly or adenopathy. In a November 2018 physiatrist physical examination, the Veteran denied neck pain.

The Veteran underwent a December 2021 VA cervical spine examination, during which the examiner did not confirm a diagnosis for the Veteran's cervical spine. The examiner noted that the Veteran's initial range of motion was abnormal with all movements limited except for full right lateral flexion.  The Veteran exhibited pain on forward flexion and on right and left lateral flexion. There was no additional loss of function or range of motion on observed repetitive use testing, or with procured evidence of repeated use over time. There was no evidence of guarding or muscle spasm, ankylosis, muscle weakness, or additional factors contributing to a cervical spine disability. The examiner indicated that the Veteran's neck condition did not impact his ability to perform any type of occupational task. 

Following the December 2021 VA cervical spine examination, the examiner concluded that the Veteran's neck pain was not due to an exposure event during service in the Gulf War that caused a MUCMI or undiagnosed illness. Further, there was no evidence of persistent or recurrent symptoms or a diagnosis for the claimed neck pain condition. While the examiner expressed concern that a true assessment was not appropriate due to the Veteran's lack of knowledge of the claimed condition, the examiner concluded that the claimed neck condition was less likely than not incurred in or caused by an in-service injury event or illness was rendered.

Bilateral Ankle Pain 

The Veteran's STRs include an October 1978 clinic note in which the Veteran complained of bilateral ankle pain for one week. He was prescribed a leg boot to wear and aspirin every four to six hours. In April 1984, the STRs show a normal left ankle reading on an x-ray performed for the Veteran's complaints of left ankle pain at that time.

VA treatment records reflect that from February 2002 to March 2015, the Veteran denied issues with his lower extremities, including edema. 

In an April 2015 telephone encounter, the Veteran reported some non-tender swelling of the ankles. In May and August 2015 comprehensive clinic notes, the Veteran offered no ankle complaints during his review of systems, and the clinician documented a normal musculoskeletal examination without edema of the extremities. 

The Veteran underwent a VA ankle conditions examination in December 2021. He was unable to recall the onset of the claimed ankle conditions or any other details surrounding the onset of the ankle conditions.  The Veteran indicated that he experienced constant dull aching to sharp stabbing pain, decreased range of motion, stiffness, swelling, weakness, and lack of endurance as his ankles "gave out" when he walked. He described treatment as home exercises, wearing an ace wrap periodically, and taking Tylenol for pain. He did not report flare ups and did not report functional impairment with repeat use over time, had 35 of 45 degrees of plantar flexion on the right and 30 degrees of plantar flexion on the left on initial range of motion testing. On passive range of motion testing, the Veteran demonstrated full range of motion of both ankles. There was no evidence of crepitus or localized tenderness for either ankle. There was no muscle atrophy, ankylosis, joint instability, or other ankle conditions noted. The Veteran had not undergone any surgical procedures and there were no other pertinent findings. The claimed condition did not impact the Veteran's ability to perform any kind of occupational task.

Following the December 2021 VA ankle conditions examination, the examiner concluded that the claimed bilateral ankle conditions were less likely than not incurred in or caused by an in-service injury event or illness. As rationale, the examiner noted that there was no evidence of persistent or recurrent symptoms for the claimed bilateral ankle pain. Based upon the character of the current bilateral ankle symptoms, the examiner concluded that both ankles were within normal limits and provided no diagnosis for either ankle. Again, the examiner noted that a true assessment was not appropriate due to the Veteran's lack of knowledge of the claimed conditions.

Chest Pain 

Review of the Veteran's service treatment records reflects that the Veteran had a normal chest x-ray and normal EKG in December 1994. The December 2021 VA examiner reported that in the Veteran's May 1995 separation Report of Medical History and examination, he reported sharp pains in his chest "sometimes." 

After service, a cardiac stress test performed in September 2009 produced no chest pain and was deemed a normal stress test with normal functional capacity and appropriate heart rate response to exercise. 

In May 2012 clinic visit, and clinic visits from October 2014 to December 2020 the Veteran denied chest pain, his heart had regular rate and rhythm, and his lungs were clear to auscultation bilaterally on examination. 

In a February 2021 clinic visit, the Veteran complained of bilateral chest pain off and on for the prior 6 months, described as a cramp. In December 2021, he was admitted to the critical care unit at the VA for left-sided chest pain due to a large pneumothorax that occurred after a slip and fall on steps causing multiple left-sided rib fractures. 

The Veteran was hospitalized in December 2021 for multiple left-sided rib fractures and a pneumothorax from chest trauma after slipping and falling on steps.

In December 2021 and January 2022, the Veteran underwent a VA Examinations for Heart Conditions for his claim of severe chest pain. The Veteran advised the December 2021 examiner that the chest pain that he thought was heartburn started in service. He did not remember the time of onset. The Veteran described his chest pain as non-radiating and occurring every two to three months lasting for a couple of minutes. He had not taken any medication for the chest pain and denied any emergency department visits, any medical appointments, or hospitalizations for evaluation or treatment for chest pain. The Veteran had been diagnosed with hypertension for which he took daily medication. The examiner noted that there was no functional impact with respect to employment based upon the Veteran's diagnosis of hypertension. The December examiner concluded that the Veteran's lack of knowledge regarding his chest pain made it inappropriate to render an opinion.  

During the January 2022 VA heart examination, the examiner noted that there was no evidence in the available medical records of a diagnosis of chronic chest pain condition. There was evidence of cardiac hypertrophy on a September 2009 EKG, however, a stress test on that date in September 2009 was normal. The examiner noted that the Veteran did not have an arrythmia, heart valve condition, infectious heart condition or pericardial adhesions. During this examination, the Veteran described a sharp pain radiating from his left arm into his chest, with progressively worsening chest pressure, then described pain radiating down his left arm, angina, shortness of breath and other symptoms. He was taking no medication for his chest pains. The Veteran's physical examination was within normal limits including a regular heart rhythm and heart sounds. Therefore, the examiner concluded that the Veteran did not have a diagnosis of chest pain that was incurred in or caused by complaints during service. Accordingly, the examiner concluded that a nexus had not been established with the Veteran's complaints of chest pain which were diagnosed as symptom of influenza in 1986.

Headaches with dizziness

In the 17-year span of the Veteran's STRs, he complained of a headache on one occasion and dizziness on one occasion in association with symptoms diagnosed as an upper respiratory infection or influenza.  

VA treatment records reflect that the Veteran endorsed morning headaches post-service in association with an April 2000 sleep apnea evaluation. 

In a May 2012 follow-up clinic visit, the Veteran specifically denied headaches or dizziness. 

In August and October 2012 primary care visits the Veteran was noted to present for treatment with complaints of dizziness which the clinicians attributed to an especially high diastolic blood pressure. During the second visit, the Veteran reported that his dizziness had resolved, and he had no headaches. In a December 2012 visit following a car accident the week before, the Veteran reported headaches. In each quarterly comprehensive VA clinic visits from March 2013 through December 2019, the Veteran denied headaches. 

In a December 2021 headache examination, the examiner found that the Veteran did not have a documented headache diagnosis. The Veteran could not provide a time of onset of his headaches other than indicating that he had experienced headaches since discharge from the military. The headaches lasted less than a day and were described as frontal, constant, dull and achy requiring two Tylenols. He reported no symptoms of vision changes, light sensitivity or nausea associated with headaches, the headaches were not characteristic prostrating migraine attacks and did not impact the Veteran's ability to work. 

In the December 2021 ear conditions examination, the Veteran reported that he had dizziness only with headaches and does not get up for fear of falling. He reported throbbing pain with blurred vision. The examiner concluded that there was no ear condition and no ear conditions diagnosis warranted as the Veteran reported dizziness only related to headaches.

The examiner concluded that the claimed headache with dizziness condition was less likely than not incurred in or caused by the claimed in service injury or illness. As rationale the examiner noted that there was no evidence of persistent or recurrent symptoms of concerns regarding the claimed headache with dizziness condition.  The Veteran discussed dizziness only related to headaches and not an ear condition. In addition, the examiner noted that the claimed condition was not consistent with (1) an undiagnosed illness; (2) a diagnosable but medically unexplained chronic multi symptom illness (MUCMI) of unknown etiology or pathophysiology; (3) a diagnosable chronic multi symptom illness with a partially explained etiology and pathophysiology.

Right leg pain due to burn 

The Veteran's STRs reflect a single clinic visit in December 1989 in which the Veteran presented with an upper right thigh burn from a burning mattress that was treated with ointment.

The VA treatment records are silent for complaints of right leg pain related to a burn. There is no evidence of observation, complaints or treatment for a burn of the right thigh in the VA treatment records. 

With respect to the December 2021 Gulf War General Medical examination, the examiner found that there were no conditions identified of a diagnosed illness for which no etiology was established. In addition, there were no additional signs or symptoms that may have represented an undiagnosed illness or diagnosed medically unexplained chronic multi symptom illness (MUCMI).

The Veteran underwent a December 2021 VA hip and thigh examination during which the examiner noted the Veteran's lay statement that while he was in Arizona, he was burned by a box of matches that were in his pocket. He indicated that he did not want to file a claim related to his thighs as everything was okay and did not want the burn scar to be assessed.

In an April 2022 VA scars and disfigurement examination the examiner noted that the Veteran refused to allow examination of the lower extremity burn scar. The Veteran indicated that someone else had filed the claim on his behalf and he did not want a claim filed related to a burn on his leg. The examiner remarked that it was not appropriate to render an opinion due to the Veteran's lack of knowledge and refusal of evaluation for the condition claimed.

The Board notes that the Veteran has an obligation to cooperate in the development of evidence pertaining to his claim. Tyrues v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 166, 181 (2009). A refusal to cooperate, absent good cause shown, may result in the adjudication of the matter based on the evidence of record. See Kowalski v. Nicholson, 19 Vet. App. 171, 178 (2005) (recognizing that "a veteran is free to refuse to report for a scheduled VA examination" but that "the consequences of that refusal may result in the adjudication of the matter based on the evidence of record"). 

Considering the claims for service connection for bilateral ankle pain, neck pain, and right leg pain due to burn, the Board finds that there is evidence of an in-service incurrence. In addition, affording the Veteran the benefit of the doubt, there is some evidence of an in-service incurrence of headaches with dizziness, chest pain, and sinus congestion. 

The first requirement for service connection, however, is a current disability. Under the applicable regulations, the term "disability" means impairment in earning capacity resulting from diseases and injuries and their residual conditions. 38 C.F.R. § 4.1; see also Hunt v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 292, 296 (1991); Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356 (Fed. Cir. 2018) (the term "disability" as used in 38 U.S.C. § 1110 "refers to the functional impairment of earning capacity, not the underlying cause of said disability," and held that "pain alone can serve as a functional impairment and therefore qualify as a disability.")

The Board acknowledges the Court's holding in Saunders but does not find a basis for determining that the Veteran had sinusitis, chest pain, neck pain, unilateral or bilateral ankle pain, headaches with dizziness, or right leg pain due to burn that resulted in functional impairment during the period on appeal. See Saunders v. Wilkie, supra. There is no probative evidence or allegation that the Veteran has been diagnosed with or suffers from pain that was productive of functional impairment or that he suffered from impairment of earning capacity due to these claims that was of similar severity, frequency, and duration as VA has determined by regulation would cause impaired earning capacity in an average person. Wait v. Wilkie, 33 Vet. App. 8 (2020).

The existence of a current disability is the cornerstone of a claim for VA disability compensation. See Degmetich v. Brown, 104 F. 3d 1328 (1997); Brammer v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 223, 225 (1992). The Board concludes that the Veteran does not have current bilateral ankle, neck, right leg pain due to burn, headaches with dizziness, chest pain, or sinus congestions disabilities and has not had one at any time during the pendency of the claim or recent to the filing of the claim. See Romanowsky v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 289, 294 (2013); McClain v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 319, 321 (2007).

In this instance, because there is no competent evidence of the current disabilities listed above, there can be no valid claim for service connection. Brammer v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 223, 225 (1992). 

The Board notes that the VA examiner noted a concern in reporting opinions for some of the claims, indicating that a true assessment required greater clarity from the Veteran in providing the onset of and description of current symptoms lending a speculative component to the opinion. However, the Board finds that the examiner's opinions regarding service connection applied the examiners' medical expertise to a review of service records, VA treatment records, physical examination, and consideration of the Veteran's lay statements. The examiner provided overall conclusions based on the totality of the evidence of record. Accordingly, the examiner's opinions that the claimed conditions were less likely than not related to service given the lack of a current disability for chest pain, neck pain, bilateral ankle pain, headaches with dizziness, and right leg pain from a burn are entitled to significant probative value. Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295 (2008).

In considering the Veteran's contentions, the Board notes that he is competent to observe lay symptoms but does not have the training or credentials to provide a competent opinion as to the etiology of the claimed disability. See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372 (Fed. Cir. 2007); see also 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(a)(1) (competent medical evidence means evidence provided by a person who is qualified through education, training, or experience to offer medical diagnoses, statements, or opinions). The Veteran's competent reports of factual matters of which he has first-hand knowledge, such as experiencing pain in service, reporting to sick call, being placed on limited duty, and undergoing physical therapy have been considered by the examiners who rendered pertinent opinion in conjunction with their evaluations. See Washington v. Nicholson, 19 Vet. App. 362, 368 (2005). However, the Veteran has not shown that he is qualified to render medically opinions or assessments. Accordingly, the opinions of the VA examiners are afforded greater probative value than the Veteran's unsupported contentions.

For the above reasons, the evidence is neither evenly balanced nor approximately so with regard to whether service connection is warranted for sinusitis, chest pain, neck pain, unilateral or bilateral ankle pain, headaches with dizziness, and right leg pain from a burn during the period on appeal. Rather, the evidence persuasively weighs against the claims. Therefore, the benefit of the doubt doctrine not for application. Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

Entitlement to service connection for right shoulder/arm pain

Entitlement to service connection for right thigh and groin pain with leg cramps

The Veteran contends that he has right shoulder/arm pain and right thigh and groin pain with leg cramps that had onset in or is otherwise related to his period of active service. 

With respect to the right shoulder and arm, other than the report of shoulder pain noted by the examiner in the May 1995 separation examination, a review of the Veteran's STRs did not show any complaints or treatment for right shoulder/arm pain. All VA treatment notes in evidence indicate that the Veteran had full range of shoulder motion on the right, without pain. A November 2018 note of a rehabilitation physician documented that the Veteran had no pain and full range of motion of the bilateral shoulders.

The April 2022 VA examiner conducting the shoulder and arm examination found no abnormalities of the right shoulder or arm. The Veteran denied any right shoulder pain or injury. Range of motion for the right shoulder was full upon initial and observed repetitive use without pain or functional loss. There were no other pertinent findings for the right shoulder. The examiner concluded that there was no evidence of a chronic right shoulder condition and no findings to render a diagnosis. Accordingly, the examiner concluded that the Veteran's claimed right shoulder or arm pain was less likely than not incurred in or caused by the Veteran's complaints of shoulder pain in the May 1995 separation examination.

The Veteran's STRs are silent as to complaints, treatment of diagnosis of right thigh and groin pain with cramps. VA treatment records in evidence do not reflect complaints of right leg thigh and groin pain due to cramps. 

The Veteran underwent a December 2021 VA hip and thigh examination during which the examiner noted the Veteran's lay statement that everything was okay and did not want the burn scar on his thigh to be assessed. The Veteran did discuss right thigh aching to stabbing pain that came and went and that he was unable to stand for periods of time. He took Tylenol and used a heating pad for pain relief on these occasions. Upon examination, his right hip range of motion was full upon initial and repetitive use testing and there was no evidence of ankylosis, femur of hip joint impairment, or others physical findings. No additional functional loss or loss of range of motion was suggested from procured evidence for repeat use over time. The Veteran denied flare-ups. The examiner concluded that the claimed right thigh and groin pain due to cramps was not incurred in or cause by and injury or illness in service.  As rationale, the examiner noted that here is no evidence of persistent/recurrent symptoms or concern or a diagnosis for the claimed condition. The Veteran provided inconsistent statements regarding a right thigh injury. He reported that he was experiencing right thigh pain, then stated that he was burned by a box of lit matches in his pant pocket and was unsure of the medical issues related to the claimed right thigh condition. 

The Board acknowledges the Court's holding in Saunders, supra, but does not find a basis for determining that the Veteran has a current disability for his claims of right shoulder/arm pain and right thigh and groin pain with leg cramps. 

The Board finds that there is insufficient evidence in the STRs of an in-service occurrence of chronic right shoulder/arm pain and right thigh and groin pain due to cramps, which is a requirement for service connection.  In addition, post-service medical records including examinations by VA examiners reflect no diagnoses of a disability manifested by right shoulder or arm pain or right thigh pain due to cramps at any time throughout the duration of the appeal or proximate to the appeal. Romanowsky v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 289, 294 (2013); McClain v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 319, 321 (2007). The existence of a current disability is the cornerstone of a claim for VA disability compensation. 38 U.S.C. § 1110; see Degmetich v. Brown, 104 F. 3d 1328, 1332 (1997). In the absence of proof of a current disability, there can be no valid claim. Boyer v. West, 210 F.3d 1351, 1353 (Fed. Cir. 2000); Brammer v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 223, 225 (1992). Romanowsky v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 289, 294 (2013); McClain v. 

While the Veteran is competent to report past treatment and lay observations, he is not competent to provide a diagnosis. The issues are medically complex, as it requires specialized medical education and knowledge of bodily systems. Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377, 1377 n.4 (Fed. Cir. 2007). Consequently, the Board gives more probative weight to the competent medical evidence which does not demonstrate a current diagnosis.

Therefore, as the evidence of record shows that the Veteran does not have a current disability or diagnosis related to right shoulder/arm pain or right thigh and groin pain with leg cramps, the Board concludes that service connection is not warranted, and no further discussion of the remaining elements is necessary. See Coburn v. Nicholson, 19 Vet. App. 427, 431 (2006) (finding that the absence of any one element will result in denial of service connection).

Based upon the foregoing, the Board concludes that the evidence persuasively weighs against the claims for service connection of right shoulder or arm pain, right leg pain due to cramps. As the evidence is not in approximate balance, and the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply.  Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

 

DUSTIN L. WARE

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Adams Hill, Denise

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.