Citation Nr: A25032860
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240819-466692
DATE: April 9, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for tinnitus is granted.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for left ear hearing loss is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for right ear hearing loss is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran has experienced symptoms of tinnitus continuously since separation from service.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to service connection for tinnitus have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 1110, 1112, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.307, 3.309.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from November 1967 to January 1971.  For the Veteran's service, he was awarded the Vietnam Service Medal and Vietnam Campaign Medal w/60 Device.

The rating decisions on appeal were issued in March 2024 and May 2024; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies. 

In the August 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Hearing docket.  A Board hearing was held on December 10, 2024.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2024 and May 2024 Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) decisions on appeal, respectively, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or representative at the hearing or within 90 days following the hearing.  38 C.F.R. § 20.302(a).  If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal and prior to the Board hearing, or (2) more than 90 days following the hearing, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.302(a), 20.801. 

An April 2008 Rating Decision denied the Veteran's claims for service connection for PTSD, right ear hearing loss, and tinnitus.  The March 2024 Rating Decision found that new and relevant evidence had been received to readjudicate the claims of service connection for PTSD, right ear hearing loss, and tinnitus.  These are favorable findings by the AOJ and the Board will proceed to the address the claims on the merits.  See 38?U.S.C. § 5104A; 38?C.F.R. § 3.104(c).

The Board notes that the Veteran filed a December 2023 VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, seeking service connection for PTSD.  In Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1, 5 (2009), the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) held that, in determining the scope of a claim, the Board must consider the claimant's description of the claim, symptoms described, and the information submitted or developed in support of the claim.  In light of the Court's decision in Clemons and the psychiatric symptoms of record, the Board has recharacterized the issue on appeal as entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include PTSD.

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider for the issue of entitlement to service connection for tinnitus, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim for service connection for tinnitus, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of entitlement to service connection for left ear and right ear hearing loss and service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include PTSD, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Service Connection

Service connection generally will be awarded when a Veteran has a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1112; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a).  Service connection may be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge, when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).  To establish service connection on a direct basis, the evidence must show: (1) a current disability; (2) incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury in service; and (3) a link between the current disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated in service (the "nexus" element).  See Holton v. Shinseki, 557 F.3d 1363, 1366 (Fed. Cir. 2009).

For the chronic diseases listed in 38 C.F.R. § 3.309(a), including tinnitus as an organic disease of the nervous system, service connection may alternatively be established with evidence of chronicity of the disease during service or during a presumptive period following service separation.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(b); Walker v. Shinseki, 708 F.3d 1331, 1338 (Fed. Cir. 2012); Fountain v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 258, 260 (2015) (holding that tinnitus qualifies as an organic disease of the nervous system, at a minimum when there is evidence of acoustic trauma).  For conditions noted during service (or in the presumptive period) but not shown to be chronic at the time, a continuity of symptomatology after service is required to support the claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(b).

In addition, where a Veteran served continuously for 90 days or more during a period of war, or after December 31, 1946, there is a presumption of service connection for organic diseases of the nervous system if the disease(s) manifested to a degree of ten percent or more within one year from the date of separation from service, even if there is no evidence of the disease during the service period itself.  38 U.S.C. § § 1101, 1110, 1112; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307(a)(3), 3.309(a).

In making all determinations, the Board must fully consider the lay statements of record.  A Veteran is competent to report on that of which he or she has personal knowledge.  Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 470 (1994).  When considering whether lay evidence is competent the Board must determine, on a case-by-case basis, whether the Veteran's particular disability is the type of disability for which lay evidence may be competent.  See Kahana v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 428 (2011); see also Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1376-77 (Fed. Cir. 2007).

A claimant is entitled to the benefit of the doubt when there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence on any issue material to the claim.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.  If the positive and negative evidence is in approximate balance, which includes but is not limited to equipoise, the claimant receives the benefit of the doubt.  Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 781 (Fed. Cir. 2021).  If the evidence persuasively favors one side or the other, there is not an approximate balance, and therefore the benefit-of-the-doubt-rule does not apply.  Id. at 781-82.

1. Entitlement to service connection for tinnitus is granted.

The Veteran maintains that his current tinnitus began during his active service and has been present since that time.  In particular, the Veteran indicated that he began experiencing tinnitus following an explosion that occurred near him while Bien Hoa Air Base in Vietnam was under attack and also resulted in a right ear injury during his service in Vietnam.  See December 2024 Board Hearing Transcript.  For the reasons discussed below, the Board finds that service connection is warranted. 

Tinnitus is defined as "a noise in the ears, such as ringing, buzzing, roaring, or clicking.  It is usually subjective in type."  See Dorland's Illustrated Medical Dictionary, 1956 (31st ed. 2007).  Because tinnitus is "subjective," its existence is generally determined by whether the Veteran claims to experience it.  For VA purposes, tinnitus has been specifically found to be a disorder with symptoms that can be identified through lay observation alone.  Charles v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 370 (2002).

The Veteran's current tinnitus is established based on his competent and credible statements describing a constant bilateral buzzing sound as described in the January 2024 VA Hearing Loss and Tinnitus Disability Benefits Questionnaire.  See Charles, 16 Vet. App. 370.  The Veteran also described his tinnitus as a constant ringing during the December 2024 Board Hearing. 

The Veteran indicated that he served in Vietnam during the Tet Offensive.  See November 2007 VA Form 21-4138, Statement in Support of Claim.  He described in-service noise exposure to an explosion near him during an attack and aircraft noise without hearing protection while he was stationed at Bien Hoa Air Base, and exposure to explosions generally while stationed at Long Binh Post.  

The Veteran's service personnel records indicate that his service included Campaigns designated as RVN Counter Offensive Phase IV, V, VI, and RVN TET 69/Counter Offensive.  Therefore, the Board finds that the Veteran's in-service noise exposure is established based on his competent and credible testimony, and the circumstances of his service.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a) (VA must consider the places, types, and circumstances of service in making service connection determinations).  The Veteran also indicated that he did not have any occupational noise exposure after his active service.  See January 2024 VA Hearing Loss and Tinnitus Disability Benefits Questionnaire.

During the December 2024 Board hearing, the Veteran advised that he began experiencing tinnitus following the in-service explosion that occurred at Bien Hoa Air Base and has experienced tinnitus since that time.  The Veteran is competent to report the sensation of tinnitus during and since service; and there is not sufficient evidence of record upon which the Board may find him not credible in this regard.  Layno, 6 Vet. App. 465, 470.  While the Veteran's service treatment records do not reflect complaints, treatment, or a diagnosis of tinnitus, that alone does not weigh against his testimony.  See Buczynski v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 221, 224 (2011) (the absence of evidence does not automatically constitute substantive negative evidence).  In this regard, there is no foundation in the record to conclude that the Veteran "would reasonably have been expected to report his symptoms to medical providers."  Fountain v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 258, 273 (2015).  Indeed, the Veteran stated that following the explosion that occurred near him while at Bien Hoa Air Base, he did not seek treatment because others sustained more serious injuries and they required more immediate treatment.  See November 2007 VA Form 21-4138, Statement in Support of Claim.

The Board acknowledges the negative etiological opinion evidence of record from the January 2024 VA examiner.  The examiner provided that the Veteran's tinnitus is less likely than not related to military noise exposure, there is no record of reported tinnitus in the Veteran's service treatment records or at separation, and his hearing was within normal limits at separation.  The Veteran's military occupational specialty was Food Service Specialist, which has a low probability of hazardous noise exposure.  Although in-service noise exposure is conceded for the Veteran and the relationship between noise and tinnitus is well documented, tinnitus is not conceded based on noise alone.  The medical opinion concludes that there is no evidence to support a nexus to relate the Veteran's current tinnitus to military noise and not another etiology.

The Board declines to accept this medical opinion, because in providing support for its conclusion, the VA examiner did not consider the Veteran's competent reports of tinnitus symptoms during and after his active service.  See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008) (holding that most of the probative value of an opinion comes from its rationale or underlying reasoning).  The medical opinion also improperly relies, in part, upon a lack of complaints of tinnitus contained in the Veteran's service treatment records and at separation.  Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331, 1336-37 (Fed. Cir. 2006) (holding that the absence of contemporaneous medical records does not, in and of itself, render lay testimony not credible); Cf. Dalton v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 23, 39-40 (2007) (holding that a VA opinion was inadequate where the examiner did not comment on the Veteran's report of in-service injury and relied on lack of evidence in service medical records to provide a negative opinion).

The Veteran's claims file also contains a negative etiological opinion finding that the Veteran's tinnitus is not related to his in-service herbicide agent exposure as there is no medical or scientific evidence to support such a relationship.  See April 2024 VA medical opinion.  However, the Veteran has not indicated that his tinnitus is related to herbicide agent exposure and such an opinion does not negate the Veteran's competent and credible statements that his tinnitus began during his active service. 

In sum, the Veteran has competently and credibly described suffering in-service noise exposure and reported a continuity of symptomatology of bilateral auditory pathology in the form of tinnitus during and since his active service.  See Charles, 16 Vet. App. 370; Jandreau, 492 F.3d at 1376-77; Buchanan, 451 F.3d at 1337; see also Jefferson v. Principi, 271 F.3d 1072 (Fed. Cir. 2001).  As noted above, the Board declines to accept the negative January 2024 VA medical opinion.  In light of the Veteran's statements, the Board finds that the persuasive evidence of record demonstrates that his tinnitus had its onset during service.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch, 21 F.4th at 781-82.  As such, the benefit-of-the-doubt-rule does not apply.  Service connection for tinnitus is granted.

REASONS FOR REMAND

Under the AMA, the Board must remand a claim to correct an error by the AOJ to satisfy its duty to assist the claimant under 38 U.S.C. § 5103A, if the error occurred prior to the AOJ decision on appeal.  38 U.S.C. § 5103A; 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).  The Board may also remand a claim to correct any other AOJ error "in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty, if correction of the error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating" the claim.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

1. Entitlement to service connection for left ear hearing loss is remanded.

2. Entitlement to service connection for right ear hearing loss is remanded.

The Veteran maintains that his hearing loss is related to his active service.  The Veteran indicated that his hearing loss was caused by in-service noise exposure, and in particular, aircraft noise and an explosion that occurred near him during an attack while he was stationed at Bien Hoa Air Base in Vietnam.  See December 2024 Board Hearing Transcript.  

To evaluate the nature and etiology of the Veteran's hearing loss, he was afforded a January 2024 VA Hearing Loss and Tinnitus Disability Benefits Questionnaire.  When VA undertakes to provide a VA examination or obtain a VA opinion, it must ensure that the examination or opinion is adequate.  Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 312 (2007).  The examination report indicates that the Veteran has current bilateral hearing loss. 

The related January 2024 VA medical opinion concludes that the Veteran's bilateral hearing loss is less likely than not related to his military noise exposure.  In support, the medical opinion states that although there was mild hearing loss present at 500 Hertz at enlistment after ASA to ANSI conversion, it does not meet VA criteria for a ratable disability or pre-existing hearing loss.  The medical opinion also states that there were no significant threshold shifts from enlistment to separation or objective evidence of permanent auditory damage due to hazardous noise exposure during active duty.  The Veteran's hearing was within normal limits at separation.  Research studies have shown that hazardous noise exposure has an immediate effect on hearing, and it is usually temporary at first.  It does not have a delayed onset nor is it progressive or cumulative.  Therefore, the Veteran's separation examination accurately represented the effects of any hazardous noise exposure that he sustained during active military service.  The medical opinion explains that the Veteran's military occupational specialty of Food Service Specialist has a low probability of hazardous noise exposure.  Although noise exposure is conceded and the relationship between noise, auditory damage, and hearing loss is well documented, auditory damage and hearing loss are not conceded based on noise alone.  Per the medical opinion, there is no evidence to support a nexus to relate the Veteran's current hearing loss to military noise and not another etiology.

The Board finds the January 2024 VA medical opinion is inadequate.  In this regard, the absence of documented evidence of a disability during service is not always fatal to a claim for service connection.  See Ledford v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 87, 89 (1992); see also Hensley v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 155, 159 (1993) (holding 38 C.F.R. § 3.385 does not preclude service connection for a current hearing disability where hearing was within normal limits on audiometric testing at separation of service).  

Further, VA policy has changed with regard to the conversion of in-service audiograms. Formerly, the results of audiometric testing (i.e. puretone thresholds at various frequencies) during active service dated after October 31, 1967 were assumed to have been provided in units of measurement established by the International Standards Organization (ISO)-American National Standards Institute (ANSI). Audiometric data prior to October 31, 1967 was assumed to have been recorded in American Standards Association (ASA) units, and thus had to be converted to ISO-ANSI units to enable data comparison and to bring them in line with VA regulation pertaining to hearing loss, which is based on ISO-ANSI units. However, VA policy now is to consider audiometric data dated between January 1, 1967 and December 31, 1970 using either ISO-ANSI or ASA units, whichever is more favorable to the claimant, unless the audiogram clearly indicates which standard was used. The conversion from ASA to ISO-ANSI units is accomplished by adding 15 decibels at 500 Hz, 10 decibels at 1000 Hz, 2000 Hz, and 3000 Hz, and 5 decibels at 4000 Hz.

Here, the Veteran's August 1967 entrance examination report does not indicate which audiogram standard was used.  As noted, audiometric data dated between January 1, 1967 and December 31, 1970 is to be considered using either ISO-ANSI or ASA units, whichever is more favorable to the claimant.  In providing a medical opinion, the January 2024 VA examiner converted the August 1967 audiogram from ASA units to ISO-ANSI units.  However, in this case it is more favorable to the Veteran to presume that the August 1967 audiometric testing was provided in ISO-ANSI standards.  Therefore, no conversation was necessary.  

The AOJ's failure to obtain an adequate VA medical opinion constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error, and the Veteran's claims must be remanded so that he is afforded an adequate medical opinion prior to adjudication.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

3. Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include PTSD is remanded.

The Veteran maintains that his claimed acquired psychiatric disorder is related to the in-service explosion that occurred near him during an attack while he stationed at Bien Hoa Air Base in Vietnam.  See December 2024 Board Hearing Transcript.  The Veteran also advised that during his active service, he witnessed soldiers killed in action and sustaining serious injuries.  See December 2023 Written Statement.

Again, when VA undertakes to provide a VA examination or obtain a VA opinion, it must ensure that the examination or opinion is adequate.  Barr, 21 Vet. App. at 312.  

To evaluate the Veteran's claimed acquired psychiatric disorder, he was afforded a March 2024 Initial Posttraumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) Disability Benefits Questionnaire.  The examination report indicates that his symptoms do not meet the diagnostic criteria for PTSD under DSM-5 criteria nor does he have a mental disorder that conforms with the DSM-5 criteria.  The examination report further provides that the Veteran did not report any current mental health problems, treatment, medications, hospitalizations, and suicide attempts.  

The corresponding March 2024 VA medical opinion finds that the claimed condition is less likely than not related to his active service as he does not meet the DSM-5 diagnostic criteria for a diagnosis of PTSD or other mental disorder.  

The Board finds that the March 2024 VA examination and medical opinion are inadequate as they are based on inaccurate factual premises.  Reonal v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 458, 461 (1993) (concluding that a medical opinion is only as good and credible as the history on which it was based, and if based on an inaccurate factual premise it has no probative value); Monzingo v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 97, 107 (2012) ("If the opinion is based on an inaccurate factual premise, then it is correct to discount it entirely.").  While the examination report and medical opinion state that the Veteran does not have a mental disorder diagnosis under the DSM-5 criteria, they do not address a June 2007 VA treatment record that states that the "impression/plan" for the Veteran includes adjustment disorder and a notation that if the Veteran desires treatment, including a mental health evaluation or medication, he will notify the provider.  Additionally, while the examination report states that the Veteran did not report any current mental health problems, his private treatment records from June 2022 demonstrate that he reported several days of trouble falling or staying asleep, or sleeping too much and several days of feeling tired or having little energy, and he was assessed with minimal depression.  

As such, VA committed a pre-decisional duty to assist error, and the issue must be remanded so that he is afforded an adequate examination and medical opinion prior to adjudication.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain a new VA medical opinion from an appropriately qualified examiner regarding service connection for the Veteran's bilateral hearing loss, as specified below. The examiner must review the claims file.

After review of the claims file, the examiner must opine:

Whether the Veterans' current bilateral hearing loss was at least as likely as not (i.e., likelihood is at least in approximate balance or nearly equal, if not greater) caused by his in-service noise exposure, to include from aircraft noise and an explosion that occurred near him during an attack while he was stationed at Bien Hoa Air Base in Vietnam.

In formulating this opinion, the examiner should address the significance of any threshold shifts, or the lack thereof, between the Veteran's August 1967 entrance and January 1971 separation audiological examinations.  For the purpose of this opinion, the examiner is advised that both the entrance and separation audiograms are presumed to be in ISO-ANSI units; therefore, no conversion is necessary.

The examiner is advised that the absence of in-service evidence of a hearing loss disability is not an adequate basis for a negative nexus opinion.

A complete rationale must be provided for any opinions expressed and to achieve this, the medical professional must explain the rationale for all opinions in detail, citing to supporting clinical data and/or medical literature, as appropriate.

2. Schedule the Veteran for an appropriate VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of any acquired psychiatric disorder.  

The examiner must review the claims file and must note that review in the report.  All appropriate tests or studies should be accomplished, and all clinical findings should be reported in detail.

The examiner must address the following:

(a.) Identify, by diagnosis, all acquired psychiatric disorders found to be present, including PTSD.  See June 2007 VA treatment record that states that the "impression/plan" for the Veteran includes adjustment disorder.

(b.) For each acquired psychiatric disorder found to be present, opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that it had its onset during service or is related to any incident of service, to include any in-service stressor(s) indicated by the Veteran.

In formulating this opinion, the examiner should consider:

"	The Veteran's lay statements that an explosion occurred near him during his service at Bien Hoa Air Base in Vietnam while under attack.

"	The Veteran's December 2023 written statement that during his active service he witnessed "a lot of guys get hurt and blowing up and killed in action."

"	The Veteran's December 2024 testimony that he experiences depression, nightmares, difficulty sleeping, lapsed judgment, obsessive rituals, thoughts of hurting himself and other people, and attempts at self-harm.

A complete rationale must be provided for any opinions expressed and to achieve this, the medical professional must explain the rationale for all opinions in detail, citing to supporting clinical data and/or medical literature, as appropriate.

 

 

P.M. DILORENZO

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Mussey, Sean

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.