Citation Nr: A25032660
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240510-437416
DATE: April 9, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a gastrointestinal condition is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a respiratory condition is remanded. 

Entitlement to service connection for a skin condition is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from May 2010 to June 2011.  These matters were denied by the regional office in an April 2024 rating decision.  Thereafter, the Veteran submitted a timely May 2024 notice of disagreement on VA Form 10182 and selected direct review of the evidence.  As such, the Board's review is restricted to that evidence that was available at the time of the underlying April 2024 rating decision.  With this in mind, the Board is not aware of any evidence that has been added to the claims file outside this evidentiary review period.  

The Board is aware that less than one year has elapsed since the appealed rating decision was issued, and the Veteran has a right to switch appeal dockets during that one-year period.  However, the Board views the Veteran's submissions as reflecting an intent to have this matter reviewed in an expeditious manner, and has found this to be an implicit waiver of the right to change appeal dockets under Williams v. McDonough, 537 Vet. App. 305 (2024). 

1. Entitlement to service connection for a gastrointestinal condition and a respiratory condition is remanded.

The Veteran seeks entitlement to a gastrointestinal condition as well as a respiratory condition, both of which he contends are directly related to his exposure to toxic environmental agents during his service in the Southwest Asia theater of operations.  

In support of his gastrointestinal condition claim, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination in February 2024, during which he reported that he experiences chronic abdominal pain, bloating, and diarrhea and constipation, and has experienced these symptoms ever since his service.  After an in-person evaluation, the VA examiner declined to endorse a diagnosis of a gastrointestinal condition, stating that the Veteran neglected to attend a scheduled evaluation through his local VA medical center and so did not undergo necessary testing to confirm whether he has a diagnosable gastrointestinal condition. 

In support of the respiratory condition claim, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination in February 2024 as well, wherein he reported that he began experiencing shortness of breath while in service and that he currently experiences chronic coughing and nasal blockage.  After an in-person evaluation, the VA examiner declined to endorse a diagnosis of a respiratory condition on the grounds that the Veteran did not report experiencing chronic shortness of breath at the time of the examination.  The examiner also referred to the lack of a diagnosis in the available VA medical records.  

The Board cannot rely on either of these examinations as the respective examiners appear to have ignored clear evidence suggesting that the Veteran has a diagnosable gastrointestinal condition as well as a respiratory condition.  Specifically, the examiner in each examination acknowledged that the Veteran reported symptoms potentially attributable to a diagnosable gastrointestinal condition as well as a respiratory condition, but wholly failed to justify why a diagnosis was not reasonable despite this reported symptomatology.  As such, remand is necessary in order to secure addendum examinations addressing both the gastrointestinal and respiratory condition claims, in order to correct a failure of the duty to assist in providing deficient examinations.  

2. Entitlement to service connection for a skin condition is remanded.

The Veteran seeks entitlement to service connection for a skin condition, which he contends is directly related to his exposure to toxic environmental agents during his service in the Southwest Asia theater of operations.  

In support of his claim, he was afforded a VA examination in October 2023, wherein he reported that in service he developed a chronic rash to his posterior left arm and buttocks that has continued since his discharge.  After an in-person evaluation, the VA examiner set forth a diagnosis of seborrheic keratosis on the left arm as well as a drained abscess on his buttocks.  The examiner in a subsequent January 2024 opinion report then found that it was less likely than not that either condition is attributable to service.  As a rationale, the examiner detailed known causes for both conditions, and then provided the conclusory statement that neither condition is related to a Southwest Asia exposure event.  

The Board cannot rely on this opinion, as the examiner relied on no objective medical evidence to support her conclusory statement other than a reference to medical literature regarding the likely causes for the development of both diagnosed skin conditions.  Without additional clarification as to why she arrived at her determination, the Board cannot evaluate the probative value of her conclusions.  As such, a remand is necessary in order to correct a failure of the duty to assist in securing a deficient opinion in support of the Veteran's claim. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination to evaluate the nature and likely etiology of the claimed gastrointestinal and respiratory conditions. The entire claims file, to include a complete copy of this REMAND, must be made available to the individual designated to examine the Veteran, and the examination report should include discussion of the Veteran's documented medical history and assertions relating to his claimed gastrointestinal and respiratory conditions.  All necessary special studies or tests must be accomplished.

If a diagnosis of a gastrointestinal condition and/or a respiratory condition is not deemed appropriate, the examiner must give a thorough rationale for why this is so, to include discussion of the Veteran's lay statements concerning his experiencing symptoms potentially attributable to either claimed condition. The examiner must also specifically discuss the criteria for establishing a diagnosis of both a gastrointestinal condition as well as a respiratory condition and provide an analysis as to whether the Veteran fits those criteria.

Regardless of whether a diagnosis of either claimed condition is warranted or not, the examiner is asked to opine as to whether it is it at least as likely as not (at least an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence) that any diagnosed gastrointestinal and/or respiratory condition had its onset during service or is otherwise related to active service. In setting forth these opinions, the examiner is asked to consider, and comment upon as necessary, lay testimony indicating that the Veteran experienced gastrointestinal and respiratory symptomatology while in service and has experienced such symptoms ever since his discharge.

The examiner must provide any and all opinions as to etiology in the form of a probability and must provide a complete rationale for any opinion expressed. 

2. Provide the claims file to a qualified VA medical professional in order to secure an addendum opinion regarding the likely etiology of the claimed skin condition. The entire claims file, to include a complete copy of this remand, must be made available to the examiner for review, and the chosen examiner must indicate that they reviewed the claims file in its entirety before setting forth any requested opinion.

After a thorough review of the claims file, the examiner is asked to opine whether it is at least as likely as not (an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence) that the claimed skin condition had its onset during service or is otherwise related to active service.  In setting forth this opinion, the examiner must comment upon the Veteran's statements during the October 2023 and February 2024 examinations that he developed rashes on his left arm and buttocks while deployed in 2011.  The examiner is asked to consider the likelihood that in-service exposure to hazardous chemical agents, to specifically include any that are detailed in the generated TERA memorandum, contributed to the development of the claimed skin conditions, either during service or thereafter. 

The examiner must provide any and all opinions as to etiology in the form of a probability and must provide a thorough rationale for any opinion expressed.  A thorough rationale is not simply a restatement of the evidence but includes the application of medical analysis and a discussion of the significance of the relevant evidence, as well as relevant medical literature and/or studies. The lay contentions of the Veteran must also be considered in full.

 

 

A. C. MACKENZIE

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Christopher M. Collins, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.1303.