Citation Nr: A25032625
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240619-448562
DATE: April 9, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to special monthly compensation (SMC) based on the regular need for aid and attendance is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran is so helpless by reason of service-connected disabilities so as to be in regular need of aid and attendance.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for SMC based on the Veteran's regular need for aid and attendance are met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1114(l), 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.350, 3.352.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Navy from October 1981 to November 1986.  This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an April 2024 rating decision by an Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA).  

The Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Thus, the Board may only consider the evidence of record when the Veteran was notified of the AOJ decision on appeal.  The Board cannot consider evidence submitted after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal.  See 38 C.F.R. § 20.301.

The Veteran asserts that he requires aid and assistance regularly due to service-connected disabilities.  See, e.g., March 2024 VA Form 21-526EZ.

The following criteria are to be considered for determining whether a veteran is in need of regular aid and attendance: (1) the inability of the veteran to dress himself or herself or to keep himself or herself ordinarily clean and presentable; (2) frequent need of adjustment of any special prosthetic or orthopedic appliance which, by reason of the particular disability, cannot be done without aid (not to include the adjustment of appliances which normal persons would be unable to adjust without aid, such as supports, belts, lacing at the back, etc.); (3) the inability of the veteran to feed himself or herself through the loss of coordination of the upper extremities or through extreme weakness; (4) the inability to attend to the wants of nature; or, (5) a physical or mental incapacity that required care and assistance on a regular basis to protect the veteran from the hazards or dangers incident to his or her daily environment.  38 C.F.R. § 3.352.  It is not required that all of these disabling conditions be shown to exist.  Id.  Moreover, it is only necessary to establish that a veteran is so helpless as to need regular aid ad attendance, not that there be a constant need.  Id.

The Veteran is in receipt of service connection for aseptic necrosis of the left hip, with one and one-half inch shortening of left lower extremity, flattening of femoral head with joint space obliteration rated 60 percent disabling; mechanical low back pain rated 10 percent disabling; left knee degenerative changes rated 10 percent disabling; and hemorrhoids rated zero percent disabling.  The Veteran has been in receipt of a total disability rating due to individual unemployability since August 19, 1996. 

The rating decision on appeal made a favorable finding that the Veteran requires aid and attendance.  However, examiner noted that "[r]estriction to dressing was noted as caused from a non-service connected shoulder."  The examiner concluded that the primary causes of the Veteran's requirement for aid and attendance was nonservice-connected gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD), sleep apnea, diabetes, thyroid condition, and nonservice-connected joint conditions.  See April 2024 Rating Decision at 3.  

Turning to the evidence of record, in March 2024 the Veteran submitted an Examination for Housebound Status or Permanent Need for Regular Aid and Attendance (VA Form 21-2680) completed by a physician.  The physician noted that the Veteran required assistance with bathing and showering; dressing; ambulating in the home; transferring in or out of bed and chairs; and noted that the Veteran was unable to perform instrumental activities of daily living such as housekeeping, laundry, meal prep, or anything that requires bending or extended standing and walking.  See March 2024 VA Form 21-2680 at 3.  The physician noted that the Veteran's hip, back, and knee disabilities resulted in chronic pain, poor endurance, and problems with balance.  See id. at 2.  The physician noted that the Veteran's requirement for assistance dressing, bathing, and at times transferring was due to poor balance, reduced mobility and endurance, limited range of motion, and limited weight bearing.  Id.  The physician noted that the Veteran had a somewhat stooped posture and ambulated with a cane.  Id. 

In addition, the physician noted that the Veteran had difficulty completing overhead activities due to a rotator cuff injury.  Id.  However, this disability is not service-connected, and thus the Board cannot consider the effects of the Veteran's right shoulder disability in assessing whether he is entitled to SMC.  

VA treatment records reflect that the Veteran sought to participate in VA's Program for Comprehensive Assistance for Family Caregivers (PCAFC).  See September 13, 2023 VA PCAFC Note; August 30, 2023 PCAFC Note.  In investigating the Veteran's needs, the VA social worker noted that the Veteran reported that he required intermittent assistance with dressing.  The social worker also noted that his caregiver assisted him with medication reminders and administering medications due to the Veteran's fear of needles.  The social worker noted that the Veteran acknowledged he was able to be left alone safely.  The note reflects that the Veteran withdrew his PCAFC application after the social worker explained that the program "is for those who need assistance EACH AND EVERY TIME with one or more ADLs and/or requires CONTINUOUS supervision/instruction/protection" (emphasis in original).  

The Board observes the criteria for entitlement to SMC are different from the PCAFC program requirements.  Critically, SMC based on aid and attendance may be awarded where a claimant regularly requires aid and attendance, even if aid and attendance is not constantly required.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.352.

The Board observes that the conclusions in the April 2024 rating decision appear to be based primarily on the response to one question in the aid and attendance examination, as well as the responses by the Veteran and his caregiver to questions during the PCAFC claim process.  In this regard, the PCAFC questionnaire reflects that the Veteran's "treatment plan" was identified as management of hypertension, diabetes, GERD, and sleep apnea.  See August 30, 2023 PCAFC Note.  While these disabilities may require the most intensive management by the Veteran's caregiver, the evidence does not show that these disabilities are responsible for the Veteran's poor balance, chronic pain, or other limitations identified on the aid and attendance examination report.

Additionally, the Veteran's right shoulder disability was noted on the aid and attendance examination report in connection with a question as to restrictions of the upper extremities, "with particular reference to grip, fine movements, and ability to feed [oneself], button clothing, shave, and attend to the needs of nature."  See March 2024 VA Form 21-2680 at 3.  While the April 2024 rating decision interpreted this answer as indicating that the Veteran's requirement for assistance dressing was due to his right shoulder disability, this is not what the evidence shows.  To the contrary, the aid and attendance examination report clearly states that the requirement for assistance dressing is due to poor balance.  See id. at 3-4.  

As noted above, 38 C.F.R. § 3.352 does not require a continuous need for aid and attendance, or that service-connected disabilities result in the need for assistance with all activities.  Here, the evidence shows that as a result of service-connected disabilities, the Veteran requires assistance with dressing, bathing, and at times transferring himself in and out of a bed or chair.  In this regard, the evidence shows that the Veteran's service-connected disabilities result in poor balance, fatigability, loss of endurance, and difficulty with any activities that require bending or straightening the leg.  The combined effect of these limitations would reasonably prevent the Veteran from dressing or undressing independently, bathing independently, and at times transferring.  Without the ability to bend or straighten his leg, and without the ability to balance safely and exert himself for a prolonged period, the Veteran's service-connected disabilities would likely prevent him from putting on a pair of trousers or bathing or showering independently, and would occasionally prevent transferring.  Accordingly, the evidence shows that the Veteran requires aid and attendance regularly due to service-connected disabilities.  To avoid prejudice to the Veteran, the Board will permit the AOJ to assign the effective date of SMC in the first instance.  See Urban v. Principi, 18 Vet. App. 143 (2004).  If the Veteran disagrees with the date assigned by the AOJ, he may seek review of that decision by filing an appropriate VA form.

 

 

S. BUSH

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Badaczewski, Donald M.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.