Citation Nr: A25032909
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240801-459614
DATE: April 9, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a heart disability, to include on a secondary basis, is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from December 1975 to February 1979.

The rating decision on appeal was issued in July 2024 and constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.

In the August 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the July 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  However, because the Board is remanding the claim of entitlement to service connection for a heart disability, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

As a final preliminary matter, the Board acknowledges the recent precedential decision in Williams regarding 38 C.F.R. § 20.202(c)(2) and deciding AMA appeals before the time to change dockets has ended.  See Williams v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 305 (2024).  Generally, the Board may not decide an appeal before the deadline for requesting an AMA docket switch has elapsed.  38 C.F.R. § 20.202(c)(2) allows claimants to switch AMA dockets by completing and submitting a new Notice of Disagreement within one year from the date the AOJ mails notice of the decision on appeal, or 60 days from when the Board receives the Notice of Disagreement, whichever is later, unless a claimant has already submitted evidence or testimony as described in 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.302 and 20.303.  In this case, less than one year has passed since the AOJ mailed notice of the decision on appeal; however, as the Board is remanding the issue for additional development, there is no prejudice to the Veteran in proceeding with the claim on appeal prior to the expiration of the deadline for requesting an AMA docket switch.

Entitlement to service connection for a heart disability, to include on a secondary basis.

The Veteran contends that his heart disability (claimed as heart aneurysm) is secondary to his service-connected left knee disability.  See August 2024 Appellate Brief.

Following a review of the claims file, a remand is warranted to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  Specifically, the Board finds the VA medical opinion inadequate for adjudicative purposes.  The Board notes that when VA undertakes to provide a VA examination or obtain a VA opinion, it must ensure that the examination or opinion is adequate.  Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007).

During his VA examination in April 2024, the Veteran was diagnosed with myocardial infarction, bradycardia, and heart valve replacement.  The Veteran reported that he was septic after having left knee surgery, for which he was prescribed medication.  He reported that he then had acid reflux, eventually discovering that he had a heart aneurysm which resulted in a heart valve replacement.

In the May 2024 medical opinion, the VA examiner opined that the Veteran's heart disability is less likely than not proximately due to or a result of the Veteran's service-connected left knee arthroplasty.  The examiner reasoned that the conditions are not medically related, and a thorough review of medical literature failed to demonstrate a causal relationship.  The VA examiner noted the general risk factors, to include family history, and documented the Veteran's family history of an aortic aneurysm.  The examiner additionally documented the Veteran's history of hyperlipidemia and myocardial infarctions, and indicated that those conditions, in addition to his genetics, most likely contributed to or caused the Veteran's aortic aneurysm.  Notably, however, the examiner did not provide an aggravation opinion.

Given the above, the Board finds the May 2024 VA medical opinion inadequate, as the examiner did not address the required prong of aggravation.  See El-Amin v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 136, 140 (2013).  Accordingly, a remand is necessary to obtain an addendum VA medical opinion and cure the pre-decisional duty to assist error.

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain an addendum medical opinion from an appropriate clinician to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's heart disability.  The need for an in-person examination is left to the discretion of the examiner.

The entire claims file, including a copy of this Remand, must be made available to the examiner.  After reviewing the entire claims file, the examiner should:

(a.) Opine whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's heart disability is etiologically related to his active service.

(b.) Opine whether the Veteran's heart disability was at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) caused by his service-connected left knee arthroplasty.

(c.) Opine whether the Veteran's heart disability was at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) aggravated by his service-connected left knee arthroplasty.

The examiner is reminded that causation and aggravation are separate and distinct concepts and require separate rationales.

(Continued on the next page)

The examiner is advised that the Veteran is competent to report his symptoms and history and that such reports must be acknowledged and considered in formulating any opinions.  The examiner must provide a complete rationale for any opinion offered, citing to the examiner's own expertise, medical principals, and/or evidence in the Veteran's claims file, when necessary, to support the conclusion reached.  If an opinion cannot be reached without resorting to speculation, the examiner must fully explain why. 

 

H.M. WALKER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Caitlin B.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.