Citation Nr: A25032870
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 201231-127716
DATE: April 9, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 30 percent for service-connected major depressive disorder (MDD) is denied.

Entitlement to a total disability rating based on individual unemployability (TDIU) is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran's MDD has manifested in symptomatology that demonstrates occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency but not with reduced reliability and productivity, deficiencies in most areas, or total occupational and social impairment. 

2. The Veteran's service-connected disabilities do not render him unable to secure and follow substantially gainful employment.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for a disability rating in excess of 30 percent rating for service-connected MDD have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.3, 4.7, 4.130, Diagnostic Code (DC) 9434.

2. The criteria for entitlement to a TDIU have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.340, 3.341, 4.16.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from January 1969 to September 1970. 

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a September 2020 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office, which is the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ). 

In the December 2020 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the September 2020 AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

In an October 2023 Board decision, the Board granted the Veteran entitlement to an initial 30 percent rating, but no higher, for his service-connected MDD and denied entitlement to a TDIU. The Veteran thereafter appealed the Board's decision to the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court). In a September 2024 Order, the Court granted a Joint Motion for Partial Remand to vacate the Board's decision as to a rating in excess of 30 percent for MDD and entitlement to a TDIU. 

Increased Rating

Disability evaluations are determined by the application of the facts presented to VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities (Rating Schedule) at 38 C.F.R. Part 4. The percentage ratings contained in   the Rating Schedule represent, as far as can be practicably determined, the average impairment in earning capacity resulting from diseases and injuries incurred or aggravated during military service and the residual conditions in civilian occupations. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1.  

Reasonable doubt as to the degree of the disability will be resolved in the veteran's favor. 38 C.F.R. § 4.3. 

The General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders at 38 C.F.R. § 4.130 provide the following ratings for psychiatric disabilities, including PTSD: 

Under the formula, a 30 percent rating is warranted where there is occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks (although generally functioning satisfactorily, with routine behavior, self-care, and conversation normal), due to such symptoms as: depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks (weekly or less often), chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss (such as forgetting names, directions, recent events).

A 50 percent rating is warranted for occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to such symptoms as: flattened affect, circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short-and long-term memory (e.g. retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships. 

A 70 percent rating is warranted where there is occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately, and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a worklike setting); inability to establish and maintain effective relationships. 

A 100 percent rating is warranted where there is total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations, grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name. 

The United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit held that evaluation under 38 C.F.R. § 4.130 is "symptom-driven," meaning that "symptomatology should be the fact-finder's primary focus when deciding entitlement to a given disability rating." Vasquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F3d 112, 116-17 (Fed. Cir. 2013). The symptoms listed are not exhaustive, but rather, "serve as examples of the type and degree of symptom, or their effects, that would justify a particular rating." Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436, 442 (2002). In the context of determining whether a higher disability evaluation is warranted, the analysis requires considering "not only the presence of certain symptoms[,] but also that those symptoms have caused occupational and social impairment in most of the referenced areas"-i.e., "the regulation... requires an ultimate factual conclusion as to the Veteran's level of impairment in 'most areas.'" Vasquez-Claudio, 713 F.3d at 117-18; 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411. 

Further, when evaluating a mental disorder, the Board must consider the "frequency, severity, and duration of psychiatric symptoms, the length of remissions, and the Veteran's capacity for adjustment during periods of remission." 38 C.F.R. § 4.126(a). The Board must also "assign an evaluation based on all the evidence of record that bears on occupational and social impairment rather than solely on the examiner's assessment of the level of disability at the moment of examination." Id. 

1. Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 30 percent for service-connected MDD.

The Veteran contends that he is entitled to a 70 percent rating for his service-connected MDD. 

The Veteran reported that he retired in 2002, prior to the period on appeal. See July 2015 PTSD Disability and Benefits Questionnaire (DBQ).

The Veteran consistently sought treatment at the VA for his psychiatric condition. Per VA treatment records, the Veteran consistently denied suicidal and homicidal ideation. His appearance was noted as well-groomed and casually dressed. His mood was most often noted as good and euthymic. However, it was noted as depressed and anxious on some occasions. See e.g., March 2016 VA Treatment Record. The Veteran's thought process was consistently noted as linear. He denied hallucinations and was noted as fully oriented. No apparent deficits were noted for his attention and concentration, and his memory was noted as intact. The Veteran's judgment and insight were most often noted as good but were noted as poor or fair on few occasions. See e.g., March 2016 VA Treatment Record. The Veteran was noted as able to perform activities of daily living. See December 2019 and August2020 VA Treatment Records. His appetite was mainly noted as adequate and intact. See e.g., June 2017; March 2017; August 2016; and January 2016 VA Treatment Records. However, in a November 2015 VA treatment record, his appetite was noted as poor due to difficulty swallowing. 

In February 2015 the Veteran denied symptoms of depression, but became irritable when asked routine medications management questions. See February 2015 VA Treatment Record.

In April 2015 his mood was described as dysphoric with flat affect. He reported that he lived with and cared for his mother. He also reported that he had a good relationship with his children and grandchildren. See April 2015 VA Treatment Record.

In May 2015, the Veteran denied feeling depressed and was described as future oriented. He reported that he enjoyed going out to dance with friends, had a good support system, and that he slept six to eight hours per night. See May 2015 VA Treatment Record.

In a July 2015 VA examination, the Veteran reported that he socialized regularly, and went out once or twice monthly. No hallucinations were reported. He was noted as oriented to person, place, and time. His impulse control was noted as good. The Veteran denied engaging in any reckless/impulsive behaviors. He reported that he slept well but had some difficulty obtaining sleep secondary to pain. He denied general difficulty with irritability but reported daily episodes of anger over the prior month due to his daughter. She was living with him and he stated that there was a lot of conflict because she was "cluttering the house up," not taking care of her children, and not trying to get a job. He stated that he was "hollering" at her every day to "get a job and do things." No homicidal ideation was noted, and he "never" had suicidal ideation. See July 2015 PTSD DBQ. 

In August 2015 the Veteran denied depression and described his mood as good. He endorsed adequate sleep, appetite, and concentration. He enjoyed going out to dinner with friends but reported decreased energy due to medical co-morbidities. He specifically denied depression. He reported that his daughter and twin grandsons moved into his home, which was anxiety producing. His MDD was noted to be in full remission. See August 2015 VA Treatment Record. 

In November 2015 the Veteran described his mood as increasingly depressed due to deteriorating health. He reported little interest or pleasure in doing things, poor sleep, and poor appetite due to difficulty swallowing. The Veteran denied hopelessness, but the psychologist reported that his attitude appeared hopeless. See November 2015 VA Treatment Record.

In January 2016 the Veteran reported that he was sleeping well and his anxiety was well-controlled, but he was depressed due to medical issues. He stated his overall mood was stable, and he felt his depression would get better once his medical issues were resolved. He reported no issues with concentration. See January 2016 VA Treatment Record.

In March 2016 the Veteran reported that he was anxious about multiple upcoming surgeries, and he was depressed as he lost his mother unexpectedly several weeks prior. See March 2016 VA Treatment Record.

In May 2016 the Veteran reported his overall mood as stable, but he was depressed regarding his medical surgeries. The psychologist noted that he had an irritable affect, but the Veteran denied irritability. Instead, he was frustrated regarding the surgeries that he needed. The Veteran reported that he was hopeful for the future. His daughter stayed with him to help care for him. He socialized and spoke with friends regularly. He reported that he was sleeping fairly well and had a good appetite. He reported that he did not experience PTSD symptoms and his anxiety was fairly well-controlled. See May 2016 VA Treatment Record.

In November 2016 he noted that his depression and anxiety stemmed from his inability to walk around and be independent. He reported that his pain caused anxiety and irritability. He was described as future oriented. He reported that he planned to go to a friend's house for the Thanksgiving holiday. See November 2016 VA Treatment Record.

In March 2017 the Veteran reported that he was stressed about pain management. He denied depression; changes in sleep; and changes in weight, appetite, or energy. He reported that he lived by himself and that things were stable at home. See March 2017 VA Treatment Record.

In May 2017 his mood was described as slightly frustrated and irritable due to decreased narcotics. See May 2017 VA Treatment Record. 

In June 2017 the Veteran reported that his mood was okay. He denied depression. He reported that his daughter lived nearby and helped him sometimes. See June 2017 VA Treatment Record. 

In August 2017 the Veteran denied depressed mood but endorsed appropriate stress associated with his mother's upcoming estate sale. He reported that his daughter lived down the road from him, and that she and her children were good support for him. See August 2017 VA Treatment Record. 

In March 2018 the Veteran reported that chronic back pain contributed to his low mood and his depressive symptoms were related to the severity of his pain. He stated his quality of life was poor due to pain, but he still tried to spend time with friends for a couple hours. He reported his sleep was fragmented and he was anxious at times due to pain. He denied amotivation and poor appetite. See March 2018 VA Treatment Record.

In April 2018 the Veteran reported his mood as good, and he met with friends in the afternoon to eat. He denied restlessness, poor focus, and sleep issues. He reported he felt depressed because he could not perform manual labor due to back pain. He reported his primary issue as still being easily fatigued and some irritability. See April 2018 VA Treatment Record.

In July 2018 he described his mood as okay. His depressive symptoms remained secondary due to back pain. He reported poor sleep and fatigue due to pain. His anxiety was well controlled. He lived alone but had a "good friend support system." He went out with friends for meals and concerts. He reported that he made sure he got out of the house daily. See July 2018 VA Treatment Record.

In October 2018 he reported his sleep and appetite were okay and he lived by himself, but he spoke with his two children on a regular basis. He also stated that he had "many friends who he talks to on a regular basis."  See October 2018 VA Treatment Record.

In November 2018 he was described as insightful and aware of others. His ability to care for others was listed as one of his strength/abilities. See November 2018 VA Treatment Record. 

In January 2019 he reported that he was sleeping okay but not very great. He reported that his mood was good, and his anxiety was under control. See January 2019 VA Treatment Record.

In September 2020 the Veteran submitted an opinion from a private psychologist. She opined that the Veteran's depressive symptoms were chronic and have as least as likely as not caused him occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas since at least January 2015 to the present. 

The psychologist noted that the Veteran presented with constricted affect and spoke openly and deliberately and remained responsive to questions throughout the interview. The psychologist noted that the Veteran's memory was aligned with information presented in the claims file and the Veteran described consistent presentation of psychiatric symptoms. The psychologist opined that the Veteran persistently reported depressed mood, poor appetite, insomnia, low energy or fatigue, feelings of hopelessness, diminished interest, change in appetite and/or weight, sleep disturbance, psychomotor agitation or retardation, fatigue or loss of energy, feelings of worthlessness or guilt, and diminished concentration.

During the private interview, the Veteran reported that he did not have an appetite when depressed. He slept four hours at a time, five at the most and he sometimes took a nap during the day. He reported that he was tired a lot and did not feel motivated to do anything. He reported that he felt hopeless, and he felt guilty that he could not work and do things he used to. He reported that it was hard to trust people but thought everybody was kind of like that. He reported that he was set in his ways, and if he cannot do something right then he will not do it at all. He got irritable or angry when things were not in their place or done correctly, which was a problem for him in relationships and at work. He reported that he got overwhelmed when stressed, and he tried to keep his stress low, so he did not start reacting or getting overwhelmed by it. He reported that he got violent when he was angry. He reported that he sometimes could not make himself shower or change, and he would just sit around and watch TV for days.

The psychologist opined that the Veteran's symptoms would make it very difficult to pursue employment, stay on task at work, get along with others at work, and be reliable and effective in a competitive work environment. The examiner concluded that the Veteran's symptoms would at least as likely as not negatively impact his communication, memory, and ability to follow instructions as well as his reactivity and judgment, and tolerance in interacting with people such as supervisors, co-workers, and the public. The psychologist opined that the Veteran's symptoms would at least likely as not preclude him from successfully securing and following substantially gainful employment.

The Board finds that the Veteran's symptoms do not rise to the level of severity contemplated by the 50 percent rating criteria. The Veteran's symptoms do not appear to be extreme or excessive as to affect his social and familial relationships.  Indeed, the Veteran reported several times throughout the record that he spent time with friends, and he regularly went out to eat, attended dances, and attended concerts with his friends. He also reported good relationships with his children and grandchildren. There is no indication in the record that the Veteran had difficulty completing tasks or needed assistance to complete tasks due to his psychological symptoms. No memory deficits were noted, and the Veteran was noted as able to complete activities of daily living. See December 2019 and August 2020 VA Treatment Records.

The private psychologist found that the Veteran experienced near continuous depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately, and effectively; disturbances of motivation and mood; feelings of worthlessness or guilt; diminished interests; change in appetite and weight; fatigue or loss of energy; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work like setting; impaired impulse control, such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence; and neglect of personal appearance and hygiene. However, the Board notes that the contemporaneous evidence of record does not support such findings.

For example, the evidence of record does not demonstrate that the Veteran had near continuous depression affecting his ability to function independently, appropriately, and effectively. For a portion of the appeal period the Veteran's mother lived with him, and he assisted in caring for her until her passing. His daughter and two grandsons also lived with him. He also lived alone for a portion of the appeal period. He was capable of completing activities of daily living, and there was no indication in the record that he required assistance in completing tasks due to his psychological symptoms. Further, there were several instances in the record where the Veteran denied having depression. See e.g., August 2015, March 2017, June 2017, and August 2017 VA Treatment Records. Indeed, in August 2015 his depression was noted to be in full remission. 

Regarding disturbances of motivation and mood, there were some instances in the record where the Veteran's mood was noted as depressed or dysthymic. However, the Veteran mainly reported that his mood was good or okay, and he denied amotivation. Further, VA treatment records consistently noted his mood as euthymic. Therefore, the instances of motivation and mood do not appear to rise to the frequency, severity, and duration as contemplated by the 50 percent rating criteria. 

Regarding difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships and adapting to stressful circumstances, there were periods of time where the Veteran reported difficulty getting along with his family. However, he consistently reported good relationships with his children, grandchildren, and friends. Throughout the appeal period, he reported that he went out with and communicated with his friends regularly. He was noted to have a good support system, which consisted of his family and friends. Thus, the Board finds these instances do not rise to the frequency, severity, and duration as contemplated by the 50 and 70 percent rating criteria. 

The Board acknowledges the Veteran's reports of irritability throughout the record. However, this symptom does not cause the 70 percent criteria to be met. He reported outbursts of anger. At his July 2015 VA examination, he denied general difficulty with irritability but reported daily episodes of anger over the prior month due to his daughter. She was living with him and he stated that there was a lot of conflict because she was "cluttering the house up," not taking care of her children, and not trying to get a job. He stated that he was "hollering" at her every day to "get a job and do things." See July 2015 PTSD DBQ. The Board finds that the Veteran's irritability was in response to a stressful situation as a result of his daughter living with him. It does not represent a severity level more accurately described as "impaired impulse control." Instead, he was reacting to a stressful situation, and his irritability was not unprovoked. Additionally, daily episodes of yelling at his daughter were documented once during the appeal period in July 2015, and were not mentioned again, even when the Veteran discussed living with his daughter at later treatment appointments. Thus the duration of these episodes is not long enough to be most accurately contemplated by the 70 percent criteria. Further, the Veteran's treatment records do not contain any reports of violence. Thus, the Board finds the Veteran's irritability does not rise to such severity as to constitute unprovoked irritability with periods violence as contemplated by the 70 percent rating criteria.  

The private psychologist opined that the Veteran's depression symptoms would make it very difficult to pursue employment, stay on task, get along with others, and be reliable and effective in a competitive work environment. The private psychologist also opined that his depression symptoms would negatively impact his communication, memory and ability to follow instruction as well as his reactivity and judgment, and tolerance in interacting with people such as supervisors, coworkers, and the public. The Board again finds this is not supported by the contemporaneous evidence of record. Throughout the appeal period, the Veteran's concentration was noted as adequate. The Veteran did not endorse memory issues. His judgment and insight were mainly noted as intact. There were no issues with his attention. The Veteran interacted with the public regularly. He attended social events with his friends, and he reported that he tried to go out daily. 

The Board acknowledges the statements provided during the Veteran's private mental health examination. The examiner primarily uses these statements in support of her finding that the Veteran's mental health symptoms satisfy the 70 percent rating criteria. However, the Board finds the Veteran's mental health treatment records more persuasive because they reflect his reports during treatment for his psychiatric disorder as opposed to an interview in conjunction with a benefits claim. The Federal Circuit has held, in the context of reviewing a Court of Federal Claims decision denying compensation under the Vaccine Act, that "[m]edical records, in general, warrant consideration as trustworthy evidence.  The records contain information supplied to or by health professionals to facilitate diagnosis and treatment of medical conditions.  With proper treatment hanging in the balance, accuracy has an extra premium.  These records are also generally contemporaneous to medical events."  Cucuras v. Secretary of Health & Human Servs., 993 F.2d 1525, 1528 (Fed. Cir. 1993). The Board finds this conclusion to be highly persuasive and the same logic applies in this case.  This Veteran sought medical treatment for his mental health, and with "proper treatment hanging in the balance, accuracy has an extra premium."

In sum, the Veteran's symptoms throughout the appeal period more nearly approximate occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency but not occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity, deficiencies in most areas, or total occupational and social impairment. As such, the Board finds that a rating in excess of 30 percent is not warranted. 

2. Entitlement to a TDIU.  

The Veteran contends that he is entitled to a TDIU based on his service-connected MDD. See December 2020 Notice of Disagreement.

A TDIU may be assigned, where the schedular rating is less than total, where a veteran is unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation as a result of service-connected disabilities.  38 C.F.R. §4.16(a).  To qualify for schedular consideration of a TDIU, if there is only one such disability, this disability shall be ratable at 60 percent or more, and, if there are two or more disabilities, there shall be at least one disability ratable at 40 percent or more and sufficient additional disability to bring the combined rating to 70 percent or more.  Id.

For the purposes of one 60 percent disability, or one 40 percent disability in combination, the following will be considered as one disability: (1) Disabilities of one or both upper extremities, one or both lower extremities, including the bilateral factor, if applicable; (2) disabilities resulting from common etiology or a single accident; (3)disabilities affecting a single body system, e.g., orthopedic, digestive, respiratory, cardiovascular-renal, neuropsychiatric; (4) multiple injuries incurred in action; or (5) multiple disabilities incurred as a prisoner of war.  38 C.F.R. §4.16(a); see Moody v. Wilkie, 30 Vet. App. 329, 339 (2018) (combining disabilities as "one disability" to meet the rating threshold of § 4.16(a) requires the use of the combined rating table).

The Veteran is service connected for MDD at 30 percent, tinnitus at 10 percent, ischemic heart disease at 10 percent, and bilateral hearing loss at noncompensable.  The Veteran has a combined disability rating of 40 percent. Thus, the Veteran does not meet the schedular criteria for a TDIU. 38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a). 

A TDIU evaluation can still be awarded if "there is sufficient evidence to substantiate a reasonable possibility that a veteran is unemployable by reason of his or her service-connected disabilities." Ray v. Wilkie, 31 Vet. App. 58, 66 (2019). However, the Board cannot assign an extraschedular rating in the first instance. Bagwell v. Brown, 9 Vet. App. 337 (1996). Therefore, the Board must specifically adjudicate whether to remand a case for referral to the Director of the Compensation Service for consideration of an extraschedular TDIU. Thun v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 111 (2008); Barringer v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 242 (2008).

The Veteran asserts that he has not been employed since 2002. He reported that he was self-employed as a general contractor for 25 years until physicians told him he needed to retire due to his heart attacks. See July 2015 PTSD DBQ.

As to the Veteran's service-connected bilateral hearing loss and tinnitus, the evidence of record does not show that these disabilities render the Veteran unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation.

In March 2015 a VA examiner reviewed the Veteran's record and determined that the Veteran's heart condition had no functional impact on his ability to work. See March 2015 Heart Conditions DBQ. Additionally, the evidence of record does not show that the Veteran's heart condition caused any mental or physical limitations to the Veteran, such as limitations to his strength, posture, senses, or manipulative capabilities.

In a September 2020 opinion, a private psychologist opined that the Veteran's symptoms would make it very difficult to pursue employment, stay on task at work, get along with others at work, and be reliable and effective in a competitive work environment. She opined that the Veteran's symptoms would at least as likely as not negatively impact his communication, memory, and ability to follow instructions as well as his reactivity and judgment, and tolerance in interacting with people such as supervisors, co-workers, and the public. She opined that the Veteran's symptoms would at least likely as not preclude him from successfully securing and following a substantially gainful employment. 

The Board assigns little probative weight to the private psychologist's opinion as it is not supported by the contemporaneous evidence of record. Per VA treatment records, there were no notable issues regarding the Veteran's judgment. His concentration, insight, and attention were consistently noted as adequate and intact. The Veteran did not endorse any memory issues. He frequently went out in public and interacted with family and friends.  He attended social events with his friends, such as attending concerts. He also reported that he tried to go out daily.

Based on the available evidence, the Board finds that there is insufficient evidence to substantiate a reasonable possibility that the Veteran was unemployable because of his service-connected disabilities. Accordingly, referral to the Director, Compensation Service, for consideration of TDIU on an extraschedular basis under 38 C.F.R. § 4.16(b) is not warranted.

 

 

D. Martz Ames

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	A. Dennis, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.