Citation Nr: A25032265
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 210128-135350
DATE: April 8, 2025

REMANDED

1. Entitlement to an increased disability rating in excess of 60 percent for coronary artery disease is remanded.

2. Entitlement to a total disability rating for compensation based on individual unemployability due to service-connected disabilities (TDIU) is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served active duty in the Air Force from July 1974 to June 1997.

This matter is before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a July 2020 rating decision from the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) that denied the within claims. In January 2021, the Veteran appealed the Board's decision through the submission of a VA Form 10182, Notice of Disagreement, selecting the Hearing docket and requesting a Board hearing before a Veterans Law Judge. A virtual hearing was held before the undersigned VLJ in December 2024.

Under the hearing docket of the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), the Board may consider only the evidence of record at the time of the July 2020 AOJ decision on appeal as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or his representative at or within 90 days from the date of the Veteran's December 2024 Board hearing, which would have been on March 3, 2025. 38 C.F.R. § 20.302. The Board cannot consider (1) evidence submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal and before the date of the Veteran's Board hearing or (2) evidence submitted more than 90 days after the Veteran's Board hearing. 38 C.F.R. § 20.302. 

If evidence was associated with the claims file during a period of time when additional evidence was not allowed, the Board has not considered it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. § 20.300. If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was added to the claims file that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim[s], considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

However, because the Board is remanding the Veteran's claims, any evidence the Board could not consider as to these issues will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

At the Veteran's Board hearing, he discussed treatment for transglobal amnesia, for which he is not service connected, but which the Veteran and his representative have attributed to the service-connected coronary artery disease. The Veteran reported that he received private neurological treatment in approximately January 2019 from a Dr. Elzawarhy in Panama City, Florida, wherein that physician had indicated that the Veteran's transglobal amnesia was related to his cardiac condition, and was not neurological in nature. The Veteran's private neurological treatment from Dr. Elzawarhy is noted within VA treatment records from 2018, and is related to the Veteran's service-connected right trigeminal neuralgia, which is considered in relation to his TDIU claim. The record further reflects the Veteran was seen by a private primary care physician, Dr. Gamad. Any related treatment records are potentially relevant to both of the present claims. 

The record does not establish that VA has attempted to obtain these records, which represents a pre-decisional duty to assist error. Therefore, remand is required for VA to attempt to obtain private treatment records from Dr. Elzawarhy, Dr. Gamad, and any other relevant private treatment records.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Request that the Veteran provide VA with permission to obtain treatment records from the following physician/medical facility(ies):

"	Neurologist Dr. Elzawarhy in Panama City, Florida; and

"	Primary care provider Dr. Gamad; 

 

 

A. P. SIMPSON

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Wonderling, Gabriel N.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.