Citation Nr: A25032194
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240209-425164
DATE: April 8, 2025

ORDER

The appellant is not eligible for the direct payment of attorney fees based on past-due benefits awarded from a December 2023 rating decision that awarded an increased rating for the Veteran's bilateral pes planus disability; the appeal is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran's February 2022 appointment of the appellant as their attorney, and the associated fee agreement, are valid.

2. An initial 30 percent disability rating for the Veteran's bilateral pes planus disability has been in effect since 2006, as enacted by a May 2016 rating decision that effectuated an April 2016 order by the Board of Veterans' Appeals.  

3. Several years later, on June 13, 2023, the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) received a VA Form 8940, Veteran's Application for Increased Compensation Based on Unemployability, accompanied by a VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, requesting review of a June 2022 rating decision involving the separate and distinct matter of a disability rating for left knee instability. 

4. The agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) interpreted the June 2023 claim seeking a higher disability rating due to unemployability (a TDIU rating) to encompass claims for increased disability ratings for the underlying service-connected bilateral knee, ankle, and foot disabilities, each of which was listed as a disability that the Veteran reported as preventing him from securing or following any substantially gainful occupation. 

5. A December 2023 rating decision then awarded an increased 50 percent disability rating for the Veteran's pes planus, effective from the date of the new increased rating claim that was received by VA on June 13, 2023. 

6. The December 2023 rating decision that produced the past-due monetary benefits from which an attorney fee is now sought was the initial decision with respect to the case for the increased rating claim for pes planus that was received on June 13, 2023.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria have not been met to establish eligibility for the direct payment of attorney fees based on past-due benefits awarded from the December 2023 rating decision. 38 U.S.C. § 5904; 38 C.F.R. § 14.636.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Marine Corps from March 2004 to July 2006. 

The appellant is the Veteran's attorney, appointed to represent him in other matters before the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA). The present matter is a simultaneously contested claim because the Veteran and the attorney have a competing financial interest in the monetary amount involved. For that reason, the attorney does not represent the Veteran in this matter due to their opposing financial interests. 

The fee decision on appeal was issued in December 2023 and constitutes an initial decision in the matter of eligibility for attorney fees arising from a December 2023 rating decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies. In the February 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the appellant elected the Direct Review docket.

Simultaneously contested claims are subject to special procedural regulations. In the present case, both the Veteran and the appellant were notified of the relevant rating and fee decisions issued by the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ). The Veteran was also provided a copy of the appellant's February 2024 Notice of Disagreement in April 2024 and given the opportunity to file a brief, argument, or request for a different type of review within 30 days from the date the content of the Notice of Disagreement was furnished. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.400-20.404. The Veteran did not request a change in the docket assigned. Therefore, the Board now proceeds with direct review of the appeal.

The appellant is not eligible for the direct payment of attorney fees based on past-due benefits awarded from a December 2023 rating decision that awarded an increased rating for the Veteran's bilateral pes planus disability; the appeal is denied.

Legal Criteria

A claimant may have attorney or agent representation for the prosecution of claims for VA benefits. 38 U.S.C. § 5904. 

A power of attorney, executed on either VA Form 21-22 or VA Form 21-22a, is required to represent a claimant before VA. The power of attorney shall contain the signature of the claimant and the signature of the agent or attorney and shall be presented to the appropriate VA office for filing in the Veteran's claims folder. 38 C.F.R. § 14.631(a). A power of attorney may be revoked at any time, and an agent or attorney may be discharged at any time. Unless a claimant specifically indicates otherwise, the receipt of a new power of attorney executed by the claimant and the organization or individual providing representation shall constitute a revocation of an existing power of attorney. 38 C.F.R. § 14.631(f)(1).

All agreements for the payment of fees for services of agents and attorneys must be in writing and signed by both the claimant or appellant and the agent or attorney. To be valid, a fee agreement must include the following: the name of the Veteran; the name of the claimant or appellant if other than the Veteran; the name of any disinterested third-party payer and the relationship between the third-party payer and the Veteran, claimant, or appellant; the applicable VA file number; and the specific terms under which the amount to be paid for the services of the attorney or agent will be determined. Fee agreements must also clearly specify if VA is to pay the agent or attorney directly out of past-due benefits. A copy of a direct-pay fee agreement must be filed with the AOJ within 30 days of its execution. 38 C.F.R. § 14.636(g). Fee agreements must be reasonable; those which do not exceed 20 percent of past-due benefits are presumed reasonable. 38 C.F.R. § 14.636(f).

For initial decisions issued on or after the effective date of the modernized review system (AMA) of February 19, 2019, agents and attorneys may charge claimants or the appellants for representation provided: After an AOJ has issued an initial decision on a claim or claims, including any claim to reopen under 38 C.F.R. § 3.156(a) or for an increase in rate of a benefit; a review request (such as a notice of disagreement (NOD), higher-level review (HLR), or supplemental claim) of the initial AOJ decision has been filed with respect to that decision; and the agent or attorney has complied with the power of attorney requirements in 38 C.F.R. §14.631 and the fee agreement requirements in 38 C.F.R. § 14.636(g). See 38 U.S.C. § 5904(c)(1); see also Military-Veterans Advocacy v. Sec'y of Veterans Affairs, 7 F.4th 1110 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

When a claimant or appellant and an attorney or agent have entered into a fee agreement under which the total amount of the fee payable to the agent or attorney (i) is to be paid to the attorney by the Secretary directly from any past-due benefits awarded on the basis of the claim, and (ii) is contingent on whether the matter is resolved in a manner favorable to the claimant or appellant, the total fee payable to the attorney or agent may not exceed 20 percent of the total amount of any past-due benefits awarded on the basis of the claim. A claim shall be considered to have been resolved in a manner favorable to the claimant or appellant if all or any part of the relief sought is granted. 38 U.S.C. § 5904(d); 38 C.F.R. §§ 14.636(h)(1), 14.636(h)(2).

The term "past-due benefits" means a nonrecurring payment resulting from a benefit, or benefits, granted on appeal or awarded on the basis of a readjudicated claim after a denial by an AOJ or the Board or the lump sum payment that represents the total amount of recurring cash payments that accrued between the effective date of the award and the date of the grant of the benefit by the AOJ, the Board, or an appellate court. 38 C.F.R. § 14.636(h)(3). The fees are payable to the attorney based on the amount of past-due benefits awarded regardless of the amount payable to the Veteran. See Rosinski v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 264 (2020); see also Gumpenberger v. Wilkie, 973 F.3d 1379 (Fed. Cir. 2020); Snyder v. Nicholson, 489 F.3d 1213 (Fed. Cir. 2007).

When the benefit granted on appeal, or as the result of the readjudicated claim, is service connection for a disability, the "past-due benefits" will be based on the initial disability rating assigned by the AOJ following the award of service connection. The sum will equal the payments accruing from the effective date of the award to the date of the initial disability rating decision. If an increased rating is subsequently granted as the result of an appeal of the disability rating initially assigned by the AOJ, and if the agent or attorney represents the claimant or appellant in that phase of the claim, the agent or attorney will be paid a supplemental payment based upon the increase granted on appeal, to the extent that the increased amount of disability is found to have existed between the initial effective date of the award following the grant of service connection and the date of the rating action implementing the appellate decision granting the increase. 38 C.F.R. § 14.636(h)(3)(i).

Analysis & Conclusion

The Board finds that the attorney is not eligible for attorney fees based on the past-due benefits awarded by the December 2023 rating decision that awarded an increased rating for the Veteran's pes planus disability because this rating decision was the initial decision with respect to the new June 2023 claim for benefits.  

First, the Board finds that the representation and fee agreements between the parties are valid because they contain all the necessary components described above.

Next, the Board finds that the December 2023 rating decision created a retroactive monetary award of past-due benefits that could be subject to fees. Specifically, this rating decision increased the Veteran's combined rate of disability compensation from 90 percent to 100 percent, effective as of the date of the June 2023 date of claim for an increased rating. 

However, the governing legal authority allows attorneys to charge claimants for representation provided only after an AOJ has issued an initial decision on a relevant claim or claims. Specifically, the governing statutory and regulatory authorities make clear that in VA disability claims adjudications, attorney fees are not warranted when past-due monetary benefits arise from the AOJ's initial adjudication with respect to the case. See 38 U.S.C. § 5904(c)(1). Congress established this system because "Congress doesn't want veterans to pay fees before VA denies them a benefit. But once VA denies a claim, attorneys can be compensated for helping veterans get the benefits they deserve." Chisholm v. Collins, No. 22-7028, 2025 U.S. App. Vet. Claims LEXIS 336, *10 (Mar. 13, 2025). One might also think of this as VA having the first opportunity to reach a grant of the benefit sought, without attorney or representative costs charged to the Veteran, and then, only if VA denies the claim, a fee may be charged in correcting that denial. 

In this instance, the December 2023 rating decision was the first decision to adjudicate whether an increased disability rating was warranted for the Veteran's pes planus for the period associated with the June 2023 claim seeking an increased rating, and the AOJ granted that claim in the first instance. A claim for an increased rating is a new claim based on worsening of the disability and involves a determination of the severity of symptoms during a specified period. It does not involve a determination of the symptoms during any previous period. Here, the June 2023 claim for an increased rating for pes planus did not relate to a previously filed claim regarding that disability, and did not request review of a prior determination regarding the pes planus rating. It did not grant benefits on the same or similar basis as any previously denied claim, but rather awarded an increase in disability compensation based on worsening of a disability shown in a later period of time. On that basis, the December 2023 rating decision was the initial decision with respect to the case for this disability and this time period, and attorney fees are not warranted for an initial decision in this matter. The attorney's appeal for eligibility to receive an attorney fee based on the past-due benefits derived from the December 2023 rating decision that awarded a higher disability rating for pes planus must be denied. 

 

 

VICTORIA MOSHIASHWILI

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	K. McDonald

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.