Citation Nr: A25032344
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240503-436960
DATE: April 8, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) with hiatal hernia, irritable bowel syndrome (IBS), duodenitis, esophagitis, gastritis, and H. Pylori (GI disability) is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for allergic rhinitis is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for urticaria is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the U.S. Army from August 2017 to June 2022.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from September 2023 and January 2024 rating decisions of a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In the May 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the September 2023 and January 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decisions on appeal with regards to the claims decided in each decision. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

As the Board is remanding the claims on appeal, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

The Board notes that in the May 2024 Notice of Disagreement, the Veteran expressed disagreement with a number of issues that were decided in a June 2022 rating decision.  However, because the Veteran's Notice of Disagreement was received more than one year after the issuance of the June 2022 rating decision, it cannot serve as a valid appeal of those issues. 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.2500; 20.202, 20.203.  If the Veteran wishes to further pursue those claims, he may file the appropriate form with the RO. 

Service connection claims.

The Veteran seeks service connection for a GI disability, urticaria, and allergic rhinitis.  The Board finds that a remand is warranted in order to correct pre-decisional duty to assist errors.

First, evidence of record at the time of the rating decisions on appeal indicate that the Veteran receives treatment for his conditions from private providers.  Specifically, the evidence indicates that the Veteran receives treatment from his civilian primary care physician as well from an allergist, dermatologist, and a GI doctor. See VA treatment records; July 2023 VA fee-based skin examination.   However, no records from a private PCP, allergist, or dermatologist are of record.  Additionally, while some records from a private GI doctor are of record, the record only pertains to an endoscopy procedure.  Accordingly, a remand is required to allow VA to obtain authorization and request any outstanding records.

Futhermore, the Veteran has contended that his rhinitis is related to general stress experienced in service and that his uticiara and GI disability are related to foods he ate in service.  He also contends that his uticiara and GI disability began during service.  A review of the Veteran's service treatment records (STRs) show treatment for rhinitis, stress related issues, and allergic reactions that consisted of GI symptoms and rashes.  While toxic risk exposure activity (TERA) opinions were obtained in September 2023, no opinions were obtained that addressed the Veteran's specific contentions or the aforementioned evidence in his STRS.

Additionally, with regards to the September 2023 GI opinion, the examiner noted that there was no evidence of a specific toxic expsoure in service, but the Veteran's STRs show that the Veteran reported exposure to industrial pollution in his Post-Deployment Assessment.   

In light of the foregoing, the Board finds that opinions addressing the Veteran's contentions and his STRs as well as a new TERA opinion for the Veteran's GI disability should have been obtained.  Accordingly, the aforementioned development should be conducted on remand. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Ask the Veteran to complete a VA Form 21-4142 for his private primary care physician, allergist, dermatologist, and GI doctor that has treated his conditions.  Make two requests for the authorized records, unless it is clear after the first request that a second request would be futile.

2.  Obtain a VA medical opinion regarding the etiology of the Veteran's urticaria from a qualified medical professional.  The need for a physical examination is left to the discretion of the VA examiner.  The examiner must review the entire claims file and a copy of this Remand. 

The examiner must opine whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's urticaria had its onset in, or is otherwise related to, active service, to include 1) the rash the Veteran experienced in service, 2) the allergic reactions he experienced, and/or 3) the foods he ate in service.

A complete rationale must be provided for all opinions expressed.  The rationale must consider and discuss the pertinent evidence of record, to include the Veteran's lay statements.

3. Obtain a VA medical opinion regarding the etiology of the Veteran's rhinitis from a qualified medical professional.  The need for a physical examination is left to the discretion of the VA examiner.  The examiner must review the entire claims file and a copy of this Remand. 

The examiner must opine whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's rhinitis had its onset in, or is otherwise related to, active service, to include the January 2019 STR noting rhinitis and/or general stress experienced in service.

A complete rationale must be provided for all opinions expressed.  The rationale must consider and discuss the pertinent evidence of record, to include the Veteran's lay statements.

4. Obtain a VA medical opinion regarding the etiology of the Veteran's GI disability from a qualified medical professional.  The need for a physical examination is left to the discretion of the VA examiner.  The examiner must review the entire claims file and a copy of this Remand. 

The examiner is asked to opine:

a)  Whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's GI disability, including GERD, hiatal hernia, IBS, duodenitis, esophagitis, gastritis and/or H. Pylori had its onset in, or is otherwise related to, active service, to include the GI symptoms noted in the Veteran's STRs.

In so opining, the examiner also should consider the Veteran's contention that his GI disability is related to food he ate during service in combination with stress and the September 2023 examiner's notation that his condition can develop from dietary patterns. 

b)  Whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's GI disability is due to the combined, synergistic effect of the Veteran's total potential toxic exposures in service, to include industrial pollution.

A complete rationale must be provided for all opinions expressed.  The rationale must consider and discuss the pertinent evidence of record, to include the Veteran's lay statements.

 

 

C. CRAWFORD

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	E. Mortimer, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.