Citation Nr: A25032264
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240905-471468
-DATE: April 8, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for hypertension is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for chronic kidney disease (CKD) is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran had active duty service from March 1957 to March 1960.

By way of background, a November 2023 Board decision denied entitlement to service connection for diabetes mellitus type II, hypertension, ischemic cardiomyopathy, to include coronary artery disease (CAD) and a pacemaker, status post quadruple bypass, left lower extremity peripheral artery disease (PAD), right lower extremity PAD, and CKD.

Later in November 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, and requested readjudication of the service connection claims for diabetes mellitus type II, hypertension, ischemic cardiomyopathy, to include CAD and a pacemaker, status post quadruple bypass, left lower extremity PAD, and CKD most recently addressed in the November 2023 Board decision. In February 2024, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the supplemental claim decision on appeal, which ostensibly found that new and relevant evidence had been received and denied the claims for hypertension and CKD based on the evidence of record at the time of that decision. The issues of entitlement to service connection for diabetes mellitus type II, ischemic cardiomyopathy, to include CAD and a pacemaker, status post quadruple bypass, and left lower extremity PAD were deferred for development.

In the September 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Hearing docket. A Board hearing concerning the issues of entitlement to service connection for hypertension and CKD was held on December 6, 2024. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the February 2024 AOJ decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran, or representative, at the hearing or within 90 days following the hearing. 38 C.F.R. § 20.302(a). If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal and prior to the Board hearing, or (2) more than 90 days following the hearing, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.302(a), 20.801. However, because the Board is remanding the appeal with respect to these 2 issues, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

The Board acknowledges that a March 2024 rating decision denied entitlement to service connection for diabetes mellitus type II, ischemic cardiomyopathy, to include CAD and a pacemaker, status post quadruple bypass, and left lower extremity PAD. The Veteran appealed that decision to the Board as well. A hearing for those issues was held in September 2024. Then, in a January 2025 decision with a different docket number, the Board remanded those 3 issues for evidentiary development. 

1. Entitlement to service connection for hypertension is remanded.

2. Entitlement to service connection for CKD is remanded.

Review of the record reveals that remand is required in order to correct a duty to assist error that occurred prior to the February 2024 rating decision on appeal. See 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

Essentially, the Veteran contends that his diagnosed hypertension and CKD are due to toxic exposures during his active service in Korea. Specifically, the Veteran asserts that he was exposed to burn pits, diesel fumes from stoves, and fuel from cooking and heating oils. See August 2022 VA Form  21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim (Compensation); July 2023 Hearing Transcript; November 2023 Medical Treatment Record - Non-Government Facility; November 2023 VA 21-4138 Statement in Support of Claim; and December 2024 Hearing Transcript. The Board notes that the theory of secondary service connection has also been raised by the record. 

In the February 2024 rating decision on appeal, the AOJ made the following favorable findings for hypertension: 1) the Veteran has been diagnosed with a disability; and 2) hypertension is a condition that has been presumptively linked to exposure. The only favorable finding for CKD was that he has been diagnosed with a disability (mild chronic kidney disease). The Board is bound by these favorable findings. 38 U.S.C. § 5104A; 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c). Therefore, the remaining question for hypertension is whether it is related to service. The remaining questions for CKD are whether there was an in-service event and whether it is related to service.

If a Veteran was exposed to an herbicide agent during active military, naval, or air service, certain diseases shall be service-connected if the requirements of section 3.307(a)(6) are met even though there is no record of such disease during service, provided further that the rebuttable presumption provisions of section 3.307(d) are also satisfied. 38 C.F.R. § 3.309(e). 

VA has developed specific evidentiary procedures to verify whether a veteran was exposed to herbicide agents in locations other than Vietnam, and specifically when there is an allegation of exposure to herbicides along the DMZ in Korea. The presumption of service connection requires exposure to an herbicide agent and manifestation of the disease to a degree of 10 percent or more within the time period specified for each disease. 38 C.F.R. § 3.307(a)(6)(ii). Here, hypertension is a presumptive condition associated with herbicide exposure for purposes of this presumption, but CKD is not. 38 U.S.C. § 1116(a)(2); 38 C.F.R. § 3.309(e).

With the passage of the Blue Water Navy Vietnam Veterans Act of 2019, 38 U.S.C. § 1116B was amended to extend the presumption of herbicide exposure to certain veterans who, during active military, naval, or air service, served between September 1, 1967, and August 31, 1971, in a unit that, as determined by the Department of Defense, operated in or near the Korean DMZ in an area in which herbicides are known to have been applied during that period, shall be presumed to have been exposed during such service to an herbicide agent, unless there is affirmative evidence to establish that the veteran was not exposed to any such agent during that service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.307(a)(6)(iv); see also 38 C.F.R. § 3.814(c)(2). (Note that § 3.307(a)(6)(iv) has not been updated as to the earlier September 1, 1967 date from April 1, 1968 as of this writing, but the statute supersedes regulation in any case.) Importantly, the Veteran's service pre-dates this presumption, as he served from March 1957 to March 1963. 

In light of the foregoing, service connection may be presumed for residuals of herbicide exposure by showing two elements. First, the veteran must show that he served in or near the Korean DMZ during the prescribed time period. 38 U.S.C. § 1116; 38 C.F.R. § 3.307(a)(6). Second, the veteran must be diagnosed with one of the specific diseases listed in 38 C.F.R. § 3.309(e), or otherwise establish a nexus to service. See Brock v. Brown, 10 Vet. App. 155, 162 (1997).

In addition, for Veterans with 90 days or more of active service during a war period or after December 31, 1946, certain chronic diseases are presumed to have been incurred in service if they manifested to a compensable degree within one year of separation from service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 1112, 1113, 1137; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307, 3.309. Pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(b), where a chronic disease is shown in-service, subsequent manifestations of the same chronic disease are generally service-connected. If a chronic disease is noted in service but chronicity in-service is not adequately supported, a showing of continuity of symptomatology after separation is required. Entitlement to service connection based on chronicity or continuity of symptomatology pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(b) applies only when the disability for which the Veteran is claiming compensation is due to a disease enumerated on the list of chronic diseases in 38 U.S.C. § 1101(3) or 38 C.F.R. § 3.309(a). Walker v. Shinseki, 708 F.3d 1331, 1339-40 (Fed. Cir. 2013). 

Service connection may be established on a secondary basis for a disability that is proximately due to or the result of a service-connected disease or injury. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a). Establishing service connection on a secondary basis requires evidence sufficient to show (1) that a current disability exists and (2) that the current disability was either (a) caused by or (b) aggravated by a service-connected disability. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(b); Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439 (1995). The United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit recently clarified that, as contemplated by 38 U.S.C. § 1110, secondary aggravation will be shown where a non-service-connected disability would have been less severe "but-for" a service-connected disability, either because there is an etiological link (to include worsening of functionality) between the two conditions, or because the service-connected disability resulted in the inability to treat the non-service-connected disability. See Spicer v. McDonough, 61 F.4th 1360 (Fed. Cir. 2023).

Pursuant to the Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxins Act of 2022 (PACT Act), when a veteran submits a claim for compensation for a service-connected disability together with, "evidence of a disability and evidence of participation in a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA) during active military ... service, and such evidence is not sufficient to establish a service connection for the disability, [VA] shall - (A) provide... a medical examination under section § 5103A(d) of this title; and (B) obtain a medical opinion (to be requested by the Secretary in connection with the medical examination under subparagraph (A)) as to whether it is at least as likely as not that there is a nexus between the disability and the [TERA]." 38 U.S.C. § 1168(a)(1).

Turning to the evidence, in a November 2023 TERA Memorandum, the AOJ determined that the Veteran's job duties while stationed with the 177th Det C in Korea included burning trash, exposing him to smoke and fumes. See November 2023 Other.

In a November 2023 opinion, a private provider, Dr. S.B., indicated that, in pertinent part, the Veteran had certain environmental exposures that at least as likely as not caused his hypertension and CKD. In the report, Dr. S.B. also opined that the Veteran's hypertension and CKD are secondary to diabetes mellitus type II. See November 2023 Medical Treatment Record - Non-Government Facility. The Board acknowledges that this report discussed a number of potential chemicals that to which the Veteran was exposed. Additionally, the medical literature referred to in the report to is not explicitly tied back to this particular Veteran; it is mostly generically cited. Finally, as explained below, the Board needs specific answers to certain questions in order to provide an accurate decision in this case as it has a duty to maximize benefits. Therefore, the Board declines to assess full probative value at this point in time.

The Veteran had a VA hypertension examination in December 2023, wherein a diagnosis of hypertension was confirmed. The Veteran reported that he started VA care in 2021, but was treated privately for hypertension in the early 1970s. He said that he has taken medication for hypertension since he was originally diagnosed. 

The Veteran also had a VA kidney examination in December 2023 and a diagnosis of CKD was confirmed as well. The Veteran again reported that he started VA care around 2021 and thought he was diagnosed with renal disease in approximately 2005. He stated that he is not on dialysis, but usually has back pain that he thinks is related to his kidneys. 

VA opinions were provided in December 2023. VA examiner A.D. determined that the Veteran's claimed hypertension and CKD are less likely than not related to TERA, such as smoke and smoke fumes from burning trash in Korea. The examiner explained that a nexus cannot be established because both disabilities were diagnosed post-service and there are no applicable presumptive qualifications identified. The examiner also determined that the Veteran's claimed hypertension is less likely than not proximately due to diabetes mellitus type II because hypertension was diagnosed prior to diabetes mellitus type II. Notably, the examiner reported that CKD is at least as likely as not proximately due to hypertension and diabetes mellitus type II because they both preceded CKD and they are the most common causes of CKD. The Board observes that as of the date of this decision, entitlement to service connection for diabetes mellitus type II remains denied, so the theory of secondary service connection is inapplicable. 

The Veteran received an additional VA examination December 2023 and a diagnosis of hypertension was confirmed. The Veteran reported that it began in the 1960s and he initially had shortness of breath, pulsations in the neck, lightheadedness, and nose bleeds. He was then started on antihypertensive medications, for which he still takes daily. 

He also received another VA examination in January 2024. He was diagnosed with CKD stage 2. The Veteran reported that a post-heart attack condition and resultant quadruple bypass resulted in impaired kidney functions being identified. He also reported lower back pain and said his doctors were trying to manage his hypertension and diabetes mellitus type II. 

A January 2024 addendum opinion from VA examiner S.P. determined that the Veteran's claimed hypertension is less likely than not related to TERA, including smoke and fumes from burning trash. See November 2023 Other. She indicated that she reviewed all exposure-related materials. It was explained that the Veteran has a history of peripheral vascular disease and noted risk factors of obesity, smoking, race, advanced age, and inactivity. The examiner suggested that all of these risk factors carry more weight in the progression of hypertension. Citations to medical literature were provided. 

Another January 2024 addendum opinion from VA examiner S.P. found that the Veteran's claimed CKD is less likely than not attributable to TERA, including smoke and fumes from burning trash. See November 2023 Other. She indicated that she reviewed all exposure-related materials. It was stated that the Veteran has a history of hypertension and diabetes mellitus type II, which both carry more weight than in-service exposures for the progression of CKD. Instead, the examiner pointed to other risk factors such as obesity, nephrotoxins, kidney stones, fetal and maternal exposures, infections, environmental exposures, and acute kidney injury as being increasingly recognized as threats to kidney health. Citations to medical literature were provided. 

An addendum opinion from VA examiner S.P. was provided in January 2024. She determined that the Veteran's claimed hypertension is less likely than not proximately due to diabetes mellitus type II. She reasoned that the Veteran has other likely risks factors such as a history of smoking, obesity, race, advanced age, inactivity, diet, and family history. Therefore, the sole cause of hypertension cannot be determined without resorting to speculation. Citations to medical literature were provided.  

Considering the above, the Board finds the above VA medical opinions to be at least partially inadequate for the purposes of determining service connection. See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 312 (2007) (holding that when VA undertakes to provide a VA examination or obtain a VA opinion, it must ensure that the examination or opinion is adequate). Specifically, the examiners provided conclusory remarks with limited rationale. Moreover, the VA TERA opinions were only for exposure to smoke and fumes from burning trash. See November 2023 Other. Notably, the Veteran has claimed additional TERA, including burn pits, diesel fumes from stoves, and fuel from cooking and heating oils, but there is no opinion concerning these potential exposures. Finally, the VA opinions did not discuss or refer to the private report from Dr. S.B. at all.

When the Board identifies a pre-decisional duty to assist error, under 38 U.S.C. § 5103A; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.159(c), 20.802(a), the Board must remand the appeal back to the AOJ with instructions to correct the error. Therefore, remand is needed for an addendum opinion.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Arrange for addendum opinions from a VA examiner of appropriate expertise to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's claimed hypertension and CKD, including TERA specific opinions. The examiner is to be provided access to the Veteran's electronic claims file and must specify in the report that these records have been reviewed.

Following a review of the full record, the examiner should respond to the following:

(a)	Is there an approximate balance of evidence (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's claimed hypertension and CKD had its onset during active-duty service or is otherwise related to any in-service disease, event, or injury, to include related to or otherwise caused by additional TERA? 

(b)	The examiner should discuss the total potential exposure through all applicable deployments; and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran. It should be noted that the Veteran claims that he was exposed to burn pits, diesel fumes from stoves, and fuel from cooking and heating oils. See August 2022 VA Form 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim (Compensation); July 2023 Hearing Transcript; November 2023 Medical Treatment Record - Non-Government Facility; and November 2023 VA 21-4138 Statement in Support of Claim.

The examiner should provide a complete rationale for any opinions expressed, based on the examiner's clinical experience, medical expertise, and established medical principles. If an opinion cannot be made without resort to speculation, the examiner should provide an explanation as to why this is so and note what, if any, additional evidence would permit such an opinion to be made. 

In offering any opinion, the examiner must consider the full record, to include the Veteran's lay statements of continuity of symptoms since service and may not disregard those statements merely because there was no treatment. 

The examiner should also address and reconcile any prior reports, including the November 2023 report from Dr. S.B., as well as any other pertinent evidence of record, as necessary.

 

 

Emily Tamlyn

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	M. Miller, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.