Citation Nr: A25032721
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240801-461686
DATE: April 9, 2025

ISSUES

1. Entitlement to an initial disability rating in excess of 50 percent for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD).

2. Entitlement to an initial disability rating in excess of 10 percent for left lower extremity (LLE) radiculopathy.

3. Entitlement to an initial disability rating in excess of 10 percent for right lower extremity (RLE) radiculopathy.

4. Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 10 percent for sinusitis.

5. Entitlement to service connection for frequent urinating.

ORDER

Entitlement to an initial disability rating in excess of 50 percent for PTSD is DENIED.

Entitlement to an initial disability rating in excess of 10 percent for LLE radiculopathy is DENIED.

Entitlement to an initial disability rating in excess of 10 percent for RLE radiculopathy is DENIED.

Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 10 percent for sinusitis is DENIED.

REMAND ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for frequent urinating is REMANDED.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. For the entire period on appeal, the severity, frequency, and duration of the Veteran's PTSD symptoms more closely approximate occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity. 

2. For the entire period on appeal, the Veteran's bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy was manifested by mild incomplete paralysis.  

3. For the entire period on appeal, the Veteran's sinusitis has been manifested by, at worst, six non-incapacitating episodes, characterized by pain, purulent discharge and crusting.  

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for entitlement to an initial disability rating in excess of 50 percent for PTSD have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.126, 4.130, Diagnostic Code (DC) 9411.

2. The criteria for entitlement to an initial disability rating in excess of 10 percent for LLE radiculopathy have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.321, 4.1, 4.3, 4.124a, DC 8520.

3. The criteria for entitlement to an initial disability rating in excess of 10 percent for RLE radiculopathy have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.321, 4.1, 4.3, 4.124a, DC 8520.

4. The criteria for entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 10 percent for sinusitis have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, DCs 6512-6513.

FACTUAL AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY

The Veteran served on active duty in the Armed Forces from June 1984 until September 2001. 

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from April and June 2024 rating decisions issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).  In the August 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the April and June 2024 RO decisions.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  If evidence was submitted during the period after the RO issued the decisions, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this Decision. 

The Board has reviewed all evidence of record regardless of whether it is discussed in detail in the Decision.  See Newhouse v. Nicholson, 497 F.3d 1298, 1302 (Fed. Cir. 2007) (holding the Board must only discuss the evidence which is relevant to the issues on appeal).

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

I. 

Legal Criteria - Increased Ratings

Ratings are based on a schedule of reductions in earning capacity from specific injuries or combination of injuries.  The ratings shall be based, as far as practicable upon the average impairments of earning capacity resulting from such injuries in civil occupations. 38 U.S.C. § 1155.  

Generally, the degrees of disability specified are considered adequate to compensate for considerable loss of working time from exacerbations or illnesses proportionate to the severity of the several grades of disability. 38 C.F.R. § § 4.1.  

Where there is a question as to which of two evaluations shall be applied, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating.  Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7. 

It is not expected, especially with the more fully described grades of disabilities, that all cases will show all the findings specified; findings sufficiently characteristic to identify the disease and the disability therefrom are sufficient; and above all, a coordination of rating with impairment of function will be expected in all cases.  38 C.F.R. § 4.21. 

In accordance with sections 4.1 and 4.2 of Title 38 of the Code of Federal Regulations and Schafrath v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 589 (1991), the Board has reviewed all evidence of record pertaining to the history of the Veteran's service-connected disability. 

The Board has found nothing in the historical record which would lead to the conclusion that the current evidence of record is not adequate for rating purposes. 

Additionally, when there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, the Secretary shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 4.3. 

In evaluating the severity of a particular disability, it is essential to consider its history.  38 C.F.R. § 4.1; Peyton v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 282 (1991).  Where entitlement to compensation has already been established and an increase in the disability rating is at issue, the present level of disability is of primary importance. Francisco v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 55, 58 (1994).  That said, higher evaluations may be assigned for separate periods based on the facts found during the appeal period.  Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119, 126 (1999).  This practice is known as staged ratings.  Id. 

II.

Analysis - PTSD 

The Veteran asserts that his service-connected PTSD is more severe than contemplated by the currently assigned 50 percent rating.  He has been granted a 50 percent rating for the entire period on appeal, beginning in December 2021.  

VA evaluates all psychiatric disorders under the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders provided in 38 C.F.R. § 4.130.  Under the General Formula for Mental Disorders, the Board must conduct a "holistic analysis" that considers all associated symptoms, regardless of whether they are listed as criteria.  Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 10, 22 (2017); 38 C.F.R. § 4.130.  The Board must determine whether unlisted symptoms are similar in severity, frequency, and duration to the listed symptoms associated with specific disability percentages.  Then, the Board must determine whether the associated symptoms, both listed and unlisted, caused the level of impairment required for a higher disability rating.  Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 114-118 (Fed. Cir. 2013).

Under the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders:

A 30 percent evaluation is warranted where the disorder is manifested by occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks (although generally functioning satisfactorily, with routine behavior, self-care, and conversation normal), due to such symptoms as: depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks (weekly or less often), chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss (such as forgetting names, directions, recent events).

A 50 percent rating is assigned for occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to such symptoms as: flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short-term and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships.

A 70 percent rating is warranted where there is occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, including work, school, family relationships, judgment, thinking or mood, due to such symptoms as suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant speech; near-continuous panic or depression affecting ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a work-like setting); and inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.

A 100 percent is warranted where there is total occupational and social impairment due to such symptoms as gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name.  Id.

Where there is a question as to which of two evaluations shall be applied, the higher evaluation will be assigned only if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating.  Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7.  

Turning to the evidence of record, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination in February 2022, and was diagnosed with adjustment disorder with anxiety and insomnia.  The Veteran reported that he had been married for 36 years, and that he had four children, citing extreme support from his wife.  He stated that he also had grandchildren living in his home.  He reported completing bachelor's and master's degrees, and post-service employment with various governmental agencies.  He denied taking any psychotropic drugs or receiving any behavioral therapy.  He denied any psychiatric hospitalizations or suicide attempts, drug or alcohol use, as well as any legal or behavioral problems. 

The Veteran reported symptoms of depression, anxiety, suspiciousness, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss, flattened affect, and disturbances of motivation and mood.  The examiner found that he was competent.  The examiner opined that the Veteran's psychiatric disorder manifested as occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.  

In April 2022, the Veteran was afforded another VA examination, and his diagnosis was changed to PTSD.  The Veteran reported that he noticed triggers for irritability worsening during the COVID-19 pandemic, with his family removing his firearms from the house.  He stated that he had recently traveled to India, but that smelling blood and death triggered him.  He stated that one time, his wife was trying to wake him up for work, and he slammed her down while having a nightmare related to the military.  The Veteran reported anger and irritability, sleep impairment, avoidance, difficulty relaxing, and anxiety.  He denied any suicidal or homicidal ideations.  He denied any drug or alcohol use as well as any legal or behavioral problems.  

The Veteran reported symptoms of depression, anxiety, suspiciousness, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss, disturbances of motivation and mood, and difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances.  The examiner noted that the Veteran was alert and oriented to all spheres, with normal speech, no suicidal or homicidal ideations, no evidence of a thought disorder, and that he was well groomed and dressed.  The examiner noted that the Veteran was engaging, pleasant, and a reliable historian.  The examiner found that he was competent.  The examiner opined that the Veteran's psychiatric disorder manifested as occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.  

In June 2022 VA treatment notes, the Veteran denied any hallucinations or psychosis.  In August 2023 VA treatment notes, the Veteran reported disturbing memories and dreams, avoidance, negative feelings, and loss of interest.  He reported feelings of anger and sadness, as well as anxiety prior to meeting new people.  In October 2023, the Veteran stated that his PTSD and mood was stable, and denied any homicidal or suicidal ideation.  In November 2023 VA treatment notes, the Veteran's provider noted that he had attended nine psychotherapy sessions between June 2023 and September 2023, which focused on trauma and trauma related therapy.  The examiner stated that the Veteran declined further treatment.  

In October 2023 private treatment notes, the Veteran was evaluated for anxiety.  He stated that his symptoms had worsened since he retired.  He stated that his anxiety and sleep impairment were worse, but denied any suicidal or homicidal ideation, panic attacks, manic episodes, or use of drugs or alcohol.  In November 2023 private treatment notes, the Veteran reported that his anxiety and depression were much improved after beginning medication.  He was negative for agitation, confusion, dysphoric moods, hallucinations, sleep disturbance, or suicidal ideas.  He was also found not to be nervous or anxious.  

In January 2024, the Veteran was afforded another VA examination.  He reported that people around him knew that he had changed recently, that he had started snapping at people, fighting people in his sleep, not sleeping well, not eating well, and that he had to get the weapons out of the home as a precaution.  He noted that he had recently begun medication and had noticed an improvement.  He denied any substance abuse, and legal or behavioral history.  

The examiner noted that the Veteran was casually dressed, and maintained adequate personal hygiene.  His speech was spontaneous but with normal rate and rhythm.  The Veteran denied any hallucinations or delusions, and no obsessions, compulsions, or phobias were detected.  His mood, affect, and thought processes were all normal.  The Veteran denied any homicidal or suicidal ideations, and he was oriented to person, time, and place.  The examiner found that he was competent.  The examiner opined that the Veteran's psychiatric disorder manifested as occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.  

For the entire period on appeal, the Veteran has been assigned a 50 percent rating for his PTSD.  He was afforded three VA examinations assessing the severity of his PTSD, and underwent counseling.  The Veteran experienced psychiatric symptoms as a result of his PTSD, such as: depressed mood; anxiety; suspiciousness; mild memory loss; chronic sleep impairment; and disturbances of motivation and mood.

The Veteran did not report issues in his marriage with his spouse of many years, was employed until retiring at high functioning jobs, traveled, and maintained relationships with his children and grandchildren.  He denied any psychiatric hospitalizations, but began trauma therapy.  He also denied legal issues, behavioral issues, or substance abuse.  He consistently denied any suicidal ideation, homicidal ideation, hallucinations, delusions, or obsessive behavior.  Each of the three evaluating providers found that his symptoms manifested as occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.  

Significant probative weight is assigned to the available VA examinations and the examiners' assessments of the impact of his mental health symptoms.  In this regard, the VA examinations were compiled by licensed professionals who reviewed the Veteran's claims file and conducted examinations of the Veteran.  During these examinations, the Veteran reported his symptoms, and the impact of them on his life.  Moreover, the assessments made by the VA examiners also align with the remainder of the medical evidence, which frequently showed the Veteran reporting similar symptoms, and improvement with medication.  

The Board has taken into consideration the frequency, severity, and duration of the Veteran's symptoms of his psychiatric illness during the period on appeal.  However, the symptoms presented here, and their resulting effects, do not rise to the level of the next higher rating for 70 percent. 

 After considering both the medical and lay evidence of record during this time period, the evidence weights persuasively against a finding that the Veteran's PTSD resulted in occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas symptoms during any period on appeal.  Thus, to this extent, the appeal is denied.

III.

Bilateral Lower Extremity Radiculopathy

The Veteran asserts that his service-connected bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy is more severe than contemplated by the currently assigned ratings.  Currently, he has been granted a 10 percent rating for each extremity for the entire period on appeal under DC 8520 for paralysis of the sciatic nerve.  

In accordance with the criteria set forth in 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8520, mild incomplete paralysis is rated as 10 percent disabling.  Moderate incomplete paralysis is rated as 20 percent disabling.  Moderately severe incomplete paralysis is rated as 40 percent disabling.  Severe incomplete paralysis, with marked muscular atrophy is rated as 60 percent disabling.  Complete paralysis, with the foot dangles and drops, no active movement possible of muscles below the knee, flexion of knee weakened or (very rarely) lost is rated as 80 percent disabling.  38 C.F.R. § 4.124a.

The words "mild," "moderate," and "severe" as used in the various Diagnostic Codes are not defined in the Rating Schedule.  So, the Board looks to the dictionary to give them their common ordinary meaning.  "Mild" means "gentle in nature," "not being or involving what is extreme" and "not severe."  See www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/mild.  "Moderate" means "tending toward the mean or average amount or dimension."  See www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/moderate.  "Severe" means "of a great degree."  See www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/severe.

Regulations provide that ratings for peripheral neurological disorders are to be assigned based the relative impairment of motor function, trophic changes, or sensory disturbance.  38 C.F.R. § 4.120.  Consideration is also given for loss of reflexes, pain, and muscle atrophy.  38 C.F.R. §§ 4.123, 4.124.

The term "incomplete paralysis" indicates a degree of lost or impaired function substantially less than the type of picture for complete paralysis given with each nerve, whether due to varied level of the nerve lesion or to partial regeneration.  When the involvement is wholly sensory, the rating is for the mild, or at most, the moderate degree.  The disability ratings for the peripheral nerves are for unilateral involvement; when bilateral, the ratings combine with application of the bilateral factor. 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Note at "Diseases of the Peripheral Nerves."  The Note to 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a establishes a maximum disability rating for conditions that are wholly sensory, as opposed to a minimum disability rating for conditions that are more than wholly sensory.  See Miller v. Shulkin, 28 Vet. App. 376 (2017).

Turning to the evidence, in October 2023 VA treatment notes, the Veteran was noted to have lumbar stenosis with bilateral sciatica and radiculopathy.  He stated that he experienced radiculopathy to his lower extremities which had been chronic for years.  In October 2023 private treatment notes, he denied any weakness or numbness.  In January 2024 VA treatment notes, he denied any weakness in extremities, as well as numbness and tingling.  

In May 2024, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination.  He reported having constant pain, along with numbness and paresthesias in his bilateral lower extremities, but with more severe pain on the right side.  He stated that he experienced shooting pain in his right lower extremity.  He also stated that he had lost control of his bladder intermittently during these severe pains, and that when he took Gabapentin, it did not help decrease his symptoms.  The Veteran stated that he treated his symptoms with muscle relaxers, lidocaine patches, and Tylenol.  He reported mild constant pain in both extremities, severe intermittent pain in his RLE, moderate intermittent pain in his LLE, and mild paresthesias and/or dysesthesias and numbness bilaterally.  

Muscle strength, sensory, and reflex testing was within normal limits bilaterally, and the Veteran did not have muscle atrophy.  He had no trophic changes, and his gait was normal.  Upon evaluation, the examiner found that the Veteran did not have paralysis of any lower extremity nerve, bilaterally.  The examiner clarified that the Veteran had mild bilateral pain in the lower extremities which was sometimes severe in the right and moderate in the left.  However, the examiner noted, that the Veteran's sciatic nerve motor function was intact at this time, despite his reports of mild to severe sensory deficits.  

Based on the above, the Board finds that for the entire period on appeal, a rating in excess of 10 percent is not warranted for the Veteran's bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy.  The Board assigns great probative weight to the May 2024 VA examination assessing the Veteran's bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy disorder.  The VA examination was compiled by a licensed professional who reviewed the Veteran's claims file and conducted an examination of the Veteran.  

During the examination, the Veteran reported his symptoms, and the impact of them on his life, and, despite finding no evidence of incomplete paralysis, the examiner properly considered the Veteran's statements regarding the impact of pain, numbness, and paresthesias on his daily life in making a determination that he did have mild sensory impairment.  Importantly, the assessments made by the VA examiner also align with the remainder of the medical evidence, which frequently showed the Veteran reporting similar symptoms, to specifically include pain, but without evidence of paralysis of any lower extremity nerve.  Thus, for the relevant period, the Board concludes that the Veteran's bilateral sciatic nerve impairment was manifested by, at worst, mild incomplete paralysis.  

All potentially applicable diagnostic codes have been considered, and there is no basis to assign an alternative evaluation.  See Schafrath, 1 Vet. App. at 593.

In conclusion, the Board finds that the evidence of record weighs persuasively against the Veteran's claim for an increased rating for bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy for any period during the relevant period on appeal.  As the evidence of record persuasively weighs against higher ratings, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021). The appeals are denied. 

VI.

Sinusitis 

The Veteran asserts that his service-connected sinusitis is more severe than contemplated by the currently assigned rating.  For the entire period on appeal, the Veteran's sinusitis has been rated as 10 percent disabling under DCs 6512-6513, for maxillary and frontal sinusitis.  

The General Rating Formula for sinusitis is listed at 38 C.F.R. § 4.97, Diagnostic Codes 6510-6514.  Under the General Rating Formula, a non-compensable rating is assigned where the condition is detected by X-ray only.  38 C.F.R. § 4.97, Diagnostic Codes 6510-6514.

A 10 percent rating is assigned where there are one or two incapacitating episodes per year of sinusitis, requiring prolonged (lasting four to six weeks) antibiotic treatment, or; three to six non-incapacitating episodes per year of sinusitis characterized by headaches, pain, and purulent discharge or crusting.  Id.  

A 30 percent rating is assigned when there are three or more incapacitating episodes per year of sinusitis requiring prolonged (lasting four to six weeks) antibiotic treatment, or more than six non-incapacitating episodes per year of sinusitis characterized by headaches, pain, and purulent discharge or crusting.  Id.

A 50 percent rating is assigned following radical surgery with chronic osteomyelitis, or near constant sinusitis characterized by headaches, pain and tenderness of affected sinus, and purulent discharge or crusting after repeated surgeries.  Id.

An incapacitating episode of sinusitis means one that requires bed rest and treatment by a physician.  38 C.F.R. § 4.97, Diagnostic Code 6513 at Note 1.

The criteria for rating sinusitis are conjunctive, meaning that each element of the criteria is needed to meet the requirements for the specified evaluation.  See Camacho v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 360 (2007); see also Melson v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 334 (1991) (use of the conjunctive "and" in a statutory provision means that all the conditions listed in the provision must be met).

Turning to the evidence, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination in February 2022.  He reported that he had chronic sinusitis, with an average of one to two sinus infections per year, requiring prolonged antibiotics.  He stated that since the onset of his sinusitis, it had worsened in severity and frequency.  He reported symptoms of phlegm, nasal congestion, facial tenderness, and sneezing, which he treated with Flonase nasal spray as needed.  

The examiner found that the Veteran had frontal and maxillary sinusitis, and that he had episodes of sinusitis with tenderness of the affected sinus.  The examiner found that the Veteran had not had any incapacitating, or non-incapacitating episodes of sinusitis in the preceding twelve months.  He also had not had any sinus surgery.  

In October 2023 VA treatment notes, the Veteran was treated for an episode of sinusitis.  He reported that he had three episodes this year, lasting about four to five days each, with fever and congestion.  He reported using Flonase and Claritin for treatment.  

In January 2024, the Veteran was afforded another VA examination.  He reported having recurrent sinus infections and persistent phlegm production which worsened in severity and frequency over the past year.  He stated that he had five or six sinus infections in 2023, with symptoms worsening over time.  He noted that he used a Neti pot and Flonase daily to treat his symptoms.  

The examiner found that the Veteran had episodes of sinusitis with pain of the affected sinus, purulent discharge, and crusting.  The examiner also noted that the Veteran had six episodes of non-incapacitating sinusitis in the past twelve months.  The examiner found that the Veteran had not had any incapacitating episodes of sinusitis requiring prolonged antibiotic treatment, or which required bed rest and treatment prescribed by a physician.  The Veteran had also not undergone any sinus surgery.  

Based on the foregoing, the Board finds that the Veteran's sinusitis does not warrant a rating in excess of 10 percent for any time during the period on appeal.  The Veteran's sinusitis has been manifested by, at worst, six non-incapacitating episodes characterized by pain and purulent discharge or crusting.  

A higher evaluation of 30 percent for sinusitis is not warranted unless the evidence shows three or more incapacitating episodes per year of sinusitis requiring prolonged (lasting four to six weeks) antibiotic treatment, or more than six non-incapacitating episodes per year of sinusitis characterized by headaches, pain, and purulent discharge or crusting.  In this regard, by the Veteran's own statements both in VA treatment notes and at VA examinations, he had experienced between five to six non-incapacitating episodes in the preceding year, which does not meet the criteria for a higher, thirty percent, rating. 

All potentially applicable diagnostic codes have been considered, and there is no basis to assign an alternative evaluation.  See Schafrath, 1 Vet. App. at 593.

In addition to the medical evidence above, the Board has considered the lay evidence in the form of the Veteran's statements.  A layperson is competent to testify regarding the onset and continuity of symptomatology.  Heuer v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 379 (1995); Falzone v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 398 (1995); Caldwell v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 466 (1991).  However, even affording the Veteran full competence and credibility, the statements do not show impairment more closely approximating the criteria for a higher rating. 

For the foregoing reasons, the Board finds that the evidence is persuasively against awarding a higher rating for the Veteran's sinusitis.  In denying such a rating, the Board finds that the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine is not applicable.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7.  As such, the claim is denied.

REASONS FOR REMAND

VII.

Frequent Urinating 

The Veteran has been diagnosed with an overactive bladder, which he asserts, is secondary to his service-connected PTSD.  

During the pendency of the appeal, the law of secondary service connection changed materially.   The regulations adopted after, and because of, Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439 (1995) (en banc), provide that service connection may be granted on a secondary basis for a disability which is proximately due to, or the result of, a service-connected disease or injury.  38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a).  And that secondary service connection may be granted for aggravation of a disease or injury by a service-connected disability.  Id. § 3.310(b).  

The United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit (Federal Circuit) had recent occasion to consider matters relevant to the instant case and their holding illuminates the Board's way (and the RO's on remand). 

In Spicer v. McDonough, 61 F.4th 1360 (Fed. Cir. 2023), the Federal Circuit held that: 

§ 1110 [of Title 38 of the United States Code] plainly requires compensation when a service-connected disease or injury is a but-for cause[ ] of a present-day disability.  This broad language applies to the natural progression of a condition not caused by a service-connected injury or disease, but that nonetheless would have been less severe were it not for the service-connected disability.  Stated another way, § 1110 provides for compensation for a worsening of functionality-whether through an inability to treat or a more direct, etiological cause.  Nothing in the statute limits § 1110 to onset or etiological causes of a worsening in functionality.  

Id. at 1364 (alterations added).  

The Federal Circuit concluded the causation standard "proximately due to" under section 3.310(b) of the regulations is inconsistent with section 1110 of the statute and, therefore "unlawful."  Consequently, for "aggravation of non-service-connected disabilities" it is enough to show that "but-for" the service-connected disability the incremental increase in severity of a nonservice-connected disease or injury would not have occurred.  Id. at 1364-66.

Here, the record contains two etiological opinions for the Veteran's overactive bladder.  In May 2024, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination and the examiner opined that it was less likely than not that the Veteran's overactive bladder was proximately due to, or caused by, his service-connected PTSD.  The examiner reasoned that there were no reliable medical studies which indicated that PTSD had any impact on the functionality of the bladder and urination.  

In July 2024, an addendum opinion was obtained.  The examiner opined that it was less likely than not that the Veteran's overactive bladder was caused by any toxic exposures during service, considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments.  The examiner reasoned that the Veteran's exposure to burn pits in Iraq, through inhalation, made it less likely related to any issues with frequent urination.  The examiner cited to medical literature showing that overactive bladder happened when the muscles of the bladder started to tighten on their own even when the amount of urine in the bladder is low.  

After careful review, the Board concludes that the May 2024 VA opinion in the record did not address the correct legal standards and the holding in Spicer.  61 F.4th at 1364-66.  The May 2024 VA opinion used the proximate cause standard from the previously controlling regulation, now struck down by the Spicer court.  Accordingly, the Board finds that this opinion is inadequate because it is premised upon a standard which has departed the firmament; that is to say, it is no longer good law.  

And, so, the claims are remanded for new VA medical opinions in accord with the holding in Spicer.   Id.

The matter is REMANDED for the following actions:

1. Obtain an addendum opinion to assess the nature and etiology of the Veteran's overactive bladder.  The entire claims file should be made available to, and reviewed by, the examiner.  Another VA examination(s) should not be scheduled unless deemed necessary by the examiner.  Following a review of the record, the clinician is asked to address the following:

(a.) Whether the Veteran's service-connected disabilities, to specifically include his psychiatric disorder, are at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) a "but-for" cause (caused an increase in the severity of, or an inability to treat) of the Veteran's overactive bladder. 

That is, would the Veteran's overactive bladder disorder have been less severe "but for" the service-connected disability, either because there is an etiological link or because the condition resulted in the inability to treat the overactive bladder disability.  Spicer, 61 F.4th at 1364-66.

The clinician is advised there is no temporal requirement to secondary service connection.  In other words, the mere fact that one disorder was diagnosed before the other cannot be the sole reason for a negative opinion.  

In considering any lay statements of record, the clinician should note that the Veteran is competent to attest to matters of which he had first-hand knowledge, including observable symptomatology.  If there is a medical basis to support or doubt the history provided by the Veteran, the clinician should provide a fully reasoned explanation.

If medical literature is relied upon, the clinician should identify and specifically cite each reference material used.  The clinician should specifically discuss any contradictory evidence in the claims file and reconcile that evidence with their findings.

All opinions should be accompanied by a thorough supporting rationale explaining how the clinician arrived at the conclusions expressed. 

If the clinician determines that they cannot provide an opinion without resorting to speculation, the clinician should explain the inability to provide an opinion, identifying precisely what facts could not be determined.  

They should comment on whether an opinion could not be provided because the limits of medical knowledge have been exhausted or whether additional testing or information could be obtained that would lead to a conclusive opinion.

 

 

STEVEN V. ADLER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	M. Yacoub, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.