Citation Nr: A25032507
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240927-475398
DATE: April 8, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to a disability rating of 70 percent, but no more, for other trauma and stressor related disorder is granted on and after October 3, 2023, subject to the laws and regulations governing the payment of monetary benefits.  

FINDING OF FACT

Throughout the period on appeal, the Veteran's other trauma and stressor related disorder has been manifested by occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, but not total occupational and total social impairment.  

CONCLUSION OF LAW

With resolution of reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, on and after October 3, 2023, the criteria for a disability rating of 70 percent, but no higher, for other trauma and stressor related disorder have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.1-4.14, 4.21, 4.126, 4.130, Diagnostic Codes 9499-9411.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the Army from May 1968 to March 1971, including service in the Vietnam War.

The rating decision on appeal was issued in February 2024 and constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.

In the September 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Hearing docket.  On December 11, 2024, the Veteran withdrew the hearing request.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the February 2024 Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or attorney within 90 days following receipt of the withdrawal of the hearing request.  38 C.F.R. § 20.302(b).  If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal and prior to receipt of the withdrawal, or (2) more than 90 days following receipt of the withdrawal, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.302(b), 20.801. 

Evidence was added to the claims file between the Notice of Disagreement and the withdrawal of the hearing, which was during a period of time when new evidence was not allowed, but then resubmitted within 90 days after the withdrawal of the hearing, which is an applicable evidentiary window.  

Neither the Veteran nor his attorney have raised any issue with the duty to notify or duty to assist with regard to the issue being decided on the merits below that occurred prior to the decision on appeal.  See Scott v. McDonald, 789 F.3d 1375, 1381 (Fed. Cir. 2015) (holding that "the Board's obligation to read filings in a liberal manner does not require the Board... to search the record and address procedural arguments when the veteran fails to raise them before the Board."); Dickens v. McDonald, 814 F.3d 1359, 1361 (Fed. Cir. 2016) (applying Scott to a duty to assist argument).

1. Other Trauma and Stressor Related Disorder

The Veteran contends that his other trauma and stressor related disorder warrants a higher rating than that currently assigned.  It is currently rated under 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, Diagnostic Codes 9499-9411, with a 10 percent rating from May 23, 2008 to February 28, 2012 and a 30 percent rating on and after February 29, 2012.  VA received the Veteran's claim for an increased rating on October 3, 2023.    

Disability ratings are determined by applying a schedule of ratings that is based on average impairment of earning capacity.  Separate Diagnostic Codes identify the various disabilities. 38?U.S.C. §?1155; 38?C.F.R. Part 4.  Each disability must be viewed in relation to its history and the limitation of activity imposed by the disabling condition should be emphasized. 38?C.F.R. §?4.1. 

"Staged" ratings are appropriate for an increased rating claim when the factual findings show distinct time periods where the service-connected disability exhibits symptoms that would warrant different ratings. Hart v. Mansfield, 21?Vet. App.?505 (2007).  When entitlement to compensation has already been established and an increased rating is at issue, the relevant temporal focus for adjudicating an increased rating claim is on the evidence concerning the state of the disability from the time period one year before the claim was filed.??Hart,?at 509;?see also?38?U.S.C. §?5110(b)(3);?38?C.F.R. §?3.400(o)(2).?? 

Where there is a question as to which of two disability evaluations shall be applied, the higher evaluation is to be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating.  Otherwise, the lower rating is to be assigned. 38?C.F.R. §?4.7. 

Hyphenated diagnostic codes are used when a rating under one Diagnostic Code requires use of an additional Diagnostic Code to identify the basis for the evaluation assigned; the additional code is shown after the hyphen.  38 C.F.R. § 4.27.  The Diagnostic Code ending in "99" indicates the disability is rated by analogy to Diagnostic Code 9411, which pertains to posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD).

Under 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, psychiatric impairment is rated under the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders. 38 C.F.R. § 4.130 provides that a 30 percent rating is warranted for occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks (although generally functioning satisfactorily, with routine behavior, self-care, and conversation normal), due to such symptoms as depressed mood; anxiety; suspiciousness; panic attacks (weekly or less often); chronic sleep impairment; and mild memory loss (such as forgetting names, directions, recent events).  38 C.F.R. § 4.130.

A 50 percent rating is warranted for occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to such symptoms as flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short- and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbance of motivation and mood; and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships.  Id.

A 70 percent evaluation is warranted for occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately, and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful situations (including work or a worklike setting); and inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.  Id. 

A 100 percent rating is in order when there is total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; and memory loss for names of close relatives, occupation, or own name.  Id. 

When evaluating a mental disorder, VA must consider the frequency, severity, and duration of psychiatric symptoms, the length of remissions, and the claimant's capacity for adjustment during periods of remission.  See Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112 (Fed. Cir. 2013).  VA shall assign an evaluation based on all the evidence of record that bears on occupational and social impairment rather than solely on the examiner's assessment of the level of disability at the moment of the examination.  38 C.F.R. § 4.126 (a).  When evaluating the level of disability from a mental disorder, VA will consider the extent of social impairment, but shall not assign an evaluation solely on the basis of social impairment.  38 C.F.R. § 4.126 (b). 

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination by a psychiatrist in October 2023.  The clinician diagnosed other trauma and stressor related disorder.  The Veteran reported continuing to live with his wife and that she provided as much support as she was able to, including pointing out when his symptoms were worsening or when she noticed some breakthrough anxiety or irritability.  He added that he tried not to get easily irritated and tended to avoid interactions that might lead to that.  He reported continuing to work on his cattle farm but that he would like to be able to stop.  He also reported continuing to grieve for his adult son, who died the previous year.  He reported continued anxiety, depression, sleep disturbances, avoidant behavior, invasive memories, and hypervigilance.  He also reported some irritability at times but that he tended to keep to his farm and his wife outside of attending religious services.  

The psychiatrist listed the Veteran's symptoms for rating purposes as depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss, and difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances.  On examination, he was appropriately dressed and groomed, he was without any psychomotor agitation or retardation, his speech was within normal limits with regard to rate, rhythm, and volume, his mood was somewhat anxious/depressed and his affect was congruent, his thought process was within normal limits, his thought content was without any suicidal or homicidal ideation or any delusions, phobias, obsessions, or compulsions, there was no evidence of hallucinations, his orientation was intact to person, place, and time, his memory appeared intact but with subjective concerns noted, his concentration appeared normal, and his insight, judgment, and impulse control were good.   The psychiatrist characterized the Veteran's overall level of occupational and social impairment as occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks, which is consistent with a 30 percent rating.  

The Veteran was afforded an additional VA examination by the same psychiatrist in October 2024 (although this was outside of the period the Board may consider, because his attorney submitted a copy of the examination report within 90 days after withdrawing the request for a hearing, it is part of the record before the Board).  The clinician diagnosed other trauma and stressor related disorder.  The Veteran reported no changes in his social, family, or occupational circumstances since previous VA examination.  

The psychiatrist listed the Veteran's symptoms for rating purposes as depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks more than once a week, chronic sleep impairment, impairment of short and long term memory, circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech, difficulty in understanding complex commands, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities, impaired impulse control, and intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living.  

On examination, his grooming, attire, and overall appearance were unremarkable and he was alert and cooperative.  He appeared to the psychiatrist to be a reliable historian.  The psychiatrist characterized the Veteran's overall level of occupational and social impairment as total occupational and social impairment, which is consistent with a 100 percent rating.  

Based on the evidence described above, the Board finds that, affording the Veteran the benefit of the doubt, his psychiatric symptoms and overall disability picture warrant an evaluation of 70 percent for other trauma and stressor related disorder throughout the period on appeal.  During that period, the record contains evidence of obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities, impaired impulse control, and difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances.  For these reasons, the Board finds that Veteran's symptoms most nearly approximate those that warrant a 70 percent rating throughout the period on appeal.  38 C.F.R. §§ 4.7, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411.  

The Board does not, however, find the criteria for a 100 percent evaluation are more nearly approximated by the Veteran's symptoms at any point during the period on appeal.  The record contains evidence of intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living, which is listed in the criteria for a 100 percent rating, However, even the constant presence of some symptoms listed in the criteria for a 100 percent rating would be insufficient because the overall guiding criterion for a 100 percent rating is that both total occupational and total social impairment be present.  38 C.F.R. § 4.130; see, e.g., Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 117 (Fed. Cir. 2013).  

In this case, the Veteran's symptoms have not been shown to be so severe that he has both total occupational and total social impairment.  "Total" is defined as "whole, not divided; full; complete," and "utter, absolute."  Black's Law Dictionary, 1498 (7th ed. 1999).   Neither total social nor total occupational impairment are shown.  Despite the October 2024 examiner's finding of total occupational and social impairment, the Veteran has continued to work on his cattle farm and has been able to maintain some personal relationships, specifically with his spouse.  The Board acknowledges that these relationships are sometimes strained or distant, but that is reflected in the current 70 percent rating for "deficiencies in most areas," the criteria for which include inability to establish and maintain effective relationships and difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances including work or a worklike setting.  Because the Veteran is not totally socially or occupationally impaired, a 100 percent rating is not warranted.  

The Board also notes that many of the Veteran's reported symptoms throughout the period on appeal are included among those specifically contemplated in the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders, pursuant to which a 70 percent disability rating has been assigned.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.130.  Importantly, the Board notes that symptoms noted in the rating schedule are not intended to constitute an exhaustive list, but rather are to serve as examples of the type and degree of the symptoms, or their effects, that would justify a particular disability rating.  See Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436 (2002).  In other words, symptoms comparable to those listed in the General Rating Formula could be considered in evaluating the Veteran's extent of occupational and social impairment. 

Accordingly, the existence and severity of the Veteran's psychiatric symptoms are adequately contemplated by the 70 percent rating criteria.  As noted above, many of the symptoms are specifically listed in the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders, and the others are common psychiatric symptoms that-while not specifically listed-are comparable indicators of the type of occupational and social impairment contemplated in the Rating Formula.

(Continued on the next page)

?

The Board has also considered the Veteran's assertions, which he is competent to provide.  See Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 470 (1994).  The lay evidence is also credible.  The symptoms described in those lay statements comport with the 70 percent rating that has now been assigned.  However, these lay statements do not provide any basis upon which to assign a higher rating because they do not reflect total social or total occupational impairment.  In sum, the Board finds that, resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, his impairment due to other trauma and stressor related disorder has been most consistent with a 70 percent disability rating throughout the period on appeal.

 

 

D. Martz Ames

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	R. Frank, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.