Citation Nr: A25032798
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 211130-200959
DATE: April 9, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include adjustment disorder with anxious and depressed mood (claimed as post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD)), is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder resulted from events that occurred during his active military service. 

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder have been met. 38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303. 

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Air Force from October 1968 to March 1972, to include Vietnam War Era service. 

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an August 2021 rating decision. 

In March 2021 the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher Level Review (HLR) and requested review of the March 2021 rating decision. In June 2021, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) concluded there was a duty to assist error as a VA medical examination was needed and transferred the claim to the supplemental claim decision review option for additional development. In August 2021 the AOJ issued the supplemental claim rating decision on appeal, which considered the evidence of record at the time of that decision and denied the claim. 

In the November 2021 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Evidence docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the August 2021 AOJ decision, 38 C.F.R. § 20.301, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or his representative with the Notice of Disagreement or within 90 days following receipt of the Notice of Disagreement. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300(a), 303. If additional evidence was submitted between the dates of the AOJ decision and VA's receipt of the Notice of Disagreement, the Board will not consider it unless it is resubmitted during the 90 days following VA's receipt of the Notice of Disagreement. If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision addressing the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Law and Analysis

As a preliminary matter, the Board notes that in the August 2021 rating decision, the AOJ made the favorable finding that the evidence shows a qualifying event, injury, or disease had its onset during service as exposure to stressful circumstances during Vietnam War military service is conceded. Findings identified as favorable in an AOJ decision are binding on subsequent adjudicators, including the Board. 38 U.S.C. § 5104(b)(4); 5104A; 38 C.F.R. § 20.801(a). Favorable findings can only be rebutted by evidence that identifies a clear and unmistakable error in the favorable finding. 38 C.F.R. § 20.801(a).  

Service connection will be granted for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service. 38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a). Service connection requires evidence showing: (1) the existence of a present disability; (2) an in-service occurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury during service. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

Service connection for PTSD requires medical evidence diagnosing the condition in accordance with 38 C.F.R. § 4.125(a); a link, established by medical evidence, between current symptoms and an in-service stressor; and credible evidence that the claimed in-service stressor occurred. 38 C.F.R. § 3.304(f).

A mental disorder diagnosis must conform to the Fourth Edition of the American Psychiatric Association's Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-IV), or for claims received by or pending before the AOJ on or after August 4, 2014, the DSM-5 (Fifth Edition). See 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.125, 4.130; 79 Fed. Reg. 45093 (Aug. 4, 2014). In this case, the Veteran's claim was certified to the Board in November 2021, therefore, the regulations pertaining to DSM-5 are for application. 

If the evidence establishes that a Veteran engaged in combat with the enemy and the claimed stressor is related to that combat, in the absence of clear and convincing evidence to the contrary and provided that the claimed stressor is consistent with the circumstances, conditions, or hardships of that Veteran's service, the Veteran's lay testimony alone may establish the occurrence of the claimed in-service stressor. 38 C.F.R. § 3.304(f)(2).

Effective July 13, 2010, if a stressor claimed by a Veteran is related to that Veteran's fear of hostile military or terrorist activity and a VA psychiatrist or psychologist, or a psychiatrist or psychologist with whom VA has contracted, confirms that the claimed stressor is adequate to support a diagnosis of PTSD and that a Veteran's symptoms are related to the claimed stressor, in the absence of clear and convincing evidence to the contrary, and provided the claimed stressor is consistent with the places, types, and circumstances of that Veteran's service, a Veteran's lay testimony alone may establish the occurrence of the claimed in-service stressor. 38 C.F.R. § 3.304(f)(3). 

"[F]ear of hostile military or terrorist activity" means that a Veteran experienced, witnessed, or was confronted with an event or circumstance that involved actual or threatened death or serious injury, or a threat to the physical integrity of the Veteran or others, such as from an actual or potential improvised explosive device; vehicle-imbedded explosive device; incoming artillery, rocket, or mortar fire; grenade; small arms fire, including suspected sniper fire; or attack upon friendly military aircraft, and the Veteran's response to the event or circumstance involved a psychological or psycho-physiological state of fear, helplessness, or horror. See id. 

If a claimed stressor is not related to combat or fear of hostile military activity, then a Veteran's lay statements, alone, would not be sufficient to establish the occurrence of the alleged stressor; rather, corroborating evidence would be needed to support the claim for service connection. See Cohen v. Brown, 10 Vet. App. 128, 147 (1997); Moreau v. Brown, 9 Vet. App. 389, 395-396 (1996). 

The Board notes the Veteran's claimed acquired psychiatric disorder has been characterized throughout the appeal period as depression, anxiety, adjustment disorder with depressed and anxious mood, other specified trauma and stress related disorder, mood disorder secondary to medical condition, and PTSD. In light of the evidence of record, the Board has recharacterized the issue more broadly to include any acquired psychiatric disorder. See Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1 (2009).

Acquired Psychiatric Disorder

The Veteran contends his acquired psychiatric disorder is caused by his military service, specifically stressors he experienced while in Vietnam. See November 2016 VA Form 21-0781 Statement in Support of Claim for Service Connection for Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD).

In a May 2022 Informal Hearing Presentation (IHP) brief, the Veteran's representative argued the Veteran meets the criteria for adjustment disorder with depressed mood based on a diagnosis in a June 2017 medical record, which included a statement that the Veteran continued to have adjustment issues leading back to service. The representative also stated that the Veteran's mood disorder is secondary to his multiple service-connected disabilities as these health issues affect mood and depression. See May 2022 American Legion IHP.

In considering the evidence of record under the laws and regulations as set forth above, the Board concludes the Veteran is entitled to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder on a direct basis. Given the favorable outcome granting the Veteran's claim for entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder on a direct basis, further discussion of the Veteran's other theory of secondary service connection is not necessary.

The Veteran first reported symptoms of an acquired psychiatric disorder in April 2014 when he sought treatment regarding night sweats, biting his nails, and mood issues. His primary care provider stated the Veteran had all the symptoms of PTSD including avoidance, withdrawal, and night sweats and referred the Veteran to the mental health clinic for a diagnosis and prescribed the medication Zoloft. In a May 2014 VA Mental Health Clinic record the Veteran reported a long history of sleep difficulties and occasional nightmares about Vietnam. He reported symptoms of depression, anxiety, difficulties with crowds, nightmares, sleep difficulties, and frustration. He was diagnosed with adjustment disorder with depressed and anxious mood. See April and May 2014 New Orleans BROPC Medical Records.  

A June 2014 VA medical examination followed where the examiner found the Veteran did not have a diagnosis of PTSD or any other mental disorder that conformed to the DSM-5 criteria for diagnosis. The examiner noted the Veteran had not sought mental health treatment until April 2014 after he retired. The Veteran reported three stressors from military service. First, that he came under enemy fire when on board an aircraft and that the auxiliary fuel tank began to leak, and he worried the tank would explode and that he feared for his life. The examiner found this stressor met Criterion A as adequate to support a diagnosis of PTSD and that it was related to the Veteran's fear of hostile military or terrorist activity. Second, that a mortar landed near his barracks during the night while he slept, and although it did not explode, he learned about it the next day. The examiner found this stressor, while related to a fear of hostile military or terrorist activity did not meet Criterion A to support a diagnosis of PTSD. Third, the Veteran reported that an ammunition depot was hit by enemy fire approximately one-half mile from the Veteran and that no one was hurt to his knowledge. The examiner found this stressor, while related to a fear of hostile military or terrorist activity did not meet Criterion A to support a diagnosis of PTSD. The examiner found the Veteran did not meet any of the other criteria for a diagnosis of PTSD other than Criterion A. The Veteran completed the Beck Depression Inventory test, which found he had a minimal level of depression, the Combat Exposure Scale, which found he had a moderate level of combat exposure, and the PTSD Checklist for DSM-5, which was suggestive of clinically significant PTSD. The examiner found however that upon follow-up questioning the Veteran's interpretation of the questions led to an over endorsement of symptoms. As an example, the examiner noted the Veteran endorsed engaging in risky behavior but associated this with his wife telling him he was a bad driver. The examiner found this symptom was not consistent with PTSD-related risky behavior and concluded the Veteran's score likely over-represented the extent and degree of his PTSD symptomatology. The examiner found the Veteran was only experiencing minimal symptoms of depression and that his symptoms of intrusive memories related to Vietnam were no more than once per month and did not cause clinically significant distress or impairment, which did not rise to meet the threshold for Criterion B symptoms of PTSD. Further inquiry of the Veteran demonstrated he did not meet the criteria for avoidance, negative cognitions or mood, and alterations in arousal related to his identified military stressors. The examiner concluded it was not unusual for Veterans to experience an increase in PTSD symptomatology after retirement, and that although he did not meet the criteria for a mental disorder, it was possible that his symptoms may exacerbate with time. The examiner stated that the Veteran's current concerns about his life were best characterized under DSM-5 as a phase of life problem and relationship distress with spouse or intimate partner and were not mental disorders but instead reflected concerns or sources of distress in the Veteran's social environment. See June 2014 VA Initial Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) Disability Benefits Questionnaire. 

In a February 2015 Mental Health Clinic record the Veteran reported his syndrome of emotional distress began following his service in Vietnam. In a May 2015 Mental Health Clinic record the Veteran stated he had been having sleep problems since 1972 when he got out of service. He also stated that after leaving service he noticed he felt unconformable in crowds and was at times easily startled. He further reported he did not seek treatment until he retired because he did not know about the VA and that his symptoms became more prominent after he stopped working. He was found to have symptoms of anxiety due to past and current stressors in his life, and that his anxiety disorder began after the military and was aggravated by his current marital discord. The provider found that although the criteria for PTSD was not met, the origin of the Veteran's anxiety disorder was more likely than not related to the military. The Veteran was diagnosed with other specified trauma and stress related disorder and adjustment disorder with depressed mood. See February 2015 New Orleans BROPC Psychiatry Note. 

The Veteran next underwent a VA medical examination in November 2015. When answering the question of whether the Veteran now has or had ever been diagnosed with a mental disorder the examiner selected "no." The examiner was asked to consider whether the Veteran met the criteria for a mental disorder secondary to diabetes. The examiner noted that during a psychiatric intake Dr. C. (initials used to protect privacy) described the Veteran as a noncombat Veteran who gave a well-rehearsed history suggestive of PTSD, and that he prevented full disclosure with balking and incomplete answers. Dr. C. found there was no objective evidence the Veteran had served in combat or had impaired job performance or socialization. He was noted to be retired, financially stable, and pursuing his hobbies with impaired ability to relate to females with two divorces. Dr. C. noted the Veteran's diagnosis of adjustment disorder in February 2015 but found there was no noted stressor regarding maladjustment documented in the treatment note and diabetes was not mentioned. He also noted a May 2015 medical record which reported the Veteran's stressor was due to separation from his wife. The examiner found there was no evidence of psychiatric distress related to his diabetes diagnosis and the only distress noted was that of his separation from his wife and chronic sleep complaints since service. The Veteran reported symptoms of sleep impairment, irritability, depressed mood, worries about his health, anxiety, memory issues, and panic attacks. The examiner noted the additional symptoms of chewing nails, waking to urinate and sweating at night, and irritability with spouse. The examiner concluded the Veteran had two issues: one was a phase of life problem with adjusting to retirement including long term anxiety, which the Veteran reported as nerves from the military, the second was a chronic history of irritability and sleep problems. The examiner concluded that the Veteran's complaints were noted but they did not meet the threshold for a mental disorder diagnosis based on DSM-5. See November 2015 Mental Disorders Disability Benefits Questionnaire. 

A November 2015 Mental Health Clinic record noted mood disorder secondary to medical condition, PTSD, and anxiety disorder. See November 2015 New Orleans BROPC Psychiatry Note.

In a November 2016 statement, the Veteran described two incidents in Vietnam and how, "[s]ome days and nights I feel like I'm back at that moment and that it [is] happening all over again." See November 2016 VA Form 21-0781, Statement in Support of Claim for Service Connection for Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD). 

A July 2017 Mental Health Clinic record noted the Veteran's report of symptoms of depression after seeing a news story about a C-130 airplane going down. The Veteran stated his depression is triggered when he hears of events like the C-130 crash and when he has limitations due to his diabetes. During a depression screening the Veteran scored a "4" which was a positive screen for depression. He reported little interest in doing things more than half the days and feeling down, depressed, or hopeless more than half the days. See July 2017 New Orleans BROPC Psychiatry Note.

A July 2017 VA medical examination found the Veteran did not have a diagnosis of PTSD or any other mental disorder that met the DSM-5 criteria. The Veteran reported chronic irritability with his wife and daughter but did not report issues at work. He said he felt occasional sadness when thinking about his deceased sister or soldiers who did not make it home from Vietnam. The examiner noted the Veteran had been evaluated by three other examiners for VA medical examinations and none resulted in a mental health diagnosis. The examiner noted the Veteran's complaints of irritability but found the Veteran's symptoms did not rise to threshold required for a mental disorder diagnosis. See July 2017 VA Initial Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) Disability Benefits Questionnaire. 

In a November 2017 Mental Health Clinic record the Veteran was found to continue to meet the criteria for anxiety and sleep disorder to include depressive symptoms due to medical issues. The Veteran's restless leg due to anxiety was noted as well as his feelings of nervousness and intermittent sadness due to sleep issues at night and recalling times in service, which occurred several times per week. See November 2017 Baton Rouge South VA Clinic Psychiatry Record. 

In a February 2018 Mental Health Clinic record the Veteran recalled several stressful events from being stationed in Vietnam. In an August 2018 psychological assessment, the Veteran's symptoms were noted including nightmares, reactivity to reminders of the war, avoidance of reminders of the war, emotional numbing, feelings of detachment from others, and extreme irritability. The Veteran stated, "I have not been the same since I got back from Vietnam...I get down and I am nervous at times." The Veteran also reported symptoms due to anxiety such as panic, sleep problems, shortness of breath, heart palpitations, and others. The Veteran's diagnoses of PTSD, anxiety disorder, and adjustment disorder with mood were noted and the Veteran was found to continue to show symptoms consistent with these diagnoses. February and August 2018 Baton Rouge South VA Clinic Records.

The Veteran submitted a lay statement from his daughter C.L. (initials used to protect privacy) wherein she described her father as a "nervous wreck" and that when he visits her, he constantly checks the house doors and windows to see if they are locked. She also reported he gets very anxious and nervous when her children are playing outside and that when he watches television his mind wanders off. C.L. said the Veteran used to be full of energy but was now always depressed and distant and that it appeared to her that he has PTSD because any noise he hears triggers false alarm sounds. She reported the Veteran said being part of the military messed with his mind because he hates noise, and it brings back memories of gun shots from the Air Force and that he reported nightmares about seeing dead Airmen. See February 2021 Lay Statement from C.L. 

The Veteran also submitted a lay statement from his wife B.L. (initials used to protect privacy) where she reported knowing the Veteran for the past 40 years and that the past ten years have been different. She stated that he has been very distant, having mood swings, and has stated he feels depressed. She said he reported being shot at in 1969 when he was in the 39th Rescue and Recovery squad. B.L. further stated in her opinion the Veteran suffered from severe PTSD, depression, and anxiety and that he is long overdue for medication and needs help because she cannot continue to deal with his situation much longer. See February 2021 Lay Statement from B.L. 

The Veteran's November 2019 VA treatment records show the Veteran was found to have PTSD and depression as evidenced by his reported depressive symptoms such as dysphoric mood, tearfulness, anhedonia, anxiety, diminished interest, and concentration difficulties among others. He was noted to have intrusive thoughts evidenced by statements involving being stationed in Vietnam as well as nightmares and flashbacks. The Veteran's insomnia was also noted. See November 2019 Baton Rouge South VA Clinic Records.

In the Veteran's June 2021 Higher Level Review informal conference, the Veteran stated he was in Vietnam 49 years ago and that he had missions where he rescued people and was shot at and feels his current mental condition is due to what he had to go through in Vietnam. He also stated he keeps everything to himself, and he feels this caused his three failed marriages. See June 2021 HLR Informal Conference Worksheet. 

In July 2021 the Veteran was afforded an additional VA medical examination. The examiner found the Veteran was not currently diagnosed with a mental disorder and selected "no" when asked whether the Veteran had ever been diagnosed with a mental disorder. The examiner noted the Veteran's medical records were reviewed and found the Veteran endorsed some intermittent depression symptoms occurring a "couple hours in a day." The examiner further noted the Veteran denied that his symptoms occurred more days than not and that the symptoms did not impact his psychosocial functioning. The Veteran denied having any current treatment for behavioral health concerns and denied any past suicide attempts or hospitalizations. The examiner reported the Veteran stated he bit his fingernails since leaving the military and endorsed sleep disruption, waking up three or four times during the night. The Veteran reported some of this was due to using the restroom but also noted a history of working night shifts, which the examiner found could also account for his sleep concerns. The examiner found the Veteran did endorse experiencing some traumatic events that met the criteria for Category A of a PTSD diagnosis however he did not meet the full criteria for this diagnosis. The Veteran reported he did not like to talk about things and stated that he thought his guarded behavior contributed to his three divorces. The examiner found the Veteran did not have a current metal disorder diagnosis that met the DSM-5 criteria and concluded the Veteran's claimed condition was less likely than not incurred in or caused by his military service. July 2021 VA Mental Disorders Disability Benefits Questionnaire and Opinion. 

The Board finds the Veteran's VA treatment records, particularly his February 2015 VA treatment records, and the lay statements from the Veteran and his family more probative than the VA medical examinations and opinions. 

The Board notes that laypersons are competent to report observable symptoms in service and thereafter. While laypersons are generally not competent to offer evidence which requires medical knowledge, they may provide competent testimony as to visible symptoms and manifestations of a disorder. Lay evidence cannot be determined to be not credible merely because it is unaccompanied by contemporaneous medical evidence. See Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331, 1336-37 (Fed. Cir. 2006). A Veteran can attest to factual matters of which he has or had first-hand knowledge, for example experiencing pain in service, reporting to sick call, being placed on limited duty, or undergoing physical therapy. Washington v. Nicholson, 19 Vet. App. 362, 368 (2005). The Board finds the Veteran's lay statements and the statements of his wife and daughter highly probative as to the observable symptomatology of the Veteran regarding his acquired psychiatric disorder. 

Additionally, the in-service event has been conceded by VA in a favorable finding, namely that the evidence shows a qualifying event, injury, or disease had its onset during service as exposure to stressful circumstances during the Veteran's Vietnam War military service is conceded. The Board finds the Veteran's statements regarding what he experienced in Vietnam are also highly probative as to an in-service event, which has caused his acquired psychiatric disorder. 

The Veteran's VA treatment records from 2014 through 2019 contain multiple psychiatric diagnoses as well as detailed accounts of the symptoms experienced by the Veteran due to his acquired psychiatric disability. The VA examinations conducted alongside these treatment records, failed to fully account for the diagnoses and symptoms of the Veteran. First, the June 2014 VA medical examination found the Veteran did not have a diagnosis of PTSD or any other mental disorder that confirmed to the DSM-5 criteria for diagnosis, however the Board finds this examination focused primarily on PTSD and failed to consider whether the Veteran's in-service stressor caused the diagnosis of adjustment disorder with depressed and anxious mood, which had been documented in his April and May 2014 mental health treatment records. Next, the November 2015 VA examination focused on whether the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder was secondary to his service-connected diabetes. The examiner incorrectly selected "no" when answering whether the Veteran now has or had ever been diagnosed with a mental disorder, as the Veteran's prior VA treatment records in 2014 and 2015 contained diagnoses of adjustment disorder with depressed and anxious mood as well as other specified trauma and stress related disorder. The examiner also incorrectly found that there was no objective evidence the Veteran had served in combat, as the prior VA examination in June 2014 documented the Veteran's three in-service stressors and found one of them met the requirements for Criteria A for a PTSD diagnosis. The examiner also concluded the Veteran did not have a mental disorder and only a "phase of life problem," however this is contradictory to his finding that the Veteran had long-term anxiety, which the Veteran reported resulted from his military service. 

Further, in the July 2017 VA medical examination, the examiner did not find the Veteran had a diagnosis of PTSD or a mental disorder that met the DSM-5 criteria and instead of conducting a thorough analysis of the Veteran's medical records and symptomatology the examiner relied heavily on the fact that the prior examinations of the Veteran had not yielded a diagnosis. This is a vague and conclusory opinion and provides no reasoned analysis and is thus deemed inadequate. See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008) (holding that a medical opinion that contains only data and conclusions without any supporting analysis is afforded no weight). Finally, in the July 2021 VA medical examination, the examiner selected "no" when answering whether the Veteran now has or had ever been diagnosed with a mental disorder. This was an incorrect assessment, and discounted the Veteran's numerous medical records containing diagnoses for mental disorders including a November 2017 Mental Health Clinic record, which stated the Veteran continued to meet the criteria for anxiety and sleep disorder to include depressive symptoms, an August 2018 Mental Health Clinic record where the Veteran's diagnoses of PTSD, anxiety disorder, and adjustment disorder with mood were noted, and a November 2019 VA treatment record which noted the Veteran had PTSD and depression. The examiner also failed to consider the lay statements submitted by the Veteran's daughter and wife which expounded in great detail upon the Veteran's observable symptomatology. The examiner should have given due consideration to the lay statements of the Veteran's wife and daughter, as well as the multiple mental health treatment records, where the Veteran spoke in greater detail about his mental health symptoms.  

As the Board finds significant flaws with all of the VA medical examinations the Board is affording them less probative weight and is affording greater probative weight to the Veteran's VA treatment records, which fully document the Veteran's symptoms and diagnoses pertaining to an acquired psychiatric disorder. The Board finds especially probative the VA treatment records from 2015 diagnosing the Veteran with anxiety, other specified trauma and stress related disorder, and adjustment disorder with depressed mood, which the provider found were more likely than not related to the Veteran's military service. 

(Continued on the next page)

?

As a nexus between the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder and his military service has been established the Board finds entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder is warranted. Therefore, entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder is granted.

 

Ann K. Minami

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Anna-Liisa Davis

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.