Citation Nr: A25032381
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240502-440269
DATE: April 8, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 70 percent for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) with major depressive disorder (MDD) and alcohol use disorder (hereafter referred to as PTSD), is denied.

FINDING OF FACT

For the period on review, the probative evidence shows that the severity, frequency, and duration of the Veteran's PTSD symptoms did not result in total occupational and social impairment. 

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for a disability rating in excess of 70 percent for PTSD have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served in the United States Army from November 1986 to April 1989. 

In March 2024, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR), and requested review of a March 2024 decision. In April 2024, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the HLR decision on appeal, which considered the evidence of record at the time of the prior March 2024 decision and continued the 70 percent rating for PTSD.  

In the May 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

The Board notes that the Veteran submitted another VA Form 10182 in August 2024 where she selected the Direct Review docket, and where she stated she was submitting new evidence. However, after reviewing the submitted material, those documents are duplicates of records previously in the file that were considered by the AOJ in rendering its decision. See March 2024 Medical Treatment Record - Non-Government Facility - February 2024 Letter from Dr. J. W and March 2024 DBQ prepared by Dr. J.W. As such, the August 2024 VA Form 10182 does not constitute a change of docket, nor is the Veteran prejudiced by adjudicating this claim based on the May 2024 VA Form 10182. 

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision, which was subsequently subject to HLR. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Increased Rating Claim

Disability ratings are determined by applying the criteria set forth in the VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities, which is based on the average impairment of earning capacity resulting from disability. Separate diagnostic codes identify the various disabilities. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1. Where there is a question as to which of two ratings shall be applied, the higher rating will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating; otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7. Any reasonable doubt regarding the degree of disability will be resolved in favor of the Veteran. 38 C.F.R. § 4.3.                     

The Veteran's PTSD is rated as 70 percent disabling under the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders under 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411. 

Under this Formula, a 70 percent rating is assigned when there is objective evidence demonstrating occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities, speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately, or effectively; impaired impulse control, such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence; spatial disorientation, neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work-like setting; inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.

A 100 percent rating is warranted when there is total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living, including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene; disorientation to time and place, memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name.

In Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436 (2002), the Court held that use of the term such as in 38 C.F.R. § 4.130 demonstrates that the symptoms after that phrase are not intended to constitute an exhaustive list, but rather are to serve as examples of the type and degree of the symptoms, or their effects, that would justify a particular rating. Accordingly, the evidence considered in determining the level of impairment under section 4.130 is not restricted to the symptoms provided in the diagnostic code. Rather, VA must consider all symptoms of a claimant's condition that affect the level of occupational and social impairment.

Although the Veteran's symptomatology is the primary consideration, the Veteran's level of impairment must be in "most areas" applicable to the relevant percentage rating criteria. Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 116-19 (Fed. Cir. 2013).

Lay statements may serve to support a claim for service connection by supporting the occurrence of lay-observable events, or the presence of disability, or symptoms of disability subject to lay observation. 38 U.S.C. § 1153(a); 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a); Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372 (Fed. Cir. 2007). Although lay persons are considered competent to provide opinions on some medical issues, some medical issues fall outside of the realm of common knowledge of a lay person. Kahana v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 428 (2011).

The Board must assess the credibility and weight of all the evidence, including the medical evidence, to determine its probative value, accounting for evidence that it finds to be persuasive or unpersuasive, and providing reasons for rejecting any evidence favorable to the claimant. See Wilson v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 614, 618 (1992); Hatlestad v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 164 (1991). Equal weight is not necessarily accorded to each piece of evidence contained in the record; not every item of evidence necessarily has the same probative value. 

When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence as to any issue material to the determination of a matter, VA will resolve reasonable doubt in favor of the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4 th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc).

PTSD - Evidence

In March 2023, the Veteran reported increased stress due to undergoing tests for her job as a school bus driver. The Veteran requested therapy with medication. See March 2023 PC/MH Telephone Contact.

During a March 2023 Integrated Pain Management Consult, the Veteran reported her mental/emotional well-being as a 3/5 and her overall day to day quality of life as a 4/5. See March 2023 Integrated Pain Management Consult.

In June 2023, the Veteran requested letters from her primary care provider and mental health provider regarding job requirements that were negatively affecting her mental health/job performance. See June 2023 Addendum. 

In June 2023, the Veteran was provided a letter from DNP L.R. who stated, "this veteran also has a mental health condition that hinders her performing her current job to the extent of the job description." See June 2023 Letter to Employer School.

In July 2023, the Veteran underwent a PCHMI Functional Assessment. The Veteran requested an assessment due to medication management and adjusting her current medication regime. The Veteran worked as a school bus driver but was going to meet with the principle to see if she could do a different job because driving a school bus was too stressful. The Veteran previously worked in finance and has an associate degree. The Veteran reported low motivation, irritability, nightmares, and avoiding crowds. The Veteran denied suicidal ideation, homicidal ideation, inflated self-esteem, risky behaviors, audio/visual/tactile hallucinations, paranoia, and delusions. The Veteran was alert and oriented to person, time, and place. Her mood was depressed, and affect was congruent with mood. Her speech was within normal limits, and her thought process was coherent, and goal directed. No delusions were elicited and there was no evidence of internal stimuli. The Veteran was started on new medications, and she would continue to receive Mental Health Services. See July 2023 Primary Care Admission Evaluation Note. 

In August 2023, the Veteran underwent an initial Vocational Rehabilitation Screening interview. The Veteran was currently working as a teachers' aid but stated she may need to find a new job after her employer interpreted the letter from the Veteran's mental health provider about the Veteran being unable to perform certain duties due to her mental health disabilities as a possible resignation and not a request for reasonable accommodation. The Veteran did not want to drive a school bus. The Veteran was provided with suggestions, such as speaking with Human Resources (HR) and clarifying things with her employer. See August 2023 Mental Health Consult. 

In August 2023, the Veteran participated in group therapy. She was noted to show interest in the group, focused on group tasks, participated in group exercises, and demonstrated listening skills. The Veteran informed the group she was fired from her job after getting a letter from her primary care provider that said her anxiety got in the way of driving a bus. The group recommended the Veteran reach out to HR or get legal advice. See August 2023 Psychiatric Nursing Group Note. 

In September 2023, the Veteran participated in group therapy. She was noted to show interest in the group, focused on group tasks, and participated in group exercises. The Veteran shared that even briefly relaxing is helpful. See September 2023 Psychiatric Nursing Group Note. 

In October 2023, the Veteran participated in group therapy where she shared that she had started a new job that did not require any training. See October 2023 Psychiatric Nursing Group Note. The Veteran participated in group therapy in November 2023. See November 2023 Psychiatric Nursing Group Note.

In December 2023, the Veteran requested medication refills for her mental health medications that were "working now." The Veteran denied suicidal ideation or homicidal ideation. See December 2023 Women's Health Note.  

In February 2024, the Veteran underwent a private clinical interview by Dr. J. W., a licensed psychologist.  Under the recent history section, Dr. J.W. noted the Veteran was married, was a high school graduate, and used alcohol. The psychologist determined that the following symptoms applied to the Veteran's diagnosis: depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks that occur weekly or less often, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss, such as forgetting names, directions or recent events, impairment of short and long term memory, flattened affect, impaired judgement, gross impairment in thought process and communication, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances, suicidal ideation, obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities, impaired impulse control, persistent delusions or hallucinations, grossly inappropriate behavior, neglect of personal appearance and hygiene, disorientation to place or time, nightmares, irritability, and fatigue. Dr. J.W. determined that the Veteran had total occupational and social impairment. See VA 21-0906P-3 Review PTSD Disability, received in March 2024. 

Dr. J.W. prepared a February 2024 letter outlining the Veteran's disability and provided a concluding diagnosis which he stated was based on a clinical interview with the Veteran in February 2024 and a review of a Decision Letter from January 2024. The letter stated that the Veteran has a diagnosis of PTSD with MDD and alcohol use disorder which resulted in many manifestations, including total occupational and social impairment.  The letter stated the letter/opinion was based on the examination that showed the Veteran had the following symptoms: depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks that occur weekly or less often, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss, such as forgetting names, directions or recent events, impairment of short and long term memory, flattened affect, impaired judgement, gross impairment in thought process and communication, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances, suicidal ideation, obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities, impaired impulse control, persistent delusions or hallucinations, grossly inappropriate behavior, neglect of personal appearance and hygiene, disorientation to place or time, nightmares, irritability, and fatigue. See Medical Treatment Record - Non-Government Facility, received in March 2024. 

In March 2024, the Veteran was afforded an in-person VA examination for PTSD. The examiner indicated that the Veteran's VA e-folder was reviewed. The Veteran's diagnoses of PTSD, MDD, and alcohol use disorder, were confirmed. The Veteran was noted to be polite, open, and cooperative during the exam. She was dressed appropriately with good hygiene. Her affect was appropriate to the content of her speech, her thought process was logical and organized, there was no delusional thought content and no evidence of responding to internal stimuli. During the exam, the Veteran reported she had been married for five months and the communication within the relationship was "horrible." The Veteran reported she has three adult children who are all in her life and are very supportive. In addition to her children, she is very close with one of her sisters and has good friends and associates that she talks to. The Veteran recently finished up an employment contract where she worked in customer service. 

The Veteran denied any psychiatric hospitalizations. She attends behavioral health services monthly via telehealth and is taking medications to treat her psychiatric conditions. The Veteran denied suicidal ideation but reported occasional thoughts of questioning her purpose. The Veteran denied any relevant legal or behavioral history. The Veteran reported she has been drinking more lately than she usually does but it is not causing any functional impairment. 

The VA examiner determined that the following symptoms applied to the Veteran's diagnosis: depressed mood, suspiciousness, chronic sleep impairment, disturbances of motivation and mood, and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships. The VA examiner determined that the Veteran had occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity. 

PTSD - Analysis

The Veteran contends that the frequency, severity, and duration of psychiatric symptoms manifested by her PTSD is most closely contemplated by the criteria for a higher rating of 100 percent. The Veteran contends that the VA failed to utilize the benefit of the doubt doctrine as defined in 38 C.F.R § 3.102 when rating her PTSD. See May 2024 VA Form 10182 and April 2024 HLR Informal Conference. 

On review of all relevant evidence, lay, medical, and vocational, the Board finds that the criteria for a rating higher than 70 percent for the Veteran's PTSD are not met or approximated. In this regard, there is no probative evidence of symptoms resulting in total occupational and social impairment, which is required for the next-higher rating of 100 percent.  There is no probative evidence of gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living, including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene; or disorientation to time and place, memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name.

Prior to the February 2024 private interview and the March 2024 VA examination, the medical evidence shows that the Veteran regularly participated in group therapy where she was noted to show interest in the group, focused on group tasks, participated in group exercises, and demonstrated listening skills. Additionally, in July 2023, during a PCHMI Functional Assessment, the Veteran denied experiencing audio/visual/tactile hallucinations, paranoia, and delusions. Throughout the review period, the record documents that the Veteran was alert and oriented to person, time, and place. Her speech was within normal limits, and her thought process was coherent and goal directed. No delusions were elicited and there was no evidence of internal stimuli. The Veteran's psychiatric nursing notes, treatment records and vocational records support that she did not display gross impairment in thought processes or communication, grossly inappropriate behavior, or disorientation to time and place, memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name.

Moreover, the Veteran's psychiatric nursing notes, group therapy notes, treatment records, and vocational records are consistent with the March 2024 VA examination. During the March 2024 VA examination, the Veteran was again noted to be polite, open, and cooperative as well as dressed appropriately with good hygiene. The Veteran's thought process was logical and organized, there was no delusional thought content, and no evidence of responding to internal stimuli. The Veteran reported she continued to go to monthly therapy sessions and was compliant with her medications. While the Veteran did report difficulty in her relationship with her spouse, she was noted to have strong bonds with her three adult children, one of her sisters, and friends and acquaintances, which weighs against total social impairment. Additionally, based on the record, the Veteran was able to find alternative employment when her mental health interfered with her employment as a bus driver. The March 2024 VA examiner found that the Veteran's mental diagnoses resulted in occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity, which is consistent with the criteria of only a 50 percent rating.  Nonetheless, the Veteran has been in receipt of a 70 percent rating since December 2017 when she was initially granted service connection for such, and the Board will not disturb that rating.

However, at no time during the period on appeal is there probative evidence demonstrating total occupational and social impairment to warrant a maximum 100 percent rating under Diagnostic Code 9411. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.130. 

The Board acknowledges that Dr. J.W. determined that the Veteran's disability results in total occupational and social impairment but he did not support that finding with any rationale in his letter.  Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008) (most of the probative value of a medical opinion comes from its reasoning).  In other words, Dr. J.W. did not explain how the Veteran is totally impaired, both socially and occupationally. Further, Dr. J.W.'s determination is based solely on a clinical interview of the Veteran and a review of the January 2024 AOJ Decision Letter, rather than the Veteran's relevant psychiatric nursing and therapy notes, and vocational records that actually describe the Veteran's symptoms shown and reported during the period on review.  Accordingly, the Board finds that Dr. J.W.'s finding of total occupational social impairment is unsupported and not based on this Veteran's complete disability picture.  The failure to provide a supporting explanation and the failure to consider all relevant records greatly diminish the probative value of Dr. J.W.'s opinion.  Although Dr. J.W. is certainly competent to provide an assessment, the Board finds that his report and letter are of of little probative value. 

The Board further acknowledges the Veteran's belief that the private report and letter from Dr. J.W. should be afforded more weight.  The Veteran is competent to report the symptoms she experiences firsthand, however, she is not competent to determine whether she meets the diagnostic criteria for PTSD or any other acquired psychiatric disorder, as she has not demonstrated the specialized medical expertise required for such a complex medical determination. See Jandreau, 492 F.3d at 1376.  For the reasons iterated in this decision, the Board finds the VA examination, VA psychiatric nursing notes, group therapy notes, and vocational records to be of greater probative value than the private letter and examination report from Dr. J.W. 

As the factfinder, the Board considered the medical and lay evidence during the evidentiary window and finds that the probative evidence is persuasively against a higher and maximum 100 percent rating under Diagnostic Code 9411 for the period on appeal. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.130. 

The Board further acknowledges that the Veteran contends that the reasonable doubt standard of 38 C.F.R § 3.102 was not applied in her case. However, as determined, the evidence is persuasively against the claim for a rating higher than 70 percent.  As there is not an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence, the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine is not applicable in this case.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

Neither the Veteran nor her representative have raised any other issues, nor have any other issues been reasonably raised by the record, regarding the higher rating claim adjudicated herein. See Doucette v. Shulkin, 28 Vet. App. 366, 69-70 (2017). 

 

S. B. MAYS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Elsbach, E. R.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.