Citation Nr: A25032226
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240906-471247
DATE: April 8, 2025

ORDER

New and relevant evidence having been received, the request for readjudication of the claim for entitlement to service connection for right ankle tendonitis is granted.

New and relevant evidence having been received, the request for readjudication of the claim for entitlement to service connection for a right knee condition is granted.

New and relevant evidence having been received, the request for readjudication of the claim for entitlement to service connection for impingement syndrome of left shoulder is granted.

Entitlement to service connection for right ankle tendonitis is granted.

Entitlement to service connection for a right knee condition, to include right knee strain and osteoarthritis, is granted.

Entitlement to service connection for impingement syndrome of left shoulder is granted.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. New evidence that is relevant to the issue of entitlement to service connection for right ankle tendonitis has been received since the prior denial of the claim in November 2022.

2. New evidence that is relevant to the issue of entitlement to service connection for a right knee condition has been received since the prior denial of the claim in November 2022.

3. New evidence that is relevant to the issue of entitlement to service connection for impingement syndrome of left shoulder has been received since the prior denial of the claim in November 2022.

4. Resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, it is at least as likely as not that his current right ankle tendonitis was incurred in or caused by active military service.

5. Resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, it is at least as likely as not that his current right knee condition, to include right knee strain and osteoarthritis, was incurred in or caused by active military service.

6. Resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, it is at least as likely as not that his current impingement syndrome of left shoulder was incurred in or caused by active military service.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for readjudication of the claim for entitlement to service connection for right ankle tendonitis have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 5108, 7105; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.156, 3.2501.

2. The criteria for readjudication of the claim for entitlement to service connection for a right knee condition have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 5108, 7105; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.156, 3.2501.

3. The criteria for readjudication of the claim for entitlement to service connection for impingement syndrome of left shoulder have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 5108, 7105; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.156, 3.2501.

4. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for right ankle tendonitis have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303. 

5. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for a right knee condition, to include right knee strain and osteoarthritis, have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

6. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for impingement syndrome of left shoulder have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from January 1984 to March 1988.

These matters come before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a September 2023 rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In the September 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the September 2023 RO decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the RO decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a supplemental claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a supplemental claim are included with this decision.

SERVICE CONNECTION

Generally, service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from a disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303. The three-element test for service connection requires evidence of: (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166-67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, the benefit of the doubt should be given to the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102. When, after careful consideration of all procurable and assembled data, a reasonable doubt arises regarding service origin, the degree of disability, or any other point, such doubt should be resolved in favor of the claimant. 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

1. New and relevant evidence having been received, the request for readjudication of the claim for entitlement to service connection for right ankle tendonitis is granted. 

2. New and relevant evidence having been received, the request for readjudication of the claim for entitlement to service connection for a right knee condition is granted.

3. New and relevant evidence having been received, the request for readjudication of the claim for entitlement to service connection for impingement syndrome of left shoulder is granted.

A disallowed claim is readjudicated if new and relevant evidence is presented or secured with respect to that claim. 38 U.S.C. § 5108(a); 38 C.F.R. § 3.156(d). If new and relevant evidence is presented or secured with respect to a supplemental claim, the claim is readjudicated taking into consideration all of the evidence of record. 38 C.F.R. § 3.156(d).

Under the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), new evidence is evidence not previously part of the actual record before agency adjudicators. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501(a)(1). Relevant evidence is defined as information that tends to prove or disprove a matter at issue in a claim. Id.

The new and relevant evidence standard will not impose a higher evidentiary threshold than the previous new and material evidence standard under § 3.156(a). 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501(a). As the statutory definition of "relevant" does not require that the evidence relate to an unestablished fact necessary to substantiate the claim or raise a reasonable possibility of substantiating the claim; "new and relevant" evidence is a lower standard than the "new and material" evidence standard. 

Entitlement to service connection for right ankle tendonitis, a right knee condition, and impingement syndrome of left shoulder was denied in the relevant parts of the November 2022 rating decision. The RO concluded that service connection was not established because there was no nexus between the diagnosed right ankle tendonitis, right knee condition, and impingement syndrome of left shoulder and active service.

Subsequently, the Veteran filed two supplemental claims seeking service connection for a right ankle condition, right knee strain, and impingement syndrome of left shoulder in July 2023, and submitted additional evidence in support of the claims.

In the September 2023 rating decision on appeal, the RO denied readjudication of the claims for entitlement to service connection for right ankle tendonitis, right knee strain, and impingement syndrome of left shoulder, and found that the evidence submitted in connection with the claims, which includes the July 2023 private medical opinions, did not constitute relevant evidence because it did not prove or disprove a matter at issue in the claims.

The Board notes that in the July 2023 private medical opinions, the examiner stated that the Veteran's right knee, right ankle, and left shoulder conditions are directly related to his active military service. These medical opinions, which were associated with the Veteran's claims file on July 6, 2023, are new and relevant because they tend to prove or disprove the matters at issue in the claims for entitlement to service connection for the right ankle, right knee, and left shoulder conditions.

Thus, the Board finds that the above noted evidence added to the record since the November 2022 denial is new because it was not previously part of the actual record before the RO, and relevant because it tends to prove or disprove a matter at issue in regard to the Veteran's claims for entitlement to service connection for the right ankle condition, right knee condition, and left shoulder condition.

Accordingly, the Board concludes that readjudication of the claims for entitlement to service connection for the right ankle condition, right knee condition, and left shoulder condition is warranted because new and relevant evidence has been received.

4. Entitlement to service connection for right ankle tendonitis is granted.

5. Entitlement to service connection for a right knee condition, to include right knee strain and osteoarthritis, is granted.

6. Entitlement to service connection for impingement syndrome of left shoulder is granted.

The Veteran asserts that he has disabilities of right ankle, right knee, and left shoulder, and these are directly related to his active military service.

Thus, the question for the Board is whether the Veteran has the current diagnoses of right ankle, right knee, and left shoulder conditions that began during his active service or are at least as likely as not related to an in-service injury, event, or disease.

There is no question regarding the current diagnoses of the Veteran's right ankle, right knee, and left shoulder conditions. In the September 2022 VA disability benefits questionnaire (DBQ) for ankle conditions, the examiner noted the diagnoses of right ankle tendonitis, right ankle pain, and right ankle weakness. In the September 2022 VA DBQ for knee and lower leg conditions, the examiner noted the diagnoses of right knee strain and right knee joint osteoarthritis. In the September 2022 VA DBQ for shoulder conditions, the examiner noted the diagnosis of impingement syndrome of both shoulders.

Regarding in-service manifestation or diagnoses of the right ankle and right knee conditions, the Board notes that in an August 1986 service treatment record, the clinician noted the Veteran injured his right ankle and right knee while playing basketball. It was noted that there was soft tissue edema around the affected site. However, there was no evidence of fracture or dislocation. Regarding in-service manifestation or diagnosis of a left shoulder condition, the Board notes that in a February 1988 separation report of medical history, the Veteran reported "trick" shoulder, and the examiner noted a history of left shoulder problems.

Furthermore, the Veteran's military occupational specialty (MOS) was a tank systems mechanic. In an August 2022 statement, the Veteran asserted that he injured his shoulders during active service while working on heavy equipment, and he continued to have issues with shoulders since then. He stated that he continued to have pain, looseness, weakness, muscle fatigue, and cracking in his left shoulder. He also stated that his shoulders pain began during active service when he started regular use of the hydraulic and other tools to break loose the lug nuts to the tank wheels, track, and brake systems. He also picked up heavy weight while changing track. He had to move and handle two inches of cable.

In the August 2022 statement regarding his knee pain, the Veteran asserted that his knee pain began during active service while walking on uneven surface, prolonged standing, prolonged walking, stair climbing, doing high-impact activities, running, squatting, jumping, and carrying heavy objects. He asserted that he continued to have knee pain after active military service.

In the August 2022 statement regarding his ankle pain, the Veteran asserted that his ankle pain began during active service due to prolonged walking, prolonged standing, doing high-impact activities, running/jogging, jumping, and carrying heavy objects. He asserted that he continued to have ankle pain after active military service.

Regarding a relationship between the Veteran's active military service and the current right knee, right ankle, and left shoulder conditions there is evidence in favor of and against the claims.

The evidence against the claims includes the September 2022 VA medical opinions. In the September 2022 VA medical opinion on the Veteran's right knee condition, the examiner stated that the claimed right knee condition was less likely than not incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness. As a supporting rationale, the examiner stated that there is an x-ray from 1986 which documents the need for x-rays for a right ankle and right knee injury due to an injury from playing basketball. This confirms the injury occurred during service.  However, given the mechanism of injury and the x-ray findings, this was a self-limited injury which very likely did not lead to the development of the Veteran's current symptoms. It is normal at age 64, the age of the Veteran, to have osteoarthritis in multiple joints including the knees. There is no evidence of the Veteran seeking care for his knee issues over the years. It is impossible to say without mere speculation that activities in service caused his knee condition.

In the September 2022 VA medical opinion on the Veteran's right ankle condition, the examiner stated that the claimed right ankle condition was less likely than not incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness. As a supporting rationale, the examiner stated that there is an x-ray from 1986 which documents the need for x-rays for a right ankle and right knee injury due to an injury from playing basketball. This confirms the injury occurred during service.  However, given the mechanism of injury and the x-ray findings, this was a self-limited injury which very likely did not lead to the development of the Veteran's current symptoms including ankle tendonitis, weakness, and pain. There is no evidence of the Veteran seeking care for his ankle issues over the years. It is impossible to say without mere speculation that activities in service caused his ankle condition.

In the September 2022 VA medical opinion on the Veteran's left shoulder condition, the examiner stated that the claimed left shoulder condition was less likely than not incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness. As a supporting rationale, the examiner stated the Veteran's separation examination contains self-reported history of an unspecified shoulder problem.  "DD2807-1: Feb 9, 1988, negative for MSK conditions other than positive for "trick" shoulder". The medical provider who did the examination wrote a note that indicated the Veteran had history of the left shoulder condition. This does indicate something happened to the left shoulder but the note also specifies, "doing well now" regarding the shoulder. There are no service treatment records to indicate ongoing care for the shoulders or to describe any problems with the shoulder. The examiner concluded that the Veteran's examination and self-report are fully consistent with bilateral shoulder impingement but without more objective evidence it is impossible to assign causation of the condition to anything that occurred during service.

The Board finds the above noted September 2022 VA medical opinions on the etiology and nature of the Veteran's right knee, right ankle, and left shoulder conditions inadequate because the examiner failed to address the above-described Veteran's statements in which he asserted that he had wear and tear and other injuries to his ankles, knees, and shoulders while working as a tank systems mechanic during active military service, and that he continued to have right knee, right ankle, and left shoulder pain after the active military service.

The evidence in favor of the claims includes the July 2023 private medical opinions. In the July 2023 private medical opinion on the Veteran's right knee condition, the examiner stated that there is no documentation or available historical evidence of a pre-existing right knee condition prior to military active duty. The Veteran reported that he developed progressive pain in the right knee while on active duty related to his MOS duties and over-usage, and he continued to have pain and symptoms in his right knee since active service. The examiner noted the Veteran has the current diagnosis of right knee strain. The examiner referred to several medical articles and included the relevant information from these articles regarding chronic knee conditions due to overuse injuries.

Furthermore, the examiner stated that the Veteran's historical lay evidence supports an active-duty onset of symptoms of the right knee and chronicity of symptomatology from active duty to the current date. There is no evidence of a pre-military right knee condition or an intercurrent event, injury, or disease process that occurred after the Veteran's active-duty separation that would have caused his current disability condition or symptoms. There is a current diagnosis of right knee strain that correlates with documented symptoms in service. The medical literature supports and documents that repetitive microtrauma from overuse is a primary cause of chronic knee pain conditions and instability due to post-traumatic pathological processes and changes. Thus, the examiner concluded that it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's current right knee strain is due to, related to, a progression of, and/or a continuation of his right knee overuse injury that occurred during active-duty military service.

In the July 2023 private medical opinion on the Veteran's right ankle condition, the examiner stated that there is no documentation or available historical evidence of a pre-existing right ankle condition prior to military active duty. The Veteran reported an injury to the right ankle while on active duty from climbing, hikes in full gear, standing guard for long periods of time, and from jumping on and off of equipment he was working on, and he continued to have pain and symptoms in his right ankle since active service. The examiner noted the Veteran has the current diagnosis of right ankle tendonitis. The examiner referred to several medical articles and included the relevant information from these articles regarding tendinopathies of the lower extremities on active levels of military members, and sensitivity of tendons and response to changes in the biomechanical force that is applied to musculoskeletal system.

Furthermore, the examiner stated that the Veteran's historical lay evidence supports an active-duty onset of symptoms of the right ankle and chronicity of symptomatology from active duty to the current date. There is no evidence of a pre-military right ankle condition or an intercurrent event, injury, or disease process that occurred after the Veteran's active-duty separation that would have caused his current disability condition or symptoms. There is a current diagnosis of right ankle tendonitis that that correlates with the active-duty mechanism of injury/event. The medical literature supports and documents that a prior ankle injury and microtrauma from overuse can cause chronic mechanical and functional instability, leading to re-injury, weakened muscles and joint capsules, and impaired proprioception and neuromuscular/postural control. As a result of these chronic impairments, tendinitis or inflammation of the ankle tendons can develop, and is another cause of pain, loss of function, and disability. Thus, the examiner concluded that it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's current right ankle tendonitis is due to, related to, a progression of, and/or a continuation of his right ankle injury that occurred during active-duty military service.

In the July 2023 private medical opinion on the Veteran's left shoulder condition, the examiner stated that there is no documentation or available historical evidence of a pre-existing left shoulder condition prior to military active duty. The Veteran reported an injury to the left shoulder while on active duty from working on heavy equipment, and he continued to have pain and symptoms in the left shoulder since active service. The examiner noted the Veteran has the current diagnosis of left shoulder chronic impingement syndrome. The examiner referred to several medical articles and included the relevant information from these articles regarding shoulder impingement as a significant source of pain in people with physically demanding occupations, including military service.

Furthermore, the examiner stated that the Veteran's historical lay evidence supports an active-duty onset of symptoms of the left shoulder pain and chronicity of symptomatology from active duty to the current date. There is no evidence of a pre-military left shoulder condition or an intercurrent event, injury, or disease process that occurred after the Veteran's active-duty separation that would have caused his current disability condition or symptoms. There is a current diagnosis of left shoulder impingement syndrome that correlates with the active-duty mechanism of injury/event. The medical literature supports and documents that overuse of the shoulder muscles (especially repetitive overhead type) or a prior injury can lead to abnormal shoulder and scapular kinematics, resulting from inflammation and degeneration of the compressed structures in the subacromial space. This frequently leads to chronic pain and disability with shoulder functional loss. Thus, the examiner concluded that it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's current left shoulder chronic impingement syndrome is due to, related to, a progression of, and/or a continuation of his left shoulder injury that occurred during active-duty military service.

Thus, upon review of the record, the Board finds the evidence of record is at least in equipoise as to whether the Veteran's current right ankle, right knee, and left shoulder conditions incurred in or related to his active military service.

Accordingly, after resolving reasonable doubt in favor of the Veteran, the Board finds that entitlement to service connection for right ankle tendonitis, a right knee condition, to include right knee strain and osteoarthritis, and impingement syndrome of left shoulder is warranted. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

Consequently, entitlement to service connection for right ankle tendonitis, a right knee condition, to include right knee strain and osteoarthritis, and impingement syndrome of left shoulder is granted.

 

 

MICHAEL MARTIN

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Tariq, Nadeem

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.