Citation Nr: A25032709
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240419-432858
DATE: April 9, 2025

ORDER

Service connection for a cervical neck condition is denied.

An effective date prior to September 23, 2023, for the award of service connection for tension headaches, is denied.

An effective date prior to September 23, 2023, for the award of service connection for allergic rhinitis, is denied.

An initial compensable rating for tension headaches is denied.

An initial compensable rating for allergic rhinitis is denied.

REMANDED

The claim for service connection for athlete's foot is remanded.

The claim for service connection for shin splints is remanded.

The claim for service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include depression, anxiety, insomnia, and post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is remanded.

The claim for a total disability rating based on individual unemployability (TDIU) is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The evidence of record persuasively favors the conclusion that the Veteran does not have a current neck condition as contemplated by VA regulations.

2. The Veteran is in receipt of the earliest effective date allowed by law for the grant of service connection for tension headaches, that is the day after separation from active military service, September 23, 2023.

3. The Veteran is in receipt of the earliest effective date allowed by law for the grant of service connection for allergic rhinitis, that is the day after separation from active military service, September 23, 2023.

4. The evidence persuasively favors the conclusion that the Veteran's tension headaches have not manifested with characteristic prostrating attacks.

5. At no time over the period on appeal was the Veteran's allergic rhinitis shown to manifest with 50 percent obstruction of the nasal passages on both sides, or complete obstruction on one side, or nasal polyps.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for service connection for a cervical neck condition have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 1110, 1112, 1113, 1137; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.307(a)(3), 3.309(a).

2. The criteria for an effective date prior to September 23, 2023, for the award of service connection for tension headaches, have not been met.  38 U.S.C. § 5110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.400 (b)(2)(i).

3. The criteria for an effective date prior to September 23, 2023, for the award of service connection for allergic rhinitis, have not been met.  38 U.S.C. § 5110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.400 (b)(2)(i).

4. The criteria for an initial compensable rating for tension headaches have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.124a, Diagnostic Code (DC) 8100. 

5. The criteria for an initial compensable rating for allergic rhinitis have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.97, DC 6522.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from October 2017 to September 2023.  

The rating decisions on appeal were issued in November 2023 and April 2024 and constitute initial decisions; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.  

In the April 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, regarding the claims for service connection for a cervical neck condition; an effective date prior to September 23, 2023, for the award of service connection for tension headaches; an effective date prior to September 23, 2023, for the award of service connection for allergic rhinitis; an initial compensable rating for tension headaches; and an initial compensable rating for allergic rhinitis, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the November 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Concerning the claims for service connection for athlete's foot; service connection for shin splints; service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder; and a TDIU, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the April 2024 AOJ decision on appeal.  Id.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decisions on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, in conjunction with the claims for service connection for a cervical neck condition; an effective date prior to September 23, 2023, for the award of service connection for tension headaches; an effective date prior to September 23, 2023, for the award of service connection for allergic rhinitis; an initial compensable rating for tension headaches; and an initial compensable rating for allergic rhinitis, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims for service connection for athlete's foot; service connection for shin splints; service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder; and a TDIU, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

1. Service Connection Neck Condition

The Veteran seeks service connection for a neck condition.  

Service connection will be granted if the evidence demonstrates that a current disability resulted from an injury or disease incurred in or aggravated by active military service.  38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.  Service connection requires competent evidence showing: (1) the existence of a present disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service.  Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

Service connection may be established with certain chronic diseases, based upon a legal presumption, which occurs by showing that the disorder manifested itself to a degree of 10 percent disabling or more within one year from the date of separation from service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 1112, 1113, 1137; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307(a)(3), 3.309(a).

Additionally, service connection may be established under 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(b), when a symptom or symptoms of a chronic disease are noted in service, or within a year of the date of separation from service, and when chronicity is established through a continuity of symptomatology after service.  The continuity of symptomatology provision is an alternative method to establishing service connection for the specific chronic diseases listed under 38 C.F.R. § 3.309(a).  See Walker v. Shinseki, 718 F.3d 1331 (Fed. Cir. 2013).

A review of the Veteran's service treatment records (STRs) does not reflect any complaints, treatments, or diagnoses for any neck conditions.  Additionally, while the Veteran did report multiple issues at his May 2023 separation examination, he did not report any neck conditions.  

The Veteran's record does not contain any post-service medical treatment records that show any complaints, treatments, or diagnoses for any neck conditions.

The Veteran was provided a VA examination in August 2023, at which the VA examiner found that the Veteran did not have a diagnosis for any neck conditions.  Additionally, the examination does not contain any statements from the Veteran concerning the claimed neck condition.

The Board acknowledges the Veteran's lay contentions.  He is considered competent to report the observable health effects he experiences.  See Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 469-70 (1994).  However, outside of the claim for service connection for a neck condition, the Veteran has not actually submitted any statements explaining his claimed neck condition.  That is, he has not described his current conditions, nor has he provided an explanation for how he purportedly hurt his neck during service.  Nevertheless, his assertion of symptomatology via a claim for service connection for a neck condition is considered credible.  However, the mere presence of symptoms is not diagnostic of a neck condition, and determining whether any symptomatology is diagnostic of a neck condition is a medically complex question, which the Veteran lacks the medical training and expertise to answer.  See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 n.4 (Fed. Cir. 2007).  The Veteran's STRs do not show any complaints, treatments, or diagnoses for any neck conditions.  There are no post-service medical treatment records that contain any complaints, treatments, or diagnoses for any neck conditions. Additionally, to address the questions the Veteran lacked the medical expertise to answer, VA provided the Veteran with a medical examination, however, the VA examiner found that the Veteran did not have a diagnosed neck condition, and the Veteran did not provide any statements at the examination concerning his claimed neck condition.

Thus, service connection for a neck condition is not warranted as the evidence of record does not show that the Veteran has experienced a neck condition during the appeal period for which compensation benefits can be granted.

In order to be considered for service connection, a claimant must first have a current disability.  See 38 U.S.C. § 1110, 1131; Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356, 1363 (Fed. Cir. 2018).  The term "disability" refers to a functional impairment that reduces earning capacity.  See Saunders, 886 F.3d at 1363.  To establish a disability, the claimant's symptoms must result in "the level of a functional impairment of earning capacity."  Id. at 1367-68 (noting that the policy underlying Veterans' compensation is to compensate Veterans whose ability to earn a living is impaired as a result of their military service).  Service connection cannot be granted for injuries or diseases that are acute and transitory in nature, and do not result in residual functional impairment, because such injuries or diseases by definition would not reduce earning capacity.

Despite the Veteran's claim for service connection for a neck condition, the evidence does not show that the Veteran has experienced any functional impairment from his neck that has reduced his earning capacity during the appeal period.  Neither the Veteran's STRs, nor post-service medical treatment records, contain any complaints, treatments, or diagnoses for any neck conditions.  At the August 2023 VA examination, the Veteran was not found to have a diagnosis for a neck condition.  Additionally, the Veteran himself has not even provided any explanations regarding either the onset of his claimed neck condition or his current symptoms.  As such, his claim may be considered to be at most acute and transitory, which would not reduce earning capacity.

Thus, the evidence of record persuasively favors the conclusion that the Veteran does not have a neck condition as contemplated by VA regulations, and therefore, service connection for a neck condition is denied.

2. Effective Date Service Connection Tension Headaches and Allergic Rhinitis

The Veteran seeks an effective date prior to September 23, 2023, for the awards of service connection for both tension headaches and allergic rhinitis.  The Veteran has not provided any specific arguments for why he believes an earlier effective date is warranted for the awards of service connection for both tension headaches and allergic rhinitis.

The effective date for disability compensation claims based on direct service connection is the day following separation from active service, or the date entitlement arose, if the claim is received within one year after separation from service; otherwise, the effective date is the date of the receipt of claim, or the date that the entitlement arose, whichever is later.  38 U.S.C. § 5110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.400 (b)(2)(i).

Here, in July 2023, the Veteran filed a claim for service connection for both headaches and rhinitis.  The Veteran separated from active military service on September 22, 2023.  In a November 2023 rating decision, he was granted service connection for both tension headaches and allergic rhinitis effective September 23, 2023, the day after he separated from active military service.  As the current effective date for service connection for both tension headaches and allergic rhinitis is the day after the Veteran's separation from active military service, that is September 23, 2023, no earlier effective date is allowed by law.  Id.  As such, an effective date prior to September 23, 2023, for the awards of service connection for both tension headaches and allergic rhinitis is not warranted.

Accordingly, an effective date prior to September 23, 2023, for the award of service connection for tension headaches, is denied, and an effective date prior to September 23, 2023, for the award of service connection for allergic rhinitis, is denied.

3. Initial Compensable Rating Tension Headaches

By way of history, in a November 2023 rating decision, the Veteran was granted service connection for tension headaches with a noncompensable rating effective September 23, 2023, the day after his separation from active military service.  In December 2023, the Veteran filed a claim for an increased rating for headaches.  In an April 2024 rating decision, the Veteran was denied a compensable rating for tension headaches.  The Veteran filed a VA Form 10182 Board appeal in April 2024, in which he identified both the November 2023 and the April 2024 rating decisions, and indicated that he was seeking a compensable rating for his tension headaches.  Thus, the appeal period begins the day after the Veteran's separation from active military service, September 23, 2023, and the issue before the Board for adjudication is an initial compensable rating for tension headaches.

The Veteran's tension headaches are rated under DC 8100.  A noncompensable rating is warranted for migraine headaches with less frequent attacks.  A 10 percent rating is warranted for migraine headaches with characteristic prostrating attacks averaging one in two months over the last several months.  A 30 percent rating is warranted for migraine headaches with characteristic prostrating attacks occurring on an average once a month over the last several months.  A 50 percent rating is warranted for migraine headaches with very frequent completely prostrating and prolonged attacks productive of severe economic inadaptability.  38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, DC 8100.

The Board notes that the rating criteria does not define "prostrating," and that the courts have not undertaken to define the term for purposes of DC 8100.  See Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119 (1999).  Dorland's Illustrated Medical Dictionary defines "prostration" as "extreme exhaustion or powerlessness."  See Dorland's Illustrated Medical Dictionary 1531 (32nd ed. 2012).  The rating criteria also does not define "severe economic inadaptability."  However, the Court has indicated that, while there need not be a showing of unemployability, at a minimum, there should be an indication that the headaches are capable of interfering with earning capacity.  Pierce v. Principi, 18 Vet. App. 440 (2004).

As the appeal period begins the day following the Veteran's separation from active military service, a review of the Veteran's STRs does not show any treatment for headaches.  The only report of headaches found within the Veteran's STRs are on his May 2023 Report of Medical History for separation, where he checked frequent or severe headaches but indicated that he does not treat his headaches.

There are no post-service medical treatment records showing any symptoms or treatments for headaches. 

The Veteran underwent a VA examination in August 2023, at which he reported his headaches began in 2019.  The Veteran relayed current symptoms that included throbbing, as well as head pain with associated symptoms such as nausea and light and noise sensitivity.  The examiner indicated that the Veteran's current treatment plan did not include taking any medications for his tension headaches.  The examiner noted headache pain symptoms to include frontal head pain.  Head pain typically lasts less than one day and is located at the front of the head.   The Veteran was not found to experience any non-headache symptoms associated with his headaches.  The examiner indicated that the Veteran did not have characteristic prostrating attacks of migraine/non-migraine headache pain.  The examiner also noted that the Veteran does not have very prostrating and prolonged attacks of migraines/non-migraine pain productive of severe economic inadaptability.  Regarding functional impact, the examiner indicated that the Veteran's headaches do not impact his ability to work.

Based upon the foregoing evidence, an initial compensable rating for tension headaches is not warranted at any time over the period on appeal.  At the August 2023 VA examination, the examiner found that the Veteran did not have either characteristic prostrating attacks of migraine/non-migraine headache pain, or very prostrating and prolonged attacks of migraines/non-migraine pain productive of severe economic inadaptability.  Additionally, the examiner indicated that the Veteran's headaches did not have any functional impact on his ability to work.  There is only one report of headaches in the Veteran's STRs, which reflects only a check box for frequent or severe headaches and a report of no treatment.  There are also no post-service medical treatment records showing treatment or complaints for headaches.  Thus, neither the August 2023 VA examination, nor the Veteran's STRs, nor post-service treatment records, show that the Veteran's headaches reach a severity to be considered prostrating.  As such, the probative evidence of record does not show that the Veteran's tension headache symptoms either manifest with characteristic prostrating attacks or produce or are capable of producing severe economic inadaptability.

Accordingly, an initial compensable rating for tension headaches is denied.  

4. Initial Compensable Rating Allergic Rhinitis

By way of history, in a November 2023 rating decision, the Veteran was granted service connection for allergic rhinitis with a noncompensable rating effective September 23, 2023, the day after his separation from active military service.  The Veteran filed a VA Form 10182 Board appeal in April 2024, in which he identified the November 2023 rating decision, and indicated that he was seeking a compensable rating for allergic rhinitis.  Thus, the appeal period begins the day after the Veteran's separation from active military service, September 23, 2023, and the issue before the Board for adjudication is an initial compensable rating for allergic rhinitis.

The Veteran's allergic rhinitis is rated under DC 6522.  A 10 percent rating is provided for allergic rhinitis without polyps, but with greater than 50 percent obstruction of nasal passage on both sides or complete obstruction on one side.  A 30 percent rating is provided for allergic rhinitis with polyps.  38 C.F.R. § 4.97, DC 6522. 

In every instance where the schedule does not provide a zero percent rating for a DC, a zero percent rating will be assigned when the requirements for a compensable rating are not met.  38 C.F.R. § 4.31.

As the appeal period begins the day following the Veteran's separation from active military service, a review of the Veteran's STRs does not show any complaints or treatment for allergic rhinitis.  While the Veteran did report multiple issues at his May 2023 separation examination, he did not report allergic rhinitis or any symptoms attributable to allergic rhinitis.

There are no post-service medical treatment records showing any symptoms or treatments for allergic rhinitis.

The Veteran underwent a VA examination in August 2023, at which he reported that his allergic rhinitis began in 2011.  He relayed that his symptoms began with frequent nose bleeds and congestion.  At the time of onset, his symptoms included itchy watery eyes, sneezing, and nasal congestion.  He noted that his current symptoms included itchy watery eyes, sneezing, nasal congestion and drainage, and post-nasal drip.  Following an examination, the VA examiner found that the Veteran did not have nasal passage obstruction greater than 50 percent on both sides, complete obstruction of either side, permanent hypertrophy, polyps, or granulomatous conditions.

Based upon the foregoing, an initial compensable rating for allergic rhinitis is not warranted.  While the Veteran has reported symptoms that include itchy and watery eyes, sneezing, nasal congestion and drainage, and post-nasal drip, the evidence does not show nasal passage obstruction greater than 50 percent on both sides, complete obstruction of either side, or polyps.

Accordingly, an initial compensable rating for allergic rhinitis is denied.

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Service Connection Athlete's Foot

The Veteran seeks service connection for athlete's foot.  At a March 2024 VA examination, the Veteran reported that while deployed to Korea in 2019 he began having issues with athlete's foot.  He relayed that he did not go to medical for the condition, but simply treated it himself.  Since then, symptoms have fluctuated with the condition waxing and waning.  The examiner did not find the Veteran to have a current athlete's foot condition, however, the Veteran reported that the condition had waxed and waned since its purported onset, and the examiner did not address whether the Veteran ever had a diagnosis for athlete's foot during the appeal period.  Additionally, no medical opinion as to etiology was provided.  Thus, for purposes of clarity and due to a pre-decisional duty to assist error, remand is necessary to provide the Veteran with a new examination and obtain a medical opinion to determine the nature and etiology of his claimed athlete's foot condition. 

2. Service Connection Shin Splints

The Veteran seeks service connection for shin splints.  At a March 2024 VA examination, the Veteran reported that he insidiously started having recurring lower leg pain with running and marching beginning in 2020.  He noted that he did not go to medical for the issue.  Since separating from the service, he relayed that he still has a recurring ache with throbbing and tenderness in the bilateral lower legs, however, the pain is not as severe, mostly because he does not run as much.  The examiner noted the Veteran to have a diagnosis for bilateral shin splints, but the examiner did not provide a medical opinion concerning etiology.  Thus, remand is necessary due to a pre-decisional duty to assist error to obtain a medical opinion to determine the etiology of the Veteran's claimed shin splints.

3. Service Connection Acquired Psychiatric Disorder

The Veteran seeks service connection for multiple psychiatric disorders, specifically depression, anxiety, insomnia, and PTSD.  As such, the Veteran's claim has been recharacterized as a claim for service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder.  Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1 (2009).  

At a February 2024 VA examination, the Veteran was diagnosed with adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood, acute.  The VA examiner opined that it is less likely than not that the Veteran's adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood is caused by or related to an in-service stressor event, explaining that the Veteran did not report any in-service event that meets the DSM-5 criteria for a traumatic stressor event.  The rationale provided is not a thorough and complete rationale as it relies solely on a lack of a reported in-service stressor event.  While service connection for PTSD requires combat status or a verified in-service stressor event with a diagnosis in accordance with DSM-5, service connection for other psychiatric disorders diagnosed in accordance with DSM-5 do not require combat status or a verified in-service stressor event.  The Veteran's STRs contain notations that the Veteran underwent psychotherapy in November and December 2022.  He also checked frequent trouble sleeping, received counseling of any type, and depression or excessive worry on his May 2023 Report of Medical History for separation.  Additionally, stress, depression, and stress of life and career progress was noted by the medical officer on the May 2023 Report of Medical History for separation.  As such, remand is necessary due to a pre-decisional duty to assist error to obtain an addendum medical opinion with a thorough and complete rationale to determine the etiology of the Veteran's claimed acquired psychiatric disorder.

4. TDIU

The Veteran seeks a TDIU.  On his December 2023 application for a TDIU, he reported that his acquired psychiatric disorder and shin splints, in addition to other conditions, prevent him from securing and following any substantially gainful occupation.  Thus, the Veteran's claim for a TDIU is inextricably intertwined with his claims for service connection for shin splints and service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, which are being remanded, and therefore, a TDIU is also remanded.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of his claimed athlete's foot.  The examiner should first clarify whether the Veteran has a current diagnosis for athlete's foot, or whether he has had a diagnosed athlete's foot condition at any time during the appeal (beginning September 23, 2023, to present).  The examiner should then answer the following questions:

(a.) Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's claimed athlete's foot condition began in or was otherwise caused by his active military service?  Why or why not?

The examiner should review and discuss the Veteran's statements found in the March 2024 VA examination.

2. Obtain a medical opinion to determine the etiology of the Veteran's claimed shin splints.  If a physical examination is necessary to answer the Board's questions, one should be scheduled.  The examiner should answer the following questions:

(a.) Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's claimed shin splints began in or were otherwise caused by his active military service?  Why or why not?

The examiner should review and discuss the Veteran's statements found in the March 2024 VA examination.

3. Obtain an addendum medical opinion to determine the etiology of the Veteran's claimed psychiatric disorder.  If a physical examination is necessary to answer the Board's questions, one should be scheduled.  The examiner should first clarify diagnoses for any psychiatric disorders attributable to the Veteran.  The examiner should then answer the following questions: 

(Continued on the next page)

?

(a.) Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's claimed acquired psychiatric disorder began in or was otherwise caused by his active military service?  Why or why not?

The examiner should review the February 2024 VA examination.  The examiner should review and discuss the Veteran's STRs concerning undergoing psychotherapy and his reports on his May 2023 Report of Medical History for separation (See Medical Treatment Record - Government Facility received 07/28/2023 pp. 27, 71, and 75 out of 102).

 

 

Ann K. Minami

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	S. Lutgens-Staley, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.