Citation Nr: A25032071
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 231013-384699
DATE: April 8, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include anxiety and depression is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder clearly and unmistakably existed prior to service and was not clearly and unmistakably aggravated by service.

2. The Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder was not caused or aggravated by his service-connected migraine headaches.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § § 3.102, 3.303, 3.304, 3.310.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from February 2014 to July 2014. 

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from March 2023 and October 2023 rating decisions. 

In November 2022 the Veteran filed a claim seeking entitlement to service connection for anxiety secondary to his service-connected migraine headaches. He also sought entitlement to service connection for depression secondary to his service-connected tinnitus and migraine headaches.

In a February 2023 rating decision, the AOJ denied the Veteran's anxiety claim. In February 2023 the Veteran submitted a VA Form 10182 appealing the denial of his anxiety claim. In a March 2023 rating decision, the AOJ denied the Veteran's claim for depression as secondary to his migraine headaches. 

In a May 2023 Board decision, the Board remanded the anxiety claim to determine whether the Veteran's migraine headaches caused or aggravated his anxiety disorder. In an October 2023 rating decision, the Veteran's anxiety claim was again denied.

In the October 2023 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2023 and October 2023 AOJ decisions on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decisions on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

The Veteran's record contains diagnoses of both anxiety and depression. A claim for service connection for a psychiatric disability is deemed to encompass all psychiatric diagnoses reasonably presented in the record. See Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1 (2009). Accordingly, the Board has broadened and recharacterized the claims as an acquired psychiatric disorder, which may encompass all possible diagnoses. 

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include anxiety and depression.

The Veteran had previously filed several claims seeking entitlement to service connection for a psychiatric condition, to include on a direct basis. However, the Veteran currently contends that his acquired psychiatric disorder is related to his service-connected migraine headaches.

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by service. 38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a). Service connection may also be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge, when all of the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d). 

Service connection may also be established for a disability that is proximately due to or the result of a service-connected disability. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310 (a). Also, a disability that is aggravated by a service-connected disability may be service-connected to the degree that the aggravation is shown. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310; Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439 (1995). To prevail on the issue of entitlement to secondary service connection, there must be (1) evidence of a current disability; (2) evidence of a service-connected disability; and (3) nexus evidence establishing a connection between the service-connected disability and the current disability. See Wallin v. West, 11 Vet. App. 509, 512 (1998).

A veteran is presumed to be in sound condition upon entrance into service, except for defects, infirmities or disorders noted when examined, accepted, and enrolled for service, or where evidence or medical judgment is such as to warrant a finding that the disease or injury existed before acceptance and enrollment. 38 U.S.C. § 1111. Only such conditions as are recorded in examination reports are to be considered as noted. 38 C.F.R. § 3.304(b).

If the disorder was not "noted" at the time of induction, VA must show by clear and unmistakable evidence both that the disease or injury existed prior to service and that the disease or injury was not aggravated by service. 38 U.S.C. § 1111; 38 C.F.R. § 3.304; Wagner v. Principi, 370 F.3d 1089 (Fed. Cir. 2004); VAOPGCPREC 3-03 (July 16, 2003). 

In the March 2023 and October 2023 rating decisions the AOJ found that the Veteran has a current diagnosis of unspecified depressive disorder and generalized anxiety disorder, and he is currently service connected for migraines. The Board is bound by these favorable findings. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104 (c).

The record raises a question as to whether the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder preexisted service. 

The Veteran's November 2013 entrance examination is absent of any notations of defects, infirmities, or disorders relating to an acquired psychiatric disorder. Therefore, the Veteran is presumed to have been sound at the time he entered service. 

In an April 2013 probation officer report, the Veteran reported that he had a prior record of civil offenses and/or juvenile dispositions. 

A January 2018 private treatment record notes that the Veteran had history of treatment as a teen/youth, and he had a few group counseling sessions as a teen. 

In a May 2018 VA examination, the Veteran reported personal mental health history prior to his military service stating he was charged for assault and spent two weeks in juvenile detention and two years on probation for assault against another teenager. He reported that he attended counseling related to this issue. 

In a June 2023 VA opinion, the examiner noted that the Veteran's psychiatric disorder clearly and unmistakably existed prior to service. The examiner explained that the examination was complicated by contradictory evidence in the medical file and via self-report from the Veteran. The examiner noted that although the Veteran did not have a diagnosis of anxiety prior to enlistment, he did experience significant trauma in childhood. He endorsed receiving treatment for depression during his youth, although this was not reported on his entrance examination. 

The Veteran's lay statements, in combination with his medical record and the June 2023 VA medical opinion, support a finding that his psychiatric condition clearly and unmistakably existed prior to service. Therefore, the Board must determine whether the Veteran's psychiatric condition was clearly and unmistakably not aggravated by service.  

In January 2023 and February 2023 VA opinions, the examiner opined that the Veteran's psychiatric condition was less likely than not proximately due to or the result of the Veteran's migraines. The examiner noted that the Veteran has a long history of claims for mental health problems for a myriad of opposing reasons. The examiner noted that the Veteran had contradicted himself during the exam and other mental disorder exams. The Veteran faulted his mental health problems on family issues, military responsibilities, tinnitus, and now migraines. The examiner noted that the Veteran appears to have mental health problems and there is evidence of such in treatment records and past exams, but they are less than likely the result of migraine headaches as there are many self-reported reasons for his struggles. 

In a June 2023 VA opinion, the examiner opined that the Veteran's psychiatric condition, which clearly and unmistakably existed prior to service, was clearly and unmistakably not aggravated beyond its natural progression. The examiner noted that the examination was complicated by contradictory evidence, both in the medical file and via self-report from the Veteran. The examiner noted that although the Veteran did not have a diagnosis of anxiety prior to enlistment, he did experience significant trauma in childhood. The Veteran endorsed receiving treatment for depression during his youth, although that was not reported on the entrance exam. The examiner explained that the effects of childhood trauma are often chronic and far-reaching, often resulting in poor mental health outcomes such as anxiety, depression, and substance abuse. The examiner opined that the Veteran's anxiety or depression was not a result of military service, but rather a result of untreated childhood trauma resulting from exposure to adverse childhood experiences. 

The June 2023 VA examiner also opined that the Veteran's psychiatric condition was not at least as likely as not aggravated beyond its natural progression by his migraine disability. The examiner noted that the contradictory evidence makes it difficult to ascertain the "natural progression" of a disorder that is not consistently reported or adequately treated. The examiner noted that because anxiety was denied during service and was not reported until several years after discharge (2018), she could not establish a connection between anxiety and migraines resulting from service.

In a September 2023 VA opinion, the examiner opined that it was less likely than not that the Veteran's mental health diagnoses are due to his migraines. The examiner opined that there did not appear to be a connection between the Veteran's anxiety disorder and migraines. The Veteran reported a traumatic childhood that included abuse, bullying, and legal issues. The examiner noted that despite the lack of diagnosis on enlistment, the trauma experienced in early life appears to have impacted the Veteran throughout his life. The examiner noted that before, during, and after service the Veteran has had difficulties with social, legal, and relational spheres (i.e., arrested in childhood, fights in the military, domestic violence conviction after discharge). The examiner also noted that anxiety was first diagnosed in 2018. The Veteran reported feelings of depression and anxiety, which he believed started in the military, due to the "regulations and expectations."  The examiner opined that it appeared that the Veteran's current mental health difficulties are a continuation of the mental health challenges he reported experiencing during his youth and prior to military service. The examiner noted that although psychosocial stressors can trigger migraines, it appears that the Veteran had mental health struggles prior to his medical diagnosis of migraines. The examiner explained that regarding the etiology of depressive and anxious disorders, it is difficult to determine if one started before the other, as there are multiple overlapping symptoms. The examiner noted the conflicting reports in the Veteran's file, based on the Veteran's self-report of symptoms, treatment, and timelines. The examiner explained that without a detailed, accurate history, determining etiology in mental health disorders is extremely difficult.

The September 2023 VA examiner also opined that the Veteran's psychiatric condition was not at least as likely as not aggravated beyond its natural progression by his migraine disability. The examiner noted that there is no indication that the Veteran's anxiety was aggravated by migraines or tension headaches. The examiner explained that although psychosocial stressors can trigger migraines, it appears that the Veteran had mental health struggles prior to his medical diagnosis of migraines.

The Board assigns no probative value to the January 2023 and February 2023 VA medical opinions. The examiner relied entirely on the fact that the Veteran had advanced different theories as to the cause of his psychiatric disorder. The Veteran is not a mental health expert and has not been shown to have the requisite medical training or expertise to determine the nature or etiology of his psychiatric disorder. See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F. 3d 1372, 1376-77 (Fed. Cir. 2007).  Determining the nature and etiology of the Veteran's psychiatric disorder was a question for the VA examiner.  

The Board finds the June 2023 and September 2023 VA opinions as to whether the Veteran's psychiatric condition was clearly and unmistakably not aggravated by service and whether such disorder was aggravated by his service-connected migraine headaches highly persuasive. The examiner considered the relevant evidence of record, to include the Veteran's lay statements and medical history. The examiner, a psychologist, provided thorough rationale for her opinion. Further, there is no medical opinion to the contrary as to either issue. 

(Continued on the next page)

?

The Board acknowledges the Veteran's assertion that his psychiatric disorder is secondary to his service-connected migraine headaches. However, determining the nature and etiology of his current acquired psychiatric disorder is a complex medical question, and the Veteran has not been shown to have the requisite medical expertise to make such determination. See Jandreau, 492 F. 3d at 1376-77. 

Based on the foregoing, the Board finds that there is clear and unmistakable evidence that a psychiatric disorder both preexisted the Veteran's active service and was not aggravated therein. As the presumption of soundness has been rebutted, the Veteran is not entitled to service-connected benefits under 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.304. Moreover, as the competent and persuasive evidence demonstrates his current psychiatric disorder is not caused or aggravated by his service-connected migraine headaches, secondary service connection may not be established under 38 C.F.R. § 3.310. The claim is denied.

 

 

D. Martz Ames

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	A. Dennis, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.