Citation Nr: A25032321
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240814-463636
DATE: April 8, 2025

REMANDED

Service connection for a left ankle disability is remanded. 

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the Army from May 1981 to November 1985.  

This appeal is being adjudicated according to the appellate process set forth under the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA).  See 84 Fed. Reg. 138, 169 (Jan. 18, 2019); 38 C.F.R. § 19.2.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a July 2024 rating decision issued by a Regional Office of the United States Department of Veterans Affairs (VA).

In the August 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim for service connection for a left ankle disability, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Service connection for a left ankle disability is remanded. 

The Veteran is seeking service connection for a left ankle disability that he asserts had its onset in service.  VA records show treatment for a left ankle injury from April 1985 to October 1985, with the Veteran's separation from service occurring in November 1985.  

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination regarding the nature and likely etiology of his current left ankle disability in February 2024; however, the Board finds the February 2024 VA examination is inadequate to adjudicate the Veteran's claim and of no probative value.  Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007) ("[O]nce the Secretary undertakes the effort to provide an examination when developing a service-connection claim, . . . he must provide an adequate one.").

The VA examiner documented review of the Veteran's VA e-folder in combination with an in-person examination.  The VA examiner documented some of the Veteran's in-service treatment for a left ankle injury and noted that "no further documentation found regarding treatment for left ankle over time."  On examination, the Veteran reported that the Veteran's left ankle symptoms have continued though he has not sought orthopedic treatment.  The VA examiner opined that the Veteran's left ankle disability was less likely than not incurred in or caused by service.  The VA examiner reasoned that because there was a lack of medical records demonstrating any type of medical attention or treatment for the left ankle over the course of time following the Veteran's in-service left ankle injury that a post-service event, illness, or injury is a more likely etiology.  

Because the VA examiner's rationale relies solely on the absence of medical evidence since service, remand is warranted for an adequate examination.  

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for a VA medical examination to obtain a medical opinion addressing the likelihood that his current left ankle disability is etiologically related to his active military service.  The VA examiner must review the claims file and must note that in the report.  A copy of this REMAND must be made available to the VA examiner. 

The VA examiner is asked to opine on whether it is at least as likely as not (50 percent probability or greater) that the Veteran's current left ankle disability had its onset or is otherwise related to service. 

The VA examiner is reminded to consider the Veteran's lay statements regarding the nature and onset of his disability, including any evidence concerning continuity of symptomatology, as he is legally permitted to report his symptoms, past medical history, and experiences.  

The examiner must not opine on the credibility of the Veteran.  The examiner may, however, discuss whether there is any medical reason to accept or reject the Veteran's assertions. 

A clear and detailed rationale for the opinion(s), including a discussion of the facts and medical principles involved, should be provided as it will be of considerable assistance to the Board.  Please do not simply list the facts on which you relied. 

The examiner is informed that reliance on a lack of treatment and/or gap between discharge from military service and diagnosis of disability without explaining why such evidence is significant, may be an insufficient rationale.  

If the examiner relies on medical treatises, the examiner should identify and discuss the treatises. 

If the examiner determines a disability was acute rather than chronic, the examiner should explain how he or she arrived at that conclusion rather than providing a conclusory opinion.  For example, what evidence led to that conclusion, what would the examiner expect to see if a condition was chronic, how do the Veteran's lay statements, if any, affect the conclusion? 

If the examiner determines that a requested opinion cannot be rendered without resorting to speculation, this examiner must state whether the need to speculate is caused by a deficiency in the record or the examiner (i.e., additional facts are required, or the examiner does not have the needed knowledge or training).  The examiner should identify what evidence cannot be obtained.  The examiner should review the record prior to the examination and elicit from the Veteran a detailed medical history.  

 

 

M. Tenner

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Lee, P. M., Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.