Citation Nr: A25032833
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240227-420980
DATE: April 9, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for hypertension is granted.

Entitlement to service connection for tinnitus is granted. 

Entitlement to service connection for a left knee condition is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for a right knee condition is denied. 

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include depression, anxiety and posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for a kidney condition is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral hearing loss is denied. 

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran's hypertension was incurred in or caused by active-duty service.

2. Resolving all doubt in the Veteran's favor, tinnitus had its onset in service.

3. The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran has had a left knee condition at any time during or approximate to the pendency of the claim.

4. The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran has had a right knee condition at any time during or approximate to the pendency of the claim.

5. The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran has had an acquired psychiatric disorder at any time during or approximate to the pendency of the claim.

6. The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran has had a kidney condition at any time during or approximate to the pendency of the claim.

7. The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran has had a hearing loss condition at any time during or approximate to the pendency of the claim.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for service connection for hypertension are met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

2. The criteria for service connection for tinnitus are met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303. 

3. The criteria for service connection for a left knee condition are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

4. The criteria for service connection for a right knee condition are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

5. The criteria for service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

6. The criteria for service connection for a kidney condition are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

7. The criteria for service connection for a hearing loss condition are not met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Marine Corps from September 2015 to September 2016. This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from June 2023 and October 2023 rating decisions issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In the February 2023 VA Form 10182, the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the June 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal for the issues of entitlement to service connection for a heart condition, bilateral knee condition, kidney condition and an acquired psychiatric disorder as well as the evidence of record at the time of the October 2023 AOJ decision on appeal for the issues of service connection for tinnitus and bilateral hearing loss. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Service Connection

Service connection may be granted for disabilities due to disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active military service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303. Service connection may be granted for any disease initially diagnosed after discharge when the evidence establishes that disability was incurred in service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d). Service connection may be established by showing continuity of symptomatology after discharge. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(b).

To substantiate a claim of service connection, there must be evidence of: (1) a current disability (for which service connection is sought); (2) incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury in service; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166-1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004). The determination as to whether these requirements are met is based on an analysis of all evidence of record and an evaluation of its credibility and probative value. Baldwin v. West, 13 Vet. App. 1 (1999); 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a).

In the absence of proof of a current disability, there is no valid claim of service connection. Brammer v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 223, 225 (1992). The United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (CAVC) has held the requirement that a current disability be present is satisfied when a claimant has a disability at the time of a claim for VA disability compensation is filed or at any time during the pendency of that claim. See McClain v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 319 (2007).

VA is required to give due consideration to all pertinent medical and lay evidence in evaluating a claim for disability benefits. 38 U.S.C. § 1154(a). Lay evidence can be competent and sufficient to establish a diagnosis of a condition when (1) a layperson is competent to identify the medical condition, (2) the layperson is reporting a contemporaneous medical diagnosis, or (3) lay testimony describing symptoms at the time supports a later diagnosis by a medical professional. Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 (Fed. Cir. 2007).

When there is an approximate or nearly equal balance of positive and negative evidence regarding the merits of an issue material to the determination of the matter, the benefit of the doubt in resolving each such issue shall be given to the Veteran and the claim will be granted on the merits. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b). When the evidence persuasively favors against the claim, the benefit of the doubt doctrine is inapplicable, and the claim will be denied on its merits. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 781 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc).

Additionally, VA must provide a VA medical examination and/or medical opinion when there is (1) competent evidence of a current disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability, and (2) evidence establishing that an event, injury, or disease occurred in service or establishing certain diseases manifesting during an applicable presumptive period for which the claimant qualifies, and (3) an indication that the disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability may be associated with the Veteran's service or with another service-connected disability, but (4) insufficient competent medical evidence on file for the VA to make a decision on the claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(4); McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006). The threshold for determining whether the evidence "indicates" that there "may" be a nexus between a current disability and an in-service event, injury, or disease is a low one. McLendon, 20 Vet. App. at 83.

1. Entitlement to service connection for hypertension. 

The Veteran asserts entitlement to service connection for a heart condition and the Board notes that hypertension is considered a heart condition. Upon a review of the record, the Board finds that entitlement to service connection for hypertension is warranted.

Procedurally, in April 2023, the Veteran filed a VA Form 21-526EZ seeking entitlement to service connection for a heart condition. A June 2023 rating decision denied service connection. The Veteran subsequently filed a February 2024 VA Form 10182 appealing the claim to the Board. 

In February 2024, the Veteran also filed a VA Form 21-526EZ seeking service connection for hypertension. A June 2024 rating decision deferred a decision on entitlement to compensation for hypertension. A July 2024 rating decision granted service connection for hypertension with an evaluation of 20 percent effective February 27, 2024. 

Therefore, during the course of this appeal, in July 2024, the AOJ granted entitlement to service connection for hypertension. This favorable determination is binding on the Board. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c). Thus, the Board finds that entitlement to service connection for hypertension is warranted.

Based upon the foregoing, the Board finds that entitlement to service connection for hypertension is granted.

2. Entitlement to service connection for tinnitus.

The Veteran asserts entitlement to service connection for tinnitus. Upon a review of the record, the Board finds entitlement to service connection for tinnitus is warranted.

Regarding the first element of service connection requiring a current disability, the October 2023 rating decision favorably found that the Veteran has been diagnosed with the disability of tinnitus. See also April 2023 and August 2023 VA Examinations. Therefore, the Veteran's claim meets the first element of service connection.

Regarding the second element of service connection requiring an in-service event, the Veteran reported that the onset of his tinnitus occurred during his military service at the gun range. See April 2023 VA Examination. Additionally, during the August 2023 VA examination, the Veteran reported that the onset of tinnitus occurred in 2015 and that the circumstances of the onset occurred following shooting a rifle in bootcamp. The Veteran reported ringing in his ears following shooting the rifle and that, since the onset, his tinnitus has become constant. As the Veteran is competent to report lay-observable symptoms and the time of their onset, the Board finds that the Veteran's claim meets the second element of service connection. See Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 470.

Regarding the third element of service connection requiring a nexus between the Veteran's current disability and the in-service event, the April 2023 VA examiner found that the Veteran's tinnitus was less likely than not (likelihood was less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) caused by or a result of military noise exposure. The VA examiner further explained that service treatment records indicated no significant permanent shift in hearing thresholds greater than normal measurement variability from entrance to separation, and there was no evidence of permanent auditory damage on active duty. Additionally, there was no complaint of tinnitus in service treatment records or at separation. Though excessive noise exposure on active duty was conceded with working in logistics for the short duration the Veteran was in service, and tinnitus was reported during the examination, the VA examiner found no nexus of auditory damage on active duty to relate the current report of tinnitus to military noise. The VA examiner also noted that the examiner could not provide a medical opinion regarding the etiology of the Veteran's tinnitus without resorting to speculation. More specifically, taking into consideration the Veteran's post-separation occupational and recreational activities, the etiology pertaining to the Veteran's level of tinnitus could be partially attributed to his hobby of motorcycle riding and working as a sheet metal worker for five years.

The April 2023 VA examiner considered most of the pertinent evidence of record, relying on and citing to the records reviewed. Moreover, the examiner offered clear conclusions with supporting data as well as reasoned medical explanations connecting the two. See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295 (2008); Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 124 (2007) ("[A] medical opinion... must support its conclusion with an analysis that the Board can consider and weigh against contrary opinions"). However, the April 2023 VA examiner failed to address the Veteran's report of the onset of his tinnitus during service at the gun range. The Board notes that the Veteran is competent to report lay-observable symptoms such as ringing in the ears and the time of its onset and, thus, such should be considered by the VA examiner in the nexus opinion. See Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 470. Additionally, the VA examiner also noted that an opinion could not be provided without resorting to speculation. Accordingly, as the VA examiner failed to address the Veteran's lay statements and stated that an opinion could not be provided without speculation, the Board assigns the April 2023 nexus opinion little probative weight. 

The August 2023 VA examiner found that the Veteran's tinnitus was at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) incurred in or caused by exposure to hazardous noise. However, the August 2023 VA examiner also found that the examiner could not provide a medical opinion regarding the etiology of the Veteran's tinnitus without resorting to speculation. The VA examiner further explained that the Veteran's visit was not consistent. His subjective responses were not consistent with any of the objective testing. Therefore, the examiner could not assume his subjective comments regarding tinnitus are true.

The August 2023 VA examiner provided a negative nexus opinion without providing a rationale for such opinion. As noted above, a medical opinion must support its conclusion with an analysis that the Board can consider. Stefl, 21 Vet. App. at 124. As the August 2023 VA examiner provided no analysis with the negative nexus opinion, and further found that an opinion could not be provided without speculation, the Board assigns the August 2023 VA medical opinion no probative weight.

Nonetheless, in the case of a wholly lay-observable disability such as tinnitus, the Veteran is competent to report both its onset date and its persistence since that date. Jandreau, 492 F.3d at 1377. In both the April 2023 and August 2023 VA examinations, the Veteran reported that he began experiencing ringing in the ears at a gun range during service. The Board finds that the Veteran is competent to report the onset of lay-observable symptoms such as ringing in the ears. The Board also has no reason to doubt the veracity of his statements as they have been consistent throughout the appeal and are not contradicted by any evidence of record. Caluza v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 498, 506 (1995) aff'd, 78 F.3d 604 (Fed. Cir. 1996). Therefore, the Board assigns the Veteran's statements regarding his current symptoms and the onset of tinnitus great probative weight.

Consequently, based on the foregoing, the Board finds the evidence weighs in favor of the Veteran's claim. Therefore, the Board finds that the Veteran's tinnitus had its onset in service. Lynch, 21 F.4th at 781. As such, service connection for tinnitus is warranted.

3. Entitlement to service connection for a left knee condition. 

4. Entitlement to service connection for a right knee condition. 

The Veteran asserts entitlement to service connection for a bilateral knee condition. Upon a review of the record, the Board finds that service connection for a bilateral knee condition is not warranted.

Regarding the first element of service connection requiring a current disability, there is no evidence of record showing that the Veteran has a current disability related to his bilateral knees. The Board notes that pain in conjunction with functional loss can constitute a disability for purposes of service connection, however there is no evidence of pain paired with functional loss related to the bilateral knees. See Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356 (Fed. Cir. 2018). As noted above, in the absence of proof of a current disability, there is no valid claim of service connection. Brammer, 3 Vet. App. at 225. Therefore, the Veteran's claim does not meet the first element of service connection. 

Additionally, the Board finds that a remand for a VA examination is not warranted pursuant to McLendon. A remand pursuant to McLendon requires evidence of a current disability; however, as noted above, there is no evidence of record related to a current disability of a bilateral knee condition. 

Based upon the foregoing, as the evidence persuasively favors against the finding of a current disability, the benefit of the doubt doctrine is inapplicable, and the Board finds that entitlement to service connection for a bilateral knee condition is not warranted. Lynch, 21 F.4th at 781.

5. Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include depression, anxiety and PTSD.

The Veteran asserts entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder. Upon a review of the record, the Board finds that service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder is not warranted.

Regarding the first element of service connection requiring a current disability, there is no evidence of record showing that the Veteran has a current disability related to a psychiatric condition. As noted above, in the absence of proof of a current disability, there is no valid claim of service connection. Brammer, 3 Vet. App. at 225. Therefore, the Veteran's claim does not meet the first element of service connection. 

Additionally, the Board finds that a remand for a VA examination is not warranted pursuant to McLendon. A remand pursuant to McLendon requires evidence of a current disability; however, as noted above, there is no evidence of record related to a current disability of a psychiatric disorder. 

Based upon the foregoing, as the evidence persuasively favors against the finding of a current disability, the benefit of the doubt doctrine is inapplicable, and the Board finds that entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder is not warranted. Lynch, 21 F.4th at 781.

6. Entitlement to service connection for a kidney condition.

The Veteran asserts entitlement to service connection for a kidney disability. Upon a review of the record, the Board finds that service connection for a kidney condition is not warranted.

Regarding the first element of service connection requiring a current disability, there is no evidence of record showing that the Veteran has a current disability related to a kidney condition. As noted above, in the absence of proof of a current disability, there is no valid claim of service connection. Brammer, 3 Vet. App. at 225. Therefore, the Veteran's claim does not meet the first element of service connection. 

Additionally, the Board finds that a remand for a VA examination is not warranted pursuant to McLendon. A remand pursuant to McLendon requires evidence of a current disability; however, as noted above, there is no evidence of record related to a current disability of a kidney condition. 

Based upon the foregoing, as the evidence persuasively favors against the finding of a current disability, the benefit of the doubt doctrine is inapplicable, and the Board finds that entitlement to service connection for a kidney condition is not warranted. Lynch, 21 F.4th at 781.

7. Entitlement to service connection for bilateral hearing loss.

The Veteran asserts entitlement to service connection for bilateral hearing loss. Upon a review of the record, the Board finds that service connection for bilateral hearing loss is not warranted.

Regarding the first element of service connection requiring a current disability, the August 2023 VA examination found normal hearing in the right and left ear. Notably, the objective findings of the examination (i.e., Puretone threshold in decibels) indicate hearing loss of the right and left ear. However, the VA examiner noted that such test results are not valid for rating purposes and are not indicative of organic hearing loss. More specifically, the VA examiner noted that the Veteran was not consistent with his Puretone or discrimination responses. The VA examiner performed Distortion product otoacoustic emissions to obtain objective frequency specific information and the Veteran's otoacoustic emissions were present and robust from 1.6 to 8 kilohertz (kHZ) indicating no worse than a mild loss. The VA examiner did not feel that the Veteran's subjective responses were reliable. Further, the VA examiner found that the Veteran's Speech Reception Thresholds (SRTs) of 35 decibels were not consistent with his Puretone responses. Based upon such inconsistent results, the VA examiner found the hearing test results invalid for rating purposes. 

(Continued on the next page)

?

There are no additional hearing tests of record valid for rating purposes or additional objective medical findings showing hearing loss. Therefore, the evidence of record does not show a disability of bilateral hearing loss. As noted above, in the absence of proof of a current disability, there is no valid claim of service connection. Brammer, 3 Vet. App. at 225. Therefore, the Veteran's claim does not meet the first element of service connection.

Based upon the foregoing, as the evidence persuasively favors against the finding of a current disability, the benefit of the doubt doctrine is inapplicable, and the Board finds that entitlement to service connection for a bilateral hearing loss condition is not warranted. Lynch, 21 F.4th at 781.

 

 

John R. Doolittle, II

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Brostowski, Leyna

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.