Citation Nr: A25032206
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240331-429676
DATE: April 8, 2025

ORDER

A disability rating in excess of 50 percent for adjustment disorder with mixed disturbance of emotions and insomnia is denied.

A disability rating in excess of 10 percent for left ankle strain is denied.

A disability rating in excess of 10 percent for right ankle strain is denied.

REMANDED

The appeal for entitlement to service connection for right shoulder tendonitis as secondary to left shoulder strain is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. Throughout the appeal period, the Veteran's adjustment disorder with mixed disturbance of emotions and insomnia was manifested by psychiatric symptomatology resulting in occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity, without more severe manifestations productive of occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas or total occupational and social impairment.

2. Throughout the appeal period, the Veteran's left ankle sprain has been productive of no more than moderate limitation of motion, with no evidence of ankylosis.

3. Throughout the appeal period, the Veteran's right ankle sprain has been productive of no more than moderate limitation of motion, with no evidence of ankylosis.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for a disability rating in excess of 50 percent for adjustment disorder with mixed disturbance of emotions and insomnia have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.159, 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.7, 4.130, Diagnostic Code (DC) 9440.

2. The criteria for entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent for a left ankle sprain have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.40, 4.59, 4.71a, DC 5271.

3. The criteria for entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent for a right ankle sprain have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.40, 4.59, 4.71a, DC 5271.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Air Force from March 2006 to February 2015.

These matters come before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a March 2024 rating decision issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In the March 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the October 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims for increased rating for his service-connected adjustment disorder with mixed disturbance of emotions and insomnia, left ankle strain and right ankle strain, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of entitlement to service connection for a right shoulder disability any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of that claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Increased Ratings

Disability ratings are determined by applying the criteria set forth in VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities. The Schedule is based on the average impairment of earning capacity. Individual disabilities are assigned separate diagnostic codes. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1. When two evaluations are potentially applicable, VA will assign the higher evaluation when the disability more nearly approximates the criteria for the higher rating. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7. VA will resolve reasonable doubt as to the degree of disability in favor of the Veteran. 38 C.F.R. § 4.1. If the evidence for and against a claim is in equipoise, the claim will be granted. See 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49, 56 (1990). Any reasonable doubt regarding the degree of disability should be resolved in favor of the claimant. 38 C.F.R. § 4.3.

In accordance with 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2 and Schafrath v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 589 (1991), the Board has reviewed all evidence of record pertaining to the history of the service-connected disabilities at issue. The Board has found nothing in the historical record which would lead to the conclusion that the current evidence of record is not adequate for rating purposes. Moreover, the Board is of the opinion that this case presents no evidentiary considerations which would warrant an exposition of remote clinical histories and findings pertaining to the disability.

Each disability is viewed in relation to its history. 38 C.F.R. § 4.1; Peyton v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 282 (1991). The Board notes that where entitlement to compensation has already been established and an increase in the disability rating is at issue, the present level of disability is of primary concern. 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2 (2016); see also Francisco v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 55 (1994). In Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007), however, the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) held that "staged ratings" are appropriate for an increased rating claim when the factual findings show distinct time periods where the service-connected disability exhibits symptoms that would warrant different ratings.

The evaluation of the same disability under various diagnoses is to be avoided. 38 C.F.R. § 4.14. Section 4.14 does not preclude the assignment of separate evaluations for separate and distinct symptomatology where none of the symptomatology justifying an evaluation under one diagnostic code is duplicative of or overlapping with the symptomatology justifying an evaluation under another diagnostic code. Esteban v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 259, 262 (1994).

VA must consider all favorable lay evidence of record. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); Caluza v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 498 (1995). The Veteran is competent to testify in regard to the onset and continuity of symptomatology. Heuer v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 379, 384 (1995); Falzone v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 398, 403 (1995); Caldwell v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 466 (1991).

1. Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 50 percent for adjustment disorder with mixed disturbance of emotions and insomnia.

The Veteran's adjustment disorder with mixed disturbance of emotions and insomnia (hereinafter "adjustment disorder") is currently rated as 50 percent disabling under DC 9440. The Veteran contends that he is entitled to a 70 percent rating due to the severity of his adjustment disorder. See Argument presented at Higher-Level-Review Conference March 18, 2024.

By way of background, in June 2015, the RO granted service connection for adjustment disorder with a 50 percent rating effective February 28, 2015, the day the Veteran was discharged from active duty. 

In April 2023, the Veteran filed an increased rating claim for adjustment disorder. In May 2023, the RO acknowledged receipt of the April 2023 increased rating claim; however, returned the application citing it as incomplete due to a missing signature. To cure this defect, the Veteran through his representative submitted another June 3, 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ application for an increased rating claim. On June 8, 2023, the RO acknowledged receipt of the application finding the defect was not cured and again returned to the Veteran for signature. Finally, on June 23, 2023, the Veteran through his representative submitted a fully executed and signed application for an increased rating claim for his adjustment disorder. 

In October 2023, the RO denied the claim for an increased rating and continued the rating at 50 percent. In November 2023, the Veteran requested higher level review of the October 2023 rating decision and in March 2024, the RO continued the denial. Thus, the appeal period before the Board begins on June 23, 2023, the date of the properly executed claim for an increased claim (plus consideration of the one-year look back period). See Gaston v. Shinseki, 605 F.3d 979, 984 (Fed. Cir. 2010).

Under the General Formula for Mental Disorders (General Formula), the Board must conduct a "holistic analysis" that considers all associated symptoms, regardless of whether they are listed as criteria. Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 10, 22 (2017); 38 C.F.R. §4.130. The Board must determine whether unlisted symptoms are similar in severity, frequency, and duration to the listed symptoms associated with specific disability percentages. Then, the Board must determine whether the associated symptoms, both listed and unlisted, caused the level of impairment required for a higher disability rating. Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 114-118 (Fed. Cir. 2013).

Under the General Formula, a 50 percent rating is assigned when symptoms such as flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; or difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships cause occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.

A 70 percent rating is assigned when symptoms such as suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant speech; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a worklike setting); or inability to establish and maintain effective relationships cause occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood.

A 100 percent rating is assigned for total occupational and social impairment due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; or memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name.

Turning to the evidence of record, the Veteran's December 2022 VA treatment records show that the Veteran denied any suicidal or homicidal ideation. During an alcohol screening, he reported drinking 2 to 4 times a month. During a depression screening he scored a 2 mainly due to feeling down, depressed, and hopeless and lacking pleasure doing things in several days. 

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in July 2023. He was diagnosed with adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood. The Veteran indicated that he started therapy during service while deployed and currently thought seeing a therapist again "would be a good idea." The Veteran had no substance abuse history and not legal history. He reported symptoms of depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks that occur weekly, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss, disturbances of motivation and mood, and difficulty establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships. He reported that he is not married and has no children. He worked as an aviation mechanic for an airline company. During his appointment, the Veteran presented clean and casually dressed. He was alert and oriented and his speech was articulate without any notable problems with language. He did not show any symptoms of delusions, visual or auditory hallucinations or paranoias.  The VA examiner found that the Veteran exhibits occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks, although generally functioning satisfactorily, with normal routine behavior. 

Based on the evidence of record, the Veteran is shown to have no more than occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity consistent with a 50 percent disabling rating. 

During his VA examination, the Veteran was noted to be appropriately dressed. No note of neglect of personal appearance or hygiene was mentioned. The Veteran also did not report any suicidal ideation or suicide attempts.  Although the Veteran has symptoms of panic attacks, nothing on the record show that the Veteran's panic attacks were continuous. In addition, although the VA examiner marked that the Veteran had symptoms of disturbances of motivation and mood, the record does not show that the Veteran's mood affected his everyday normal routine. Furthermore, the Board also notes the Veteran did not exhibit any impaired speech, impaired impulse control, or spatial disorientation, and he did not neglect his personal appearance and/or hygiene or exhibit significant memory loss during the pendency of the appeal.

In sum, the evidence of record does not show that the Veteran has suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control; spatial disorientation; or an inability to establish and maintain effective relationships during this period to support the assignment of a higher disability rating.

Regarding social and occupational impairment, the Veteran has not asserted this his psychiatric symptoms cause difficulties establishing relationships with others or difficulties with his work, and therefore, the Board finds this level of symptomology is consistent with a 50 percent rating for reduced reliability and productivity.

After considering the evidence of record, the Board finds that the Veteran's symptoms more closely approximate the criteria for a 50 percent disability rating throughout the appeal period. Overall, the Veteran has not demonstrated a level of impairment consistent with the 70 percent criteria, nor have the Veteran's symptoms caused occupational and social functioning in most areas or total occupational and social functioning referenced by the 70 and 100 percent evaluation criteria. Mauerhan, supra, Vazquez-Claudio, supra. The criteria for the next higher rating of 70 percent have not been met or approximated. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411. Therefore, an increased rating for the Veteran's adjustment disorder with mixed disturbance of emotions and insomnia is denied.

2. Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 10 percent for left ankle strain.

3. Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 10 percent for right ankle strain.

The Veteran's left and right ankle strain are currently rated as 10 percent disabling, respectively, under DC 5271. The Veteran contends that his bilateral ankle strain is more severely disabling than represented by the currently assigned 10 percent ratings. 

In June 2015, the RO granted service connection for a bilateral ankle sprain with a noncompensable ratings for the left and right ankles effective February 28, 2015. In November 2018, the Veteran filed an increased rating claim for both ankles. In December 2018, the RO increased the rating for each ankle to 10 percent effective June 20, 2018. On April 22, 2023, the Veteran filed another increased rating claim for both ankles. In May 2023, the RO acknowledged receipt of the April 2023 increased rating claim; however, returned the application citing it as incomplete due to a missing signature. To cure this defect, the Veteran through his representative submitted another June 3, 2023, VA Form 21-526EZ application for an increased rating claim. On June 8, 2023, the RO acknowledged receipt of the application finding the defect was not cured and again returned to the Veteran for signature. Finally on June 23, 2023, the Veteran through his representative submitted a fully executed and signed application for an increased rating claim for his bilateral ankle strain. 

In October 2023, the RO denied the claim for increased ratings for the right and left ankles and continued the ratings at 10 percent. In November 2023, the Veteran requested higher level review of the October 2023 rating decision and in March 2024, the RO continued the denial of increased ratings. Thus, the appeal period before the Board begins on June 23, 2023, the date of claim for increased ratings (plus the consideration of the one-year look back period). See Gaston v. Shinseki, 605 F.3d 979, 984 (Fed. Cir. 2010).

Disability of the musculoskeletal system is primarily the inability, due to damage or infection in parts of the system, to perform the normal working movements of the body with normal excursion, strength, speed, coordination, and endurance.

Functional loss may be due to the absence or deformity of structures or other pathology, or it may be due to pain, supported by adequate pathology and evidenced by the visible behavior in undertaking the motion. Weakness is as important as limitation of motion, and a part that becomes painful on use must be regarded as seriously disabled. 38 C.F.R. § 4.40. In Mitchell v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 32, 44 (2011), the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) held that, although pain may cause a functional loss, "pain itself does not rise to the level of functional loss as contemplated by VA regulations applicable to the musculoskeletal system." Rather, pain may result in functional loss, but only if it limits the ability "to perform the normal working movements of the body with normal excursion, strength, speed, coordination, or endurance." Id., quoting 38 C.F.R. § 4.40. 

With respect to joints in particular, the factors of disability reside in reductions of normal excursion of movements in different planes. Inquiry will be directed to more or less than normal movement, weakened movement, excess fatigability, incoordination, pain on movement, swelling, deformity or atrophy of disuse. 38 C.F.R. § 4.45; DeLuca v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 202 (1995).

The intent of the Rating Schedule is to recognize actually painful, unstable or malaligned joints, due to healed injury, as entitled to at least the minimum compensable rating for the joint, even in the absence of arthritis. 38 C.F.R. § 4.59; Burton v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 1, 5 (2011). In this regard, 38 C.F.R. § 4.59 requires that "[t]he joints involved should be tested for pain on both active and passive motion, in weight-bearing and nonweight-bearing and, if possible, with the range of the opposite undamaged joint." Correia v. McDonald, 28 Vet. App. 158 (2016). Further, 38 C.F.R. § 4.59 is applicable to the evaluation of musculoskeletal disabilities involving actually painful, unstable or malaligned joints or periarticular regions, regardless of whether the Diagnostic Code under which the disability is evaluated is predicated on range of motion measurements. Southall-Norman v. McDonald, 28 Vet. App. 346 (2016).

When evaluating musculoskeletal disabilities based on limitation of motion, 38 C.F.R. § 4.40 requires consideration of functional loss caused by pain or other factors listed in that section that could occur during flare-ups or after repeated use and, therefore, not be reflected on range-of-motion testing. 38 C.F.R. § 4.45 requires consideration also be given to less movement than normal, more movement than normal, weakened movement, excess fatigability, incoordination, and pain on movement. See DeLuca v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 202 (1995); see also Mitchell, supra, at 44. Nonetheless, even when the background factors listed in § 4.40 or 4.45 are relevant when evaluating a disability, the rating is assigned based on the extent to which motion is limited, pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a; a separate or higher rating under § 4.40 or 4.45 itself is not appropriate. See Thompson v. McDonald, 815 F.3d 781, 785 (Fed. Cir. 2016) ("[I]t is clear that the guidance of § 4.40 is intended to be used in understanding the nature of the veteran's disability, after which a rating is determined based on the § 4.71a criteria.").

Diagnostic Codes 5270 through 5274 address disabilities of the ankle. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a. DC 5270, applicable to ankylosis of the ankle, and DC 5272, applicable to ankylosis of the subastragalar or tarsal joint, do not apply because the evidence of record does not support a finding that the Veteran suffered from ankylosis at any time. DC 5273, applicable to malunion of the os calcis or astragalus, does not apply because the record contains no evidence of such malunion. DC 5274, applicable to astragalectomy, does not apply because the Veteran never underwent such a procedure.

Prior to the pendency of this appeal, VA promulgated new regulations governing ratings for the musculoskeletal system and muscle disabilities, including ankle disabilities, effective February 7, 2021. See 85 Fed. Reg. 76,453 (Nov. 30, 2020). These new regulations apply to all applications for benefits received by VA or that are pending before the agency of original jurisdiction on or after February 7, 2021. Accordingly, because VA received the Veteran's claim for increased evaluation on June 23, 2023, only the new rating criteria applies.

Under the new version of Diagnostic Code 5271 effective February 7, 2021, a 10 percent rating is warranted for moderate limited motion of the ankle (less than 15 degrees dorsiflexion or less than 30 degrees plantar flexion.) A maximum 20 percent rating is warranted for marked limited motion of the ankle (less than 5 degrees dorsiflexion or less than 10 degrees plantar flexion.) 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5271. 

Normal ankle motion is dorsiflexion to 20 degrees, and plantar flexion to 45 degrees. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Plate II.

Turning to the evidence of record, the Veteran's December 2022 VA treatment records show that he reported falling due to his ankle "giving out." He was afforded a VA examination in July 2023 where he was diagnosed with bilateral ankle strain. He reported increased mobility issues due to pain. He did not report instability in the ankles. He reported weekly severe flare ups in both ankles lasting up to 3 to 12 hours. He was not taking any medications but used ice, wraps and elevation for pain relief. 

Initial ROM testing revealed both right ankle and left ankle plantar flexion to 25 degrees and dorsiflexion to 15 degrees on active and passive testing. Pain was noted on weight bearing, active motion, passive motion which causes functional loss on both ankles. Repetitive use testing revealed no additional loss of function or ROM limitation after three repetitions for either ankle. The Veteran was not examined after repeated use over time or during a flare-up, but the examiner indicated that the evidence suggested pain, fatigability, weakness, lack of endurance, or incoordination that significantly limits functional ability with repeated use over time or with flare-ups. Estimated ROM during flare ups revealed both right and left ankle plantar flexion to 20 degrees and dorsiflexion to 10 degrees.  There was no evidence of instability of station, crepitus, muscle atrophy, ankylosis, joint instability, shin splints, stress fractures, Achilles tendonitis, Achilles tendon rupture, malunion of calcaneus or talus, or talectomy for either ankle. The VA examiner indicated that the Veteran used a brace for both ankles but there was no history of surgical procedures for either ankle.

Upon review of the evidence of record, the Board concludes that the Veteran's bilateral ankle sprain disability most nearly approximates the criteria for 10 percent rating throughout the period on appeal and that a higher rating is not in order.

Based on the foregoing, the Board finds the evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that a rating in excess of 10 percent for the Veteran's bilateral ankle strain is warranted at any time during the period on appeal. The record does not reflect that the Veteran's bilateral ankle strain has been characterized by marked limitation of motion with less than 5 degrees of dorsiflexion or less than 10 degrees plantar flexion. At most, the Veteran's right ankle disability and left ankle disability have both been characterized by limitation of motion in plantar flexion to 20 degrees and in dorsiflexion to 10 degrees. Even considering the Veteran's reports of symptoms and functional loss, the degree of additional limitation reflected would not result in symptoms more nearly approximating the criteria for a 20 percent rating for either ankle. Accordingly, the evidence persuasively weighs against a rating in excess of 10 percent for the Veteran's right ankle disability and left ankle disability.

As mentioned, the Board has also considered the other diagnostic codes pertaining to the ankle. Other disability ratings may be assigned if the symptomatology for a disability is not duplicative or overlapping with the symptomatology of any other disability. See Esteban v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. at 261. However, the Board finds that no separate or higher rating is warranted under any other diagnostic code. Specifically, there is no competent evidence of record reflecting ankylosis of the right ankle or left ankle, ankylosis of the subastragalar or tarsal joint, malunion of os calcis or astragalus, or that the Veteran has undergone a talectomy or astragalectomy. 

Aside from the December 2022 report of a fall due to his ankle giving way, the Veteran has not asserted, nor does the evidence show, that he has ankle instability which could require consideration of a separate rating by analogy under Diagnostic Code 5262 for impairment of the tibia and fibula. The report of giving way did not result in indication of instability at the July 2023 VA examination or objective findings of instability based on examination. The Veteran's primary complaint is pain. For disabilities of the joints in particular, the Rating Schedule specifically contemplates factors such as weakened movement; excess fatigability; pain on movement; disturbance of locomotion; and interference with sitting, standing, and weight bearing. Mitchell, 25 Vet. App. at 37; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.45, 4.59. It also considers pain, instability, and malaligned joints. 38 C.F.R. § 4.59. As such, the Board finds that the Veteran's symptomatology is adequately compensated for by the 10 percent ratings currently assigned based on the evidence of record before the Board at the time of issuance of the October 2023 rating decision. If the Veteran feels his ankle conditions have worsened, he is welcome to file an increased rating claim.

In reaching its conclusions in the instant case, the Board acknowledges the Veteran's belief that his right and left ankle disabilities are more severe than reflected by the currently assigned disability ratings. In this regard, the Board must consider the entire evidence of record when analyzing the criteria laid out in the rating schedule. While the Board recognizes that the Veteran is competent to describe his symptomatology, he is not competent to provide an opinion regarding the severity of his symptomatology in accordance with the rating criteria. See Woehlaert v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 456 (2007).

The Board has also considered whether staged ratings are appropriate for the Veteran's service-connected disabilities; however, the Board finds that his symptomatology has been stable throughout the entire appeal period. Therefore, assigning staged ratings for such disabilities is not warranted. 

Accordingly, the most probative evidence of record persuasively weighs against the claim of entitlement to evaluations in excess of 10 percent for the service-connected left and right ankle strain. As the most probative evidence of record persuasively weighs against higher ratings, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776.

REASONS FOR REMAND

Entitlement to service connection for right shoulder tendonitis as secondary to left shoulder strain is remanded.

The Veteran contends his right shoulder disability is secondary to his service-connected left shoulder strain. Specifically, the Veteran contends that he must rely more on his right shoulder due to the extreme pain in his left shoulder. See July 2023 VA examination. 

Establishing service connection on a secondary basis, requires evidence sufficient to show (1) that a current disability exists and (2) that the current disability was either (a) caused by or (b) aggravated by a service-connected disability. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a)-(b). Secondary causation exists when the non-service-connected was caused by a service-connected disability either in a direct, etiological way or via multiple steps in a causal chain. Spicer v. McDonough, 61 F.4th 1360, 1365 (Fed. Cir. 2023) (citations omitted). 

Secondary aggravation exists when the non-service-connected disability, although not caused by a service-connected disability, would be less severe were it not for a service-connected disability. Id. at 1364. For example, secondary aggravation may be established where the progression of the non-service-connected disability could have been arrested or improved but for the service-connected disability. Id. The provisions of 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(b) explicitly require, however, not only that an increase in the severity of the nonservice-connected disease or injury be shown but also that the baseline level of severity of the nonservice-connected disease or injury be established by medical evidence. See also Spicer, 61 F.4th at 1364.

Under the AMA, the Board is bound by favorable findings by the AOJ or by a prior Board decision on an issue on appeal in the absence of evidence of clear and unmistakable error. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104 (c). The Board notes that the AOJ made a favorable finding in the March 2024 rating decision that the Veteran has been diagnosed with right shoulder tendinitis. Indeed, in his July 2023 VA examination, he was diagnosed with right shoulder bicipital tendonitis. The Veteran is already service connected for left shoulder strain. See June 2015 Rating Decision. 

As previously mentioned, the Veteran has consistently claimed that he must rely on his right shoulder more due to the extreme pain in his left shoulder. His July 2023 VA examiner issued a negative nexus opinion finding that his left shoulder disability did not proximately cause his right shoulder tendonitis. The VA examiner opined that his right shoulder condition is likely an overuse injury caused by repetitive mechanical stress. 

Here, the Board finds the July 2023 VA medical opinion inadequate as the VA examiner did not provide an adequate rationale in support of its conclusion and did not provide an opinion regarding aggravation. See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 301 (2008) (holding that a medical report cannot merely draw conclusions from data; it should include "a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two"). While the VA examiner cited to the Veteran's service treatment records, examination, and experience, there was not adequate rationale explaining why a nexus could not be established. In addition, the VA examiner discussed the causation prong of secondary service connection but did not address whether the Veteran's right shoulder bicipital tendonitis was at least as likely as not aggravated by the Veteran's service-connected left shoulder disability, especially considering the Veteran's lay statements regarding having to rely more on his right shoulder. As stated above, the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit has restated the standard by which secondary service connection is determined. Spicer, supra. The Board finds that this was predecisional duty to assist error and a remand for an addendum VA medical opinion is necessary to ensure the opinion addresses the current standard and correct the error. See 38 C.F.R. § 20.802.

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Obtain an addendum VA medical opinion with an appropriate clinician to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's right shoulder bicipital tendonitis. The Veteran's claims folder and a complete copy of this Remand must be reviewed and notation of such made on the examination report. All diagnostic testing deemed to be necessary by the clinician should be accomplished.

The clinician is requested to provide opinions responsive to the following:

(a.) Whether, but for the Veteran's service-connected left shoulder strain, he would not have a current disability of right shoulder bicipital tendonitis.

(b.) Whether the Veteran's right shoulder bicipital tendonitis would be less severe and result in less functional impairment but for the Veteran's service-connected left shoulder strain.

If the clinician opines that the right shoulder bicipital tendonitis would result in less functional impairment but for the left shoulder strain, the clinician must attempt to establish a baseline level of severity of the right shoulder bicipital tendonitis prior to aggravation by the service-connected left shoulder strain.

The examiner should also address the Veteran's July 2023 lay statements regarding relying on his right shoulder more due to the pain from his left shoulder strain. 

With regard to the term "aggravated," as used in 38 C.F.R. § 3.310 (b), the clinician is reminded this term does not require that there be "permanent worsening" of the non-service-connected disability. Instead, secondary service connection is warranted for "any incremental increase in disability and any additional impairment of earning capacity in nonservice-connected disabilities resulting from service-connected disabilities, above the degree of disability existing before the increase regardless of its permanence." See Ward v. Wilkie, 31 Vet. App. 233, 239 (2019).

A complete rationale must be provided for all opinions expressed and any resort to speculation should be explained.

 

 

C.B. Iwanowski

Acting Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	C. Mendoza, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.