Citation Nr: A25032220
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240410-431523
DATE: April 8, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a left eye disability is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from November 2009 to November 2010 and from May 2011 to May 2012.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from an April 2024 rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).  

In the April 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the June 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of this claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Although the Board regrets additional delay, remand is necessary to correct a duty to assist error in failing to obtain an adequate VA opinion.

In April 2023, the Veteran underwent a VA examination.  The examiner opined that it was less likely than not that the Veteran's Central serous chorioretinopathy (CSCR) is related to his service.  The examiner stated that CSCR is associated with the use of systemic steroids, stomach ulcers secondary to H pylori, or having been diagnosed with autoimmune disease, insomnia, or type "A" personality.  However, the examiner stated that the Veteran did not suffer from any of these conditions and did not provide any further explanation as to what could have caused his Central serous chorioretinopathy.  Further, the examiner failed to address the in-service eye complaint of a refractive error, as well as post-service complaints of eye swelling, having had eye surgery, and his reports of injuring his eye while serving.  See STR, February 2023; CAPRI, February 2023.

Since the Rating Decision on appeal, the Veteran has been service-connected for insomnia.  Whereas the Veteran was awarded service connection for insomnia after the rating decision on appeal, the eye disability could not be considered on a secondary basis to insomnia.  Upon remand, the RO should consider if the Veteran's eye condition is secondary to his service-connected insomnia as addressed by the April 2023 VA opinion, along with the other theories raised above. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. The claims file should be sent to an appropriate examiner to offer an opinion as to what is the medical probability that the current left eye condition onset during service or is otherwise related to an in-service injury, event, or disease, to include his in-service complaints of refractive error, and post-service eye complaints.  

The examiner should also what is the medical probability that left eye condition is (a) caused by, or (b) aggravated by any service-connected condition, including but not limited to, insomnia. 

The need for an examination is left to the discretion of the examiner.  A rationale for all opinions offered is requested as the Board is precluded from making any medical findings. 

 

 

Frederic P. Gallun

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	M.H., Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.