Citation Nr: A25032336
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240805-461513
DATE: April 8, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from April 1992 to February 1996.

This matter comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a June 2024 rating decision by a Regional Office (RO) of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA), also known as the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ).

In the August 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the June 2024 AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

As the Board is remanding the claim of sleep apnea, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of that claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea is remanded.

The Veteran contends that his sleep apnea was caused by disturbed sleep due to work/training schedules, prolonged sleep deprivation, sleep fragmentation and hyperarousal, physical and mental stress, use of caffeine to stay awake, and mold in his sleeping quarters.

The issue of entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea is remanded to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error. The Board finds that remand is warranted to address a theory of entitlement reasonably raised by the record.

Initially, VA provided the Veteran with a toxic exposure risk activities (TERA) examination in March 2024. At that time, the examiner opined that the claimed condition was less likely than not caused by the indicated TERA, after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all TERAs of the Veteran. The examiner noted in the rationale that the Veteran's enlistment examination showed no findings related to the claimed condition; his separation exam showed no findings related to the claimed condition; and his post military private/VA treatment records showed a March 2019 evaluation for sleep apnea after the Veteran reported a sleep study in 2012. The examiner reported that the Veteran gained 25 pounds and noted obesity as a major risk factor of sleep apnea.

Additionally, the Veteran provided the VA with private treatment records in March 2024 that noted that the Veteran was very symptomatic, exhausted all the time, falls asleep if sitting down at any time of the day after at least 7 hours of sleep, experiences loud snoring, short term memory loss, wheezing, has trouble exhaling that worsens with exercise, and had gained 25 pounds. The private examiner further noted that the Veteran was a 47-year-old man with a 19-inch neck and a body mass index (BMI) of 31, which is considered obese.

?

The Board, therefore, finds that obesity as an intermediate step is a theory of entitlement that was reasonably raised by the Veteran's record. The AOJ's failure to address this theory is a pre-decisional duty to assist error and remand is required.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Obtain a medical opinion from an appropriate clinician regarding the nature and etiology of the Veteran's sleep apnea. The examiner should review the claims file and address the following:

(A) Whether it is at least as likely as not that any of the Veteran's service-connected disabilities caused the Veteran's obesity (i.e., but for the service-connected disability, the Veteran would not be obese) or aggravated the Veteran's obesity (i.e., obesity would be less severe and result in less functional impairment but for the Veteran's service-connected disability).

Please note that causation and aggravation are two separate inquires and both must be addressed.

(B) If any of the Veteran's service-connected disabilities caused or aggravated the Veteran's obesity, the examiner is asked to opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's obesity was a substantial factor in causing or aggravating non-service-connected sleep apnea.

In rendering an opinion, the examiner must address the March 2024 examiner's note that obesity is a major risk factor for sleep apnea.

?

(C) Whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's non-service-connected sleep apnea would not have occurred but for obesity which may have been caused by the Veteran's service-connected disabilities.

The examiner should provide a rationale to support the opinion(s).  

 

 

MARJORIE A. AUER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Marchese, Angel N.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.