Citation Nr: A25032925
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240620-451344
DATE: April 9, 2025

ISSUE

Entitlement to service connection for urinary voiding and benign prostate hypertrophy.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for urinary voiding and benign prostate hypertrophy is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from January 1999 to January 2004.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a June 2024 rating decision by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) regional office (RO). The Veteran timely appealed by submitting a June 2024 VA Form 10182 and requested the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the June 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

Because the Board is remanding the claim of entitlement to service connection for urinary voiding and benign prostate hypertrophy, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

As an initial matter, the Board notes it has considered that generally the Board may not decide an appeal before one year has elapsed since the date of the rating decision on appeal, or 60 days from when the Board receives the notice of disagreement, whichever is later. See Williams v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 305 (2024). The Board notes that here, one year has not yet passed from the date the rating decision on appeal. However, the Veteran was sent a Board docketing letter notification on July 11, 2024 which included instructions on how to request a docket switch if desired. See July 11, 2024 BVA Docketing Letter. The Board notes that the Veteran has not submitted any notification that they wish to switch dockets in the approximately nine months since the Board sent the BVA docketing letter which included instructions on how to request a docket switch. Furthermore, because the issue on appeal is being remanded for the reasons set forth below, the Board notes that a formal decision is not being reached on the claim, and therefore the Veteran is not being denied any due process rights pursuant to Williams. To the contrary, by virtue of this remand, the Board is correcting a procedural duty to assist error in substantiating the claim. Thus, the Board will proceed with the remand of the issues as delineated below.

Entitlement to service connection for urinary voiding and benign prostate hypertrophy is remanded.

The Veteran asserts he is entitled to service connection for his urinary voiding and benign prostate hypertrophy (BPH), originally claimed as just urinary voiding but later recharacterized to include BPH. Specifically, the Veteran contends his condition is related to his deployment to the Horn of Africa in 2003 and his exposure to fuel and other fluids associated with his MOS of helicopter power plants mechanic. See May 2023 VA 21-526EZ; June 2024 VA 10182.

The Board finds that remand is necessary to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error. 

Beginning with a favorable finding relevant to this remand decision, VA has conceded that the Veteran received treatment for chronic prostatitis while in service. See June 2024 Rating Decision.

The Veteran was afforded a June 2023 VA examination and medical opinion to determine the nature and etiology of his claimed urinary voiding disability. The examiner noted a current BPH diagnosis. See June 2023 C&P Exam. She then opined that "any currently diagnosed condition(s) related to the Veteran's claimed urinary voiding is less likely than not incurred in or caused by the prostatitis during service." See June 2023 Medical Opinion. She reasoned that the Veteran's urinary dysfunction is most likely secondary to his BPH, for which he is diagnosed finasteride, which the examiner explained may reduce the chance of acute urinary retention. Id. However, the Board notes that, while the examiner does a thorough job of explaining how urinary voiding is secondary to the Veteran's BPH, their analysis does not actually explain how the Veteran's BPH is not related to his in-service prostatitis. A medical examination report cannot only contain conclusions with supporting data, but also a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two. See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295 (2008). Therefore, the June 2023 VA medical opinion is inadequate to the extent that the examiner did not provide a medical explanation for their conclusion as it pertains to the Veteran's BPH and constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error.

The Board notes that the Veteran's argument clearly alludes to participation in a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA), and the above discussed opinion clearly did not address TERA in its rationale either. However, a December 2023 VA medical opinion of record addresses TERA specifically.

Lastly, the Board acknowledges the Veteran's statements that he believes his disability is related to exposure to fuel and other fluids during service. See May 2023 VA 21-526EZ; June 2024 VA 10182. However, the Veteran's statement has no probative value regarding the possible etiology of the Veteran's urinary voiding and BPH. A lay person is considered competent to relay symptoms as actually observed, or as within the realm of their personal knowledge. See Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465 (1994). However, there is no evidence of record to indicate that the Veteran has the appropriate medical training or expertise to render a medical opinion regarding the etiology of the his urinary voiding and BPH. See 38 C.F.R. 3.159(a)(1) (defining competent medical evidence). Therefore, as there is no probative etiological evidence of record to support the Veteran's claim, there is insufficient evidence to grant service connection at this time. 

The evidence of record is inadequate to support a full grant of this case and a pre-decisional duty to assist error has been identified. Therefore, remand is required to correct the error and obtain an adequate medical opinion. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).  

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain a new VA medical opinion from an appropriate clinician to determine the etiology of the Veteran's urinary voiding and benign prostate hypertrophy. An examination is not required unless deemed necessary by the examiner to render the requested opinions.

The examiner must review pertinent documents in the Veteran's claims file. This must be noted in the medical opinion.

Following the review of the complete claims file, including this remand decision, the examiner is asked to answer the following:

(a.) Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's urinary voiding and benign prostate hypertrophy had its onset in or was incurred in service?

In arriving at the requested opinion, the examiner must specifically consider the Veteran's in-service treatment for prostatitis. See, e.g., STR-Medical received January 2004 (August 29, 2001 treatment record).

The examiner is advised that the lack of treatment records, either in-service or after, with reports of relevant symptoms alone is insufficient rationale for a negative medical nexus opinion.

The examiner is further advised that the Veteran is competent to report observable symptoms. Any such reports as to the onset and nature of symptoms must be taken into account, along with the other evidence of record, in formulating the requested opinion. 

A complete rationale must be provided for any opinion(s) expressed. The examiner is reminded that this case is being remanded in part due to the fact that a rationale for a prior medical opinion was not provided. If any requested opinion cannot be provided without resorting to speculation, then the clinician must explain why this is so.

 

Michael A. Pappas

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	E. J.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.