Citation Nr: A25032695
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240104-406155
DATE: April 9, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an increased disability rating greater than 20 percent before June 26, 2024, and greater than 40 percent thereafter, for diabetes mellitus type 1, is denied. 

Entitlement to an increased disability rating greater than 40 percent for residuals of prostate cancer in remission with erectile dysfunction and residual voiding dysfunction, is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. Before June 26, 2024, The Veteran's diabetes mellitus required only restricted diet and one or more daily injection of insulin. 

2. The Veteran did not experience episodes of ketoacidosis or hypoglycemic reactions requiring one or two hospitalizations per year or twice a month visits to a diabetic care provider and did not have complications that would not be compensable if separately evaluated.

3. During the period on appeal, the Veteran's prostate cancer was inactive with residual symptoms of voiding dysfunction, including urinary frequency requiring daytime voiding intervals of less than one hour and awakening to void two times a night; with leakage requiring the wearing of absorbent materials which must be changed less than two times per day, and no marked obstructive symptomatology.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for a disability rating in excess of 20 percent before June 26, 2024, and greater than 40 percent thereafter for diabetes mellitus type 1 have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.119, Diagnostic Code (DC) 7913.

2. The criteria for an increased disability rating greater than 40 percent for prostate cancer residuals are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5103, 5103A, 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.159, 3.321, 4.3, 4.7, 4.115a, 4.115b, DC 7528.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran had active service in the United States Air Force from January 1981 to September 1993 and from October 2001 to May 2003.  

The rating decision on appeal was issued in November 2023 and constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies. On his January 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the November 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  In support of his appeal, the Veteran submitted typed argument dated December 20, 2023, and received on January 4, 2024.  This submission contained both arguments and factual statements not previously contained in the record.  While the Board has considered the Veteran's arguments, these factual statements are evidence received outside of the record on appeal and the Board is unable to consider them in this decision. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim[s], considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Increased Ratings

Disability evaluations are determined by the application of a schedule of ratings, which is based on average impairment of earning capacity caused by the given disability.  Separate diagnostic codes identify the various disabilities. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. Part 4.

When a question arises as to which of two ratings applies under a particular Code, the higher rating is assigned if the disability more nearly approximates the criteria for the higher rating. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7.  After careful consideration of the evidence, any reasonable doubt remaining, including degree of disability, is to be resolved in favor of the Veteran. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.3.  If the evidence is not in approximate balance or nearly equal, the claim is to be denied. See Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021); Ortiz v. Principi, 274 F.3d 1361, 1364 (Fed. Cir. 2001).

In any claim for an increased rating, "staged" ratings may be warranted where the factual findings show distinct time periods when the service-connected disability exhibits symptoms that would warrant different ratings. Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007); Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119 (1999).

1. Increased Rating for Diabetes

The Veteran is seeking a higher rating because for his diabetes because he contends that his use of an insulin pump to deliver continuous insulin meets the criteria for a higher rating.  The Veteran's diabetes is currently evaluated under DC 7913 for diabetes mellitus, with a 20 percent rating before June 26, 2024, and 40 percent rating thereafter.

?

Law

Diagnostic Code 7913 provides a structured scheme of specific, successive, cumulative criteria.  Each higher rating includes the same criteria as the lower rating plus distinct new criteria. Middleton v. Shinseki, 727 F.3d 1172, 1178 (Fed. Cir. 2013).  A 10 percent rating is warranted when diabetes is manageable by restricted diet only.  A 20 percent rating is warranted when diabetes requires one or more daily injection of insulin and restricted diet, or an oral hypoglycemic agent and restricted diet.  A 40 percent rating is warranted when it requires one or more daily injection of insulin, restricted diet, and regulation of activities.  Regulation of activities is defined as avoidance of strenuous occupational and recreational activities.  A 60 percent rating is warranted when diabetes requires one or more daily injection of insulin, restricted diet, and regulation of activities with episodes of ketoacidosis or hypoglycemic reactions requiring one or two hospitalizations per year or twice a month visits to a diabetic care provider, plus complications that would not be compensable if separately evaluated.  A 100 percent rating is warranted when diabetes requires more than one daily injection of insulin, restricted diet, and regulation of activities, with episodes of ketoacidosis or hypoglycemic reactions requiring at least three hospitalizations per year or weekly visits to a diabetic care provider, plus either progressive loss of weight and strength or complications that would be compensable if separately evaluated.

Compensable complications of diabetes are evaluated separately unless they are part of the criteria used to support a 100-percent evaluation.  Noncompensable complications of diabetes are considered part of the diabetic process.  38 C.F.R. § 4.119, Diagnostic Code 7913 (Note 1).

Because Diagnostic Code 7913 contains successive criteria, the criteria for the lower rating must be met before a higher disability rating may be awarded.  A higher rating cannot be granted based on a finding that the Veteran's disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria for the next higher rating.  However, reasonable doubt regarding the presence of a criterion may be resolved in the Veteran's favor. Johnson v. Wilkie, 30 Vet. App. 245 (2018).

?

Evidence

In November 2023, VA provided an examination to assess the severity of the Veteran's diabetes mellitus type 1 (diabetes).  The examiner noted the Veteran's use of an insulin pump but noted no symptoms except for neuropathic pain, numbness, and tingling.  The examiner indicated that the Veteran did not require regulation of activities as part of the medical management of his diabetes.  They also noted that the Veteran visited a medical provider less than twice per month for treatment of either ketoacidosis or hypoglycemia, and that the Veteran had not been hospitalized over the previous year to treat either of these symptoms.  The Veteran had not experienced progressive unintentional weight loss and loss of strength attributable to diabetes. The examiner opined that the Veteran's diabetes caused no impact on his ability to work.  

In the November 2023 rating decision on appeal, the AOJ stated that although the Veteran had not been noted to require a restricted diet, current medical treatises state that a primary objective in the treatment of diabetes is to maintain glucose levels through proper nutrition, so the Veteran's need for dietary restrictions was conceded.  This is a finding favorable to the Veteran which the Board will not disturb.  

The Veteran's medical treatment records are consistent with the findings of the November 2023 VA examiner.  There are occasional endocrinology check-ups but no treatment specifically for ketoacidosis or hypoglycemia requiring more frequent visits and no hospitalizations to treat either symptom.  There is no mention of regulation of activities to control the Veteran's diabetes.  

Analysis

As an initial matter, the Board must address two arguments submitted by the Veteran.  First, the Veteran argues that the rating schedule does not have a diagnostic code which addresses his service-connected disability of diabetes mellitus type 1.  However, DC 7913 provides criteria for rating "diabetes mellitus" which includes both diabetes mellitus type 1 and diabetes mellitus type 2. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.119, DC 7913.  In support of this claim, the Veteran has submitted statements clarifying the differences in both cause and required treatment for diabetes mellitus types 1 and 2.  He emphasizes that type 1 is a "lifelong and incurable" life threatening condition which can only be controlled through medication, while type 2 is potentially treatable through lifestyle changes such as diet and exercise alone.  Assuming for the sake of argument that each of the Veteran's factual statements regarding his disability is correct the Board is still not persuaded by this argument.  The rating schedule addresses numerous lifelong and life-threatening disabilities, assigning ratings based on the average impairment of earning capacity caused by the given disability. See 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. Part 4.  The assigned rating is governed by the average impairment of earning capacity caused by the disability rather than the underlying cause of the disability.  While the cause of the Veteran's diabetes mellitus type 1 may be different than the cause of diabetes mellitus type 2 the rating criteria contained in DC 7913 contemplates the symptoms and impact on employment of both conditions.

The Veteran has also submitted what appears to be a quote from a website, although the full text of the website is not of record, stating that "[y]ou will receive a 100 percent disabling [sic] if you require insulin more than once a day." Based on this quote, the Veteran has submitted multiple medical records confirming his daily need for insulin delivered continuously though an insulin pump.  While the Board is sympathetic to the Veteran's expectations based on the submitted statement, it is not an accurate statement of the criteria contained in DC 7913, which are outlined above.  The Board must apply the criteria listed under the relevant diagnostic code.

Finally, the Veteran has stated that before his separation from active service he signed paperwork indicating that he would receive a 40 percent disability rating for his diabetes.  He argues that he is therefore entitled to at least a 40 percent rating.  The Veteran's service treatment records do contain a March 2003 record of the proceedings of an Air Force Physical Evaluation Board (PEB) as well as a recommendation by the PEB that the Veteran receive permanent retirement and a compensable rating of 40 percent.  However, the recommendation of the PEB member is not binding on VA and does not affect the Board's obligation to apply the rating criteria contained in DC 7913.  The Board did not discuss this report in the evidence section above because it describes the Veteran's symptoms approximately two decades before the period on appeal and, thus, is not pertinent to the current appeal.  

Before June 26, 2024

For the period before June 26, 2024, the question in this appeal is whether the Veteran's diabetes mellitus required one or more daily injections of insulin, restricted diet, and regulation of activities.  Regulation of activities is defined as avoidance of strenuous occupational and recreational activities.  This criterion requires medical evidence. Camacho v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 360, 364-65 (2007).

The Board finds that the Veteran's diabetes mellitus required only restricted diet and one or more daily injection of insulin during the period on appeal.  The Veteran's use of an insulin pump is well documented in treatment records and confirmed by the VA examiner, and the need for restricted diet was conceded by the AOJ.  However, none of the available evidence shows the need for restriction of activities to treat the Veteran's diabetes.

While the Veteran has been diagnosed with compensable complications of diabetes, specifically diabetic neuropathy of the bilateral upper and lower extremities, each of these is already assigned a separate disability rating and will not be considered in assigning a rating under DC 7913.   

Accordingly, the evidence of record persuasively weighs against assigning a rating in excess of 20 percent before June 26, 2024.

Beginning June 26, 2024

For the period beginning June 26, 2024, the question in this appeal is whether the Veteran's diabetes mellitus requires one or more daily injections of insulin, restricted diet, and regulation of activities with episodes of ketoacidosis or hypoglycemic reactions requiring one or two hospitalizations per year or twice a month visits to a diabetic care provider, plus complications that would not be compensable if separately evaluated. 

The Board finds that the Veteran did not have episodes of ketoacidosis or hypoglycemic reactions requiring one or two hospitalizations per year or twice a month visits to a diabetic care provider.  The Veteran has not claimed, and the evidence does not show, that the Veteran experienced have episodes of ketoacidosis or hypoglycemic reactions requiring one or two hospitalizations per year or twice a month visits to a diabetic care provider.

While the Veteran has been diagnosed with compensable complications of diabetes, specifically diabetic neuropathy of the bilateral upper and lower extremities, each of these is already assigned a separate disability rating and will not be considered in assigning a rating under DC 7913.   

Accordingly, the evidence of record persuasively weighs against assigning a rating in excess of 40 percent during the period on appeal.

2. Increased Rating for Prostate Cancer Residuals 

The Veteran is seeking an increased rating for residuals of prostate cancer with erectile dysfunction and residual voiding dysfunction.  The Veteran's disability is currently evaluated under DC 7528 for malignant neoplasms of the genitourinary system.

Law

Under Diagnostic Code 7528, a 100 percent rating is assigned for six months following the cessation of surgical, X-ray, antineoplastic chemotherapy or other therapeutic procedure.  The rating of 100 percent shall continue with a mandatory VA examination at the expiration of six months.  If there has been no local reoccurrence or metastasis, the residuals are rated as voiding dysfunction or renal dysfunction, whichever is predominant.  38 C.F.R. § 4.115b, DC 7528, Note 1.

As noted below, the Veteran did not appear to demonstrate any renal dysfunction; however, the Veteran did experience urinary or voiding dysfunction.

Voiding dysfunction is rated under the three subcategories of urine leakage, urinary frequency, and obstructed voiding.  Regarding urine leakage, a 20 percent rating is warranted when the wearing of absorbent materials which must be changed less than 2 times per day is required.  A 40 percent rating is warranted when the wearing of absorbent materials which must be changed 2 to 4 times per day is required.  A maximum 60 percent rating is warranted when the use of an appliance, or the wearing of absorbent materials which must be changed more than 4 times per day is required. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.115a, Continual Urine Leakage, Post-Surgical Urinary Diversion, Urinary Incontinence, and Stress Incontinence.

Regarding urinary frequency, a 10 percent evaluation is warranted with daytime voiding intervals between 2 and 3 hours; or awakening to void 2 times per night.  A 20 percent evaluation is warranted with daytime voiding intervals between 1 and 2 hours; or awakening to void 3 to 4 times per night.  A maximum 40 percent evaluation is warranted with daytime voiding intervals of less than an hour; or awakening to void 5 or more times per night. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.115a, Urinary Frequency.

Finally, obstructed voiding entails ratings ranging from noncompensable to 30 percent.  A noncompensable rating contemplates obstructive symptomatology with or without stricture disease requiring dilatation one to two times per year.  A 10 percent rating contemplates marked obstructive symptomatology (hesitancy, slow or weak stream, decreased force of stream) with any one or combination of the following: (1) post-void residuals greater than 150 cubic centimeters (cc's); (2) uroflowmetry; markedly diminished peak flow rate (less than 10 cc's per second); (3) recurrent urinary tract infections secondary to obstruction; (4) stricture disease requiring periodic dilatation every two to three months.  A 30 percent rating contemplates urinary retention requiring intermittent or continuous catheterization. 38 C.F.R. § 4.115a.

Evidence

The Veteran's medical treatment records show that he underwent a prostatectomy in May 2019 to treat prostate cancer, currently in remission.  The records do not show any further surgical, X-ray, antineoplastic chemotherapy or other therapeutic procedure occurring within the six months prior to the August 10, 2022, effective date for service connection for the Veteran's residuals of prostate cancer.  

In November 2023, VA provided an examination to assess the severity of the Veteran's condition.  The examiner diagnosed prostate cancer in remission with residuals of erectile dysfunction and voiding dysfunction.  The voiding dysfunction resulted in urinary leakage and increased urinary frequency but no signs of obstructed voiding.  The urinary leakage required use of absorbent material which must be changed less than two times per day.  Daytime voiding interval was less than one hour, and the Veteran awoke to void twice per night.  The examiner noted no evidence of renal dysfunction or other symptoms.  

Medical records from the period on appeal are consistent with the findings of the VA examiner and do no show renal dysfunction, use of absorbent material which must be changed two or more times per day, or obstructed voiding.  

Analysis

The Veteran's prostate cancer is in remission and the last surgical, X-ray, antineoplastic chemotherapy or other therapeutic procedure treating active prostate cancer concluded more than six months before the period on appeal.  Therefore, any residuals of prostate cancer will be rated as voiding dysfunction or renal dysfunction, whichever is predominant.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.115b, DC 7528, Note 1.  As the evidence does not show either renal dysfunction or obstructed voiding, the Veteran's voiding must be rated as either urinary leakage or urinary frequency. Id.

The Veteran's voiding intervals of less than hour during the day qualify for a 40 percent rating, the highest available rating for urinary frequency.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.115a, Urinary Frequency.

The Veteran's use of absorbent material which must be changed less than two times per day qualifies for a 20 percent rating. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.115a, Continual Urine Leakage, Post-Surgical Urinary Diversion, Urinary Incontinence, and Stress Incontinence.  The evidence does not show that the Veteran's absorbent materials need to be changed two or more times per day.

In January 2024, the Veteran argued that he should be entitled to a 60 percent rating based on his usage of absorbent materials during the day and Attends at night.  However, the rating criteria assigns ratings based on the number of times per day these absorbent materials must be changed, not on the length of time during each day that they must be worn. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.115a, Continual Urine Leakage, Post-Surgical Urinary Diversion, Urinary Incontinence, and Stress Incontinence.  As noted in the introduction above, to the extent that the Veteran's argument also contained statements regarding the number of times per day he needs to change the absorbent material, these statements are evidence received outside of the acceptable evidence window and the Board did not consider those statements.  Without considering those statements, the evidence received within the acceptable window of review does not show that his absorbent materials need to be changed two or more times per day.  

The Board notes that erectile dysfunction can be separately rated under DC 7522, however there is no compensable rating available under DC 7522 and this would provide no additional benefit to the Veteran.  

Based on the above, the Board finds that the Veteran's voiding frequency provides the Veteran with the highest available rating and is the predominant symptom of his residuals of prostate cancer.  

In conclusion, the Board finds that the evidence of record persuasively weighs against the Veteran's claim for a rating greater than 40 percent for residuals of prostate cancer.  As the evidence of record persuasively weighs against the Veteran's claim, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. Dec. 17, 2021).

 

 

L. M. BARNARD

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Zimmerman, Micah

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.