Citation Nr: A25032054
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240927-475185
DATE: April 8, 2025

ORDER

Service connection for squamous cell carcinoma is denied.

Service connection for obstructive sleep apnea is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran's currently diagnosed squamous cell carcinoma began during active service or is otherwise related to an in-service injury or disease.

2. The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran's currently diagnosed obstructive sleep apnea began during active service or is otherwise related to an in-service injury or disease.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for service connection for squamous cell carcinoma have not been met.  38 U.S.C §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

2. The criteria for service connection for obstructive sleep apnea have not been met.  38 U.S.C §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Navy from December 1963 to October 1973. 

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an October 2023 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO), which is an agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ).  The October 2023 rating decision readjudicated previously denied claims of service connection for squamous cell carcinoma and sleep apnea but confirmed and continued prior February 2022 denials of those claims on the merits.  

In a September 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran's attorney, on the Veteran's behalf, appealed the denial of service connection for squamous cell carcinoma and sleep apnea; he also elected the Evidence Submission docket.  

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the October 2023 AOJ decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or representative with, or within 90 days from receipt of, the VA Form 10182.  38 C.F.R. § 20.303.  If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal and prior to the date the Board received the VA Form 10182, or (2) more than 90 days following the date the Board received the VA Form 10182, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.303, 20.801.  

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

Notably, neither the Veteran nor his attorney submitted any additional evidence during the 90-day evidentiary window following the Notice of Disagreement (NOD) submission, but the Veteran did submit a motion to have his appeal advanced on the docket due to his age, which was subsequently granted.

Service Connection

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from a disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.  The three-element test for service connection requires evidence of: (1) a current disability; (2) an in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury.  Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166 -67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).  

Service connection may also be established on a presumptive basis for certain diseases if a veteran was exposed to an herbicide agent during active military, naval, or air service.  A veteran will be presumed to have been exposed to an herbicide agent during such service, unless there is affirmative evidence to establish that the veteran was not exposed to any such agent during that service, if the veteran served in the Republic of Vietnam during the period beginning on January 9, 1962, and ending on May 7, 1975.  38 U.S.C. § 1116(c)-(d); 38 C.F.R. § 3.307(a)(6)(iii).  For veterans who are entitled to the presumption of in-service herbicide exposure due to such covered active military, naval, or air service, there is a presumption of service connection for certain diseases enumerated under 38 C.F.R. § 3.309(e), provided that (unless otherwise directed) the disease manifested to a degree of 10 percent or more at any time after service.  38 C.F.R. § 3.307(a)(6)(ii); 38 C.F.R. § 3.309(e).  

In determining whether service connection may be granted, a review of the entire evidence of record is warranted.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a).  

Service connection may be granted when a disease is diagnosed after discharge where all of the evidence shows that the disease was incurred in service.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).  Moreover, lay statements can be competent and sufficient to establish a condition that existed prior to a formal diagnosis, if the lay statements describe symptoms that are supported by a medical professional who, later diagnoses a disability.  See Davidson v. Shinseki, 581 F.3d at 1316 (Fed. Cir. 2007); see also Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 (Fed. Cir. 2007).

Where there is an "approximate balance" of positive and negative evidence to support a claim, the claimant will receive the "benefit of the doubt".  Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 781 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

1. Entitlement to service connection for squamous cell carcinoma

The Veteran seeks service connection for squamous cell carcinoma, contending he has struggled with skin cancer for many years.  See March 2020 VA Form 21-4138, Statement in Support of Claim.  The Veteran further contends that he is entitled to service connection for squamous cell carcinoma on a presumptive basis due to in-service herbicide agent exposure.  See March 2020 VA Form 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim.  Alternatively, the Veteran also asserts that his current squamous cell carcinoma was caused by in-service exposure to hazardous solvents and military fuel vapors or extensive ultraviolet exposure while working on the flight line in service.  See December 2021 Addendum to VA Form 20-0995, Supplemental Claim Application; see also September 2024 VA Form 10182.  In a March 2022 Addendum to the Veteran's VA Form 20-0996, Request for Higher-Level Review, the Veteran contends that the AOJ did not adequately address the new and relevant evidence the Veteran submitted with his VA Form 20-0995.  Additionally, in the September 2024 Addendum to the Veteran's VA Form 10182, the Veteran raises concerns regarding the competency of the various VA examiners.  Specifically, the Veteran asserts that the VA examiners "may have a general understanding of dermatology and pulmonology," but the VA examiners are "unlikely to know and appreciate the complex nature of [the] Veteran's condition" as all the examiners are nurse practitioners "with no specialty."  

In the October 2023 decision on appeal, the AOJ made favorable findings that the Veteran was 1) exposed to herbicide agents in service based on his active naval service in the Republic of Vietnam, 2) exposed to industrial solvents during active duty as a result of his military occupational specialty (MOS) of aircraft engine mechanic, and 3) diagnosed with a current disability, squamous cell carcinoma, based on October 2023 and May 2021 VA examination reports.  The Board is bound by the AOJ's favorable findings absent evidence of a clear and unmistakable error.  38 C.F.R. § 3.104.  

Indeed, the Veteran's personnel records as well as DD Form 214 show that he had service in the Republic of Vietnam in Danang from August 1972 to March 1973 and that he earned a Vietnam Campaign Medal, Combat Action Ribbon, and Vietnam Service Medal.  Although the Veteran is presumed exposed to herbicide agents in the Republic of Vietnam, the Veteran's squamous cell carcinoma is not one of the listed diseases that is presumed due to in-service herbicide exposure.  38 U.S.C § 1116(a)(2) or 38 C.F.R. § 3.309(e).  Thus, it must be determined whether the Veteran's squamous cell carcinoma began during active service or is otherwise related to an in-service injury or disease.  Even when a Veteran is not entitled to the presumption of service connection, he or she may nevertheless establish service connection based on exposure to herbicide agents with proof of actual direct causation.  See Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120 (2007) (holding that the availability of presumptive service connection for some conditions based on exposure to Agent Orange does not preclude direct service connection for other conditions based on exposure to Agent Orange); Combee v. Brown, 34 F.3d 1039 (Fed. Cir. 1994); Brock v. Brown, 10 Vet. App. 155 (1997).  As discussed in further detail below, the evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran's current squamous cell carcinoma began during service, or was otherwise related to an injury, event, or disease in service.  

Turning to the evidence of record, the Veteran's service treatment records do not contain any complaints, treatment, or diagnosis of squamous cell carcinoma, nor do the records reflect any evidence of a skin abnormality in service.  See, e.g., August 1973 Report of Medical Examination.  In addition, the Veteran denied having a tumor, growth, cyst, or cancer and reported that he considered himself to be "in very good health" during a September 1966 medical examination.  See September 1966 Report of Medical History.  Post-service medical records do not document any complaints of, treatment for, or diagnosis of a skin disability until May 2015, when the Veteran sought care for a "skin lesion" on his left hand.  See May 2015 VA primary care note.  A July 2015 VA dermatology note shows the Veteran reported having the lesion on the back of his left hand for thirty-five years.  According to the Veteran, he never sought medical care to address or remove the lesion prior to July 2015, and he was only doing so, at that time, because the lesion was "bothering" his spouse.  A June 2016 VA dermatology note shows the Veteran declined to have the lesion on his left hand biopsied following the July 2015 VA dermatology appointment because he was "not concerned about it," and "it ha[d] been present for many years."  A May 15, 2018, VA dermatology note shows the Veteran's dermatologist completed a biopsy of the left-hand skin lesion due to its recurrence following several cryotherapy treatments.  A May 18, 2018, VA dermatology note shows the Veteran was ultimately diagnosed with squamous cell carcinoma on the back of his left hand after the pathology results of the biopsy were reviewed.  A February 2021 VA dermatology note shows the Veteran was also diagnosed with squamous cell carcinoma on his right parietal scalp following an additional skin biopsy.  A review of the VA medical examination reports of record does not show that the Veteran reported developing the skin lesions on his left hand or scalp prior to 1980.  While the Veteran is not competent to diagnose himself with squamous cell carcinoma or know whether the presence of lesions on his body represented the onset of his squamous cell carcinoma, he is competent to report having an "asymptomatic crusted spot on [his] left dorsal hand" that began thirty-five years prior to him seeking medical treatment, as that is capable of lay observation.  See July 2015 VA dermatology note; see also Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 470 (1994).  Therefore, the Veteran's lay belief that his squamous cell carcinoma is related to disease or injury in service, including in-service herbicide exposure is competent evidence.  Additionally, the record does not demonstrate that the Veteran's squamous cell carcinoma had its onset during his active service, as the Veteran has not asserted such, and there is no evidence of record to support such a finding.  Accordingly, the remaining question is whether the Veteran's current squamous cell carcinoma is etiologically related to an in-service injury or disease, including but not limited to herbicide exposure during service.

Following a May 2021 VA medical examination, the VA examiner addressed this question, opining that the Veteran's squamous cell carcinoma was at least as likely as not incurred in or caused by in-service exposure to herbicide agents.  The May 2021 VA examiner noted that the Veteran was stationed in Japan from 1964 to 1966, during which time the Veteran was exposed to Agent Orange by "mixing up" the Agent Orange prior to it "being loaded onto C123 [airplanes] to be dispersed."  The Veteran reportedly performed this "activity" for three months.  The Veteran was also noted to have been exposed to Agent Orange from 1972 to 1973.  As a rationale, the VA examiner explained that the Veteran had extensive Agent Orange exposure while stationed in Japan.  The VA examiner also explained that "the carcinogenic effects" of herbicide agent exposure "along with other environmental exposures" are at least as likely as not related to the Veteran's service.  While it is presumed that the Veteran was exposed to an herbicide agent during his service in the Republic of Vietnam, and his personnel records confirm he was stationed in Japan from October 1964 to August 1966, the competent evidence of record does not show that the Veteran mixed herbicide agents during his tour of duty in Japan.  Notably, the Veteran has not presented any corroborating evidence, other than his own lay statements, that he mixed Agent Orange by hand in service.  As the Veteran is only competent to report what he personally observed, mixing an unknown chemical substance in service, the examiner's conclusions based on the Veteran's exposure to Agent Orange from reportedly mixing it in service are not probative.  The Veteran's statements are not supported by any service department evidence or other objective findings indicating that the Veteran mixed Agent Orange by hand during service.  Furthermore, as the VA examiner's rationale for the positive nexus opinion is based on the Veteran's own self-reported history of having personally mixed Agent Orange in service, the May 2021 VA medical opinion is not persuasive and therefore not entitled to any probative weight.  See Coburn v. Nicholson, 19 Vet. App. 427, 433 (2006); see also Reonal v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 458, 458 (U.S. 1993).

In August 2021, the May 2021 VA examiner provided an addendum opinion regarding the likely etiology of the Veteran's squamous cell carcinoma, wherein the VA examiner determined that a nexus did not exist between the Veteran's squamous cell carcinoma and his active duty because squamous cell carcinoma is not presumptively linked to herbicide agent exposure.  The VA examiner also explained that "there is a lack of mention of squamous cell carcinoma in the Veteran's medical record that could link the condition to active-duty service," as the Veteran was first diagnosed with squamous cell carcinoma in 2018, more than forty years after separation.  The VA examiner further explained that "there are multiple possible etiologies" for the Veteran's current skin cancer disability and that it is less likely than not that the Veteran's squamous cell carcinoma is due to active duty.  The August 2021 VA medical opinion is probative, as it is based on an accurate medical history and provides an explanation that contains clear conclusions and supporting data.  See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008).  

In December 2021, the Veteran submitted two articles in support of his claim that he asserts the AOJ failed to adequately address.  For the reasons set forth, the December 2021 articles, which the Veteran submitted, are of little probative value regarding the likely etiology of his current skin cancer disability.  The first is an undated article from the Mayo Clinic titled "Squamous cell carcinoma of the skin," and the second is a May 2021 article titled "Carcinogenic Effect of Military Fuel Vapors" from the National Academies Press.  The "Squamous cell carcinoma of the skin" article contains information regarding the manner in which squamous cell carcinoma generally may develop.  The article lists risk factors for developing squamous cell carcinoma, such as having fairer skin or light hair with light-colored eyes, freckling, or sunburning easily, having excessive sun exposure without appropriate clothing or sunblock, using tanning beds, having a history of blistering sunburns or precancerous skin lesions, and having a weakened immune system or rare genetic disorder.  The article also notes that while ultraviolet (UV) radiation causes most DNA mutations in skin cells, other factors may contribute to the risk of skin cancer given skin cancers may develop on skin not ordinarily exposed to sunlight.  While the Mayo Clinic article contains relevant information regarding the general causes of squamous cell carcinoma, it does not refer to the Veteran's particular medical history or addresses the particular circumstances of this case.  As such, the "Squamous cell carcinoma" article is of little probative value regarding the likely etiology of the Veteran's current squamous cell carcinoma.  

The "Carcinogenic Effect of Military Fuel Vapors" article discusses the potential effects of military fuel vapors.  Notably, the article concludes that relevant data does not show "that exposure to military fuels carries a risk of kidney cancer, hematopoietic cancer, or other cancer...."  Additionally, the article notes that while some evidence may show that skin tumors may be related to skin irritation, there is only "tenuous evidence" that military fuel vapors "pose a carcinogenic hazard to the skin," as the skin damage that resulted in animal studies is "unlikely to occur in humans."  Like the Mayo Clinic Article, the article from the National Academies Press is of little probative value regarding the likely etiology of the Veteran's current squamous cell carcinoma as it does not address the specific facts and risk factors specific to the Veteran.

The Veteran underwent an additional VA medical examination in December 2021.  The VA examiner noted that the Veteran served in the Republic of Vietnam in 1965, 1967, 1972 and 1973, during which time he was exposed to herbicide agents.  The VA examiner further noted that the Veteran developed his current skin cancer disability on his left hand, face, and scalp three years prior to being examined.  The VA examiner opined that the Veteran's squamous cell carcinoma was less likely than not incurred in service or caused by an event, illness, or injury in service because it was not among the diseases listed as presumptively associated with Agent Orange exposure."  The December 2021 VA medical opinion does not address whether the Veteran's squamous cell carcinoma is directly related to in-service herbicide exposure on a facts found basis.  See Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. at 124 ("A medical nexus opinion finding a condition is not related to service because the condition is not entitled to presumptive service connection, without clearly considering direct service connection, is inadequate on its face").  As such, the December 2021 VA medical opinion is entitled to no probative weight.

VA provided the Veteran with an additional medical examination and opinion in March 2023 and April 2023, respectively.  Upon examination, the Veteran reported that his skin cancer disability began thirty years prior to the examination (in 1993) and that it was possibly due to in-service herbicide agent exposure because he mixed herbicide agents in service.  The Veteran further reported that his initial symptoms consisted of rashes.  The VA examiner opined that the Veteran's current squamous cell carcinoma was at least as likely as not incurred in or caused by in-service herbicide agent exposure.  In the rationale section of the report, the VA examiner explained that the Veteran reported "in great detail" how he mixed herbicides (agent orange) in service without the use of personal protective equipment (PPE) or without any special cleaning to his hands, body or clothes following the mixing.  The VA examiner also explained that "research has shown higher risks of cancer [including non-melanoma skin cancer (NMSC)] in military personnel exposed to herbicides," especially men with the lightest skin types and lighter eyes.  The VA examiner further explained that herbicide agents contain dioxin, which is carcinogenic to humans.  As discussed above, the evidence of record does not show that the Veteran possesses the necessary competence to discern that the chemical he mixed in service was in fact Agent Orange, or other herbicides known to have been used in the Republic of Vietnam, and there is no corroborating evidence to support the Veteran's belief.  Given the April 2023 VA medical opinion is largely based on the Veteran's reports of mixing Agent Orange without the use of PPE, it is of no probative value as it is based on self-reported history without any supporting documentation or other evidence to corroborate the Veteran's assertions.  See Coburn v. Nicholson, supra.  

VA provided the Veteran with an additional medical opinion in August 2023 to address the conflicting VA medical opinions of record.  Following a review of the conflicting medical evidence of record, the August 2023 VA examiner concluded that there was insufficient evidence to show that the Veteran's current skin cancer disability was related to toxic exposure activities in service.  The VA examiner explained that the health risks associated with the Veteran's toxic exposure did not include squamous cell carcinoma; the VA examiner also explained that the Veteran's squamous cell carcinoma was diagnosed and treated more than 40 years after separation.  Despite its brevity, the August 2023 VA medical opinion is probative as it is based on an accurate medical history as well as the competent medical evidence of record, and it contains a clear conclusion with supporting rationale.  See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, supra.  

Notably, on August 10, 2022, while the Veteran's claim was pending, the Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxins Act of 2022 (PACT Act), Pub. L. No. 117-168, § 303, 136 Stat. 1759, 1779 (2022), was signed into law.  Under the PACT Act, VA is required to provide medical examination for veterans with presumed in-service exposure to certain toxins/environmental hazards as part of VA's duty to assist, unless the Secretary determines there is no indication of an association between the disability claimed by the veteran and the toxic exposure risk activity (TERA) for which the Veteran submitted evidence.  See 38 U.S.C. § 1168.  

In October 2023, VA provided the Veteran with a TERA examination pursuant to 38 U.S.C § 1168.  Upon examination, the Veteran reported that his disability began more than thirty years prior, with him developing lesions on his left hand and head as a result of his exposures during his service in the Republic of Vietnam.  The VA examiner noted that the Veteran's lesions were removed and diagnosed as cancerous.  The VA examiner opined that the Veteran's squamous cell carcinoma was less likely than not due to in-service toxic exposure.  As a rationale, the VA examiner explained that "there is no medical literature to support [the] Veteran's toxic exposures during Vietnam caused his" current skin cancer disability to develop.  Based on the absence of medica literature, the VA examiner concluded that the Veteran's squamous cell carcinoma was less likely than not caused by in-service sun exposure or jet fuel exposure "after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran."  The October 2023 VA medical opinion regarding the Veteran's TERA participation in service is probative as it is definitive and supported by a sufficient rationale.  See Prejean v. West, 13 Vet. App. 444, 448-49 (2000). 

Based on the foregoing, the competent and probative evidence of record does not show that the Veteran's current squamous cell carcinoma began during active duty or was otherwise related to the Veteran's active service.  As discussed above, nothing in the record shows that the Veteran's squamous cell carcinoma began during active duty, and the Veteran has not asserted such.  In addition, the August 2021, August 2023, and October 2023 VA medical opinions demonstrate that the Veteran's current squamous cell carcinoma was less likely than not etiologically related to his active service.  These VA medical opinions are probative given they are based on a review of the relevant evidence as well as thoughtful analyses of the Veteran's relevant medical history.  Thus, the cumulative findings set forth in the August 2021, August 2023 and October 2023 VA medical opinions are entitled to significant probative weight.  See Nieves-Rodriguez, 22 Vet. App. 295 (holding the probative value of a medical opinion comes from when it is factually accurate, is fully articulated, and has sound reasoning for the conclusion); see also Bloom v. West, 12 Vet. App. 185, 187 (1999) (the probative value of a physician's statement is dependent, in part, upon the extent to which it reflects "clinical data or other rationale to support his opinion").  While the Veteran competently reported that he first developed lesions on his left hand and/or scalp sometime between 1980 and 2001, the competent medical evidence does not show that the initial lesion was a symptom of squamous cell carcinoma or the onset of squamous cell carcinoma.  Moreover, even assuming, arguendo, that the Veteran's squamous cell carcinoma began as an initial cancerous lesion in 1980, which was seven years following his separation from active duty, there is no competent medical opinion of record that links squamous cell carcinoma to an event, injury, or disease during the Veteran's active service, to include in-service exposure to herbicide agents, fuel vapors, and ultraviolet light.  Given the August 2021, August 2023, and October 2023 VA medical opinions are the only competent medical nexus evidence of record, and there is no other competent medical evidence that contradicts or could diminish their probative value, the evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran's current squamous cell carcinoma was caused by or incurred during active duty.  Accordingly, service connection for squamous cell carcinoma is not warranted.  

2. Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea

The Veteran also seeks service connection for sleep apnea due to his in-service herbicide agent exposure.  See March 2020 VA Form 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim.  The Veteran further contends that his military occupational specialty (MOS) of aircraft engine mechanic is "presumptive for exposure to multiple hazardous chemicals including solvents," and exposure to organic solvents "may" lead to sleep apnea.  See December 2021 Supplemental Claim Application Addendum.  Alternatively, the Veteran asserts that remand is warranted for additional development of the Veteran's claim.  Id.  

As noted above, the Veteran is presumed to have been exposed to herbicide agents based on his active-duty service in the Republic of Vietnam.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.307(a)(6)(iii).  Additionally, the AOJ made favorable findings in the October 2023 decision on appeal, that the Veteran was diagnosed with a current sleep apnea disability based on a June 2019 VA sleep study and that the Veteran was exposed to industrial solvents during active duty as a result of his MOS of aircraft engine mechanic.  The Board is bound by the AOJ's favorable findings.  38 C.F.R. § 3.104.  Given the evidence of record shows the Veteran has a current sleep apnea disability, was determined to have been exposed to industrial solvents in service and is presumed to have been exposed to herbicide agents in service, the remaining question is whether the Veteran's sleep apnea began during active duty or is otherwise related to an in-service injury or disease, including exposure to herbicide agents and industrial solvents.  The evidence of record shows that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea less is likely than not related to his in-service toxic exposures.  See 38 U.S.C § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

A review of the Veteran's VA treatment records shows he reported a significant history of snoring with apneic episodes during a February 2019 VA hematology and oncology appointment.

The Veteran underwent a VA medical examination in connection with his claim in May 2021, following which he was diagnosed with obstructive sleep apnea.  The Veteran reported that he did not know when his sleep apnea symptoms began; he could only remember that he snored and was told he stopped breathing when he was asleep.  The VA examiner opined that the Veteran's sleep apnea was less likely than not incurred in or caused by in-service herbicide agent exposure.  As a rationale, the VA examiner explained that "there are no medical records that address complaints of trouble sleeping, excessive tiredness or other symptom associated with sleep apnea that occurred while in the service.  

The May 2021 VA opinion lacks probative value as the VA examiner relied solely on the absence of contemporaneous medical evidence to determine a nexus did not exist between the Veteran's sleep apnea and his active-duty service.  See Buchanan, 451 F.3d at 1337 ("If the Board concludes that the lay evidence presented by a veteran is credible and ultimately competent, the lack of contemporaneous medical evidence should not be an absolute bar to the veteran's ability to prove his claim of entitlement to disability benefits based on that competent lay evidence").  Accordingly, the May 2021 VA medical opinion is entitled to no probative weight.

In December 2021, the Veteran submitted an abstract from an article, "Occupational exposure to organic solvents and sleep-disordered breathing," in support of his claim.  According to the abstract, a study showed that men with obstructive sleep apnea or snoring, as well as women with snoring, more often reported being "occupationally exposed to organic solvents than the" members of the control group, "showing an almost twofold increase in risk for those exposed [to organic solvents] during whole workdays."  The study also indicated that the risk of obstructive sleep apnea and snoring increased in men who had increasing exposure to organic solvents.  Based on the study results, the abstract concludes that "occupational exposure to organic solvents might cause sleep apnea" and "even snoring could be caused by exposure to organic solvents."  While the abstract suggests a correlation may exist between organic solvents and obstructive sleep apnea, the abstract is of little probative value as it is only an excerpt of a larger article, and it does not address the Veteran's specific circumstances or medical history.  See Sacks v. West, 11 Vet. App. 314, 316 (1998) (holding that generic medical treatise evidence "that does not specifically opine as to the relationship between the appellant's condition and active service" cannot provide the medical nexus necessary to establish entitlement to benefits).

The Veteran underwent an additional VA medical examination in December 2021, following which the VA examiner opined that the Veteran's sleep apnea was less likely than not incurred in or the result of an in-service injury because the Veteran's service records do not contain any complaints or treatment for sleep apnea.  Like the May 2021 VA medical opinion, the December 2021 VA medical opinion is not persuasive or probative as it relies on a lack of contemporaneous medical evidence to determine that a nexus does not exist between the Veteran's current sleep apnea and his active-duty service.  

VA provided the Veteran with an additional medical examination and opinion in March 2023 and April 2023, respectively.  Upon examination, the Veteran reported that his sleep apnea began years ago as a result of possible stress from his service.  The Veteran also reported that when his sleep apnea began, his symptoms consisted of loud snoring, daytime sleepiness, fatigue, gasping for air while sleeping, and ceasing to breathe while sleeping.  The Veteran further reported that he is currently treating his sleep apnea with a continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) machine, and his current symptoms are the same as when his disability first manifested.  While the Veteran is competent to report his lay observable symptoms of being excessively tired and fatigued during the day, the Veteran is not competent to report behaviors he could not have observed while unconscious (e.g. snoring, gasping for air, or ceasing to breathe in his sleep).  Furthermore, the Veteran is also not competent to know that his in-service symptoms of being excessively tired and fatigued represented the onset of his sleep apnea, as he does not possess the medical expertise to link his symptoms to a diagnosis.  In other words, he is not competent to state that his in-service symptoms are symptoms of sleep apnea because the issue is medically complex and requires medical knowledge as well as interpretation of complicated medical testing, records, and/or studies.  See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d at 1377; see also Kahana v. Shinseki, 24. Vet. App. 428 (2011).

The April 2023 VA examiner opined that the Veteran's current sleep apnea was at least as likely as not incurred in or caused by in-service herbicide agent exposure.  In the rationale section, the VA examiner noted that the Veteran was in close contact with herbicide agents during his active duty.  See April 2023 VA medical opinion report: squamous cell carcinoma, supra (wherein the VA examiner noted that the Veteran reported "in great detail" how he mixed herbicides in service without the use of PPE or without any special cleaning to his hands, body or clothes following the mixing).  The VA examiner also explained that the Veteran "did not have lung problems or structural problems of the airway prior to deployment."  The VA examiner further explained that a review of the relevant medical literature shows that "the mechanisms linking sleep-related physiologic changes to [upper airway] obstruction in some individuals are not fully understood."  In addition, the VA examiner explained that a 2019 study by the American Thoracic Society shows that individuals with high annual exposure to nitrogen dioxide and fine particulate matter were more likely to develop sleep apnea; and additional medical studies "confirm a plausible" causal relationship exists between sleep apnea and nitrogen dioxide and/or fine particulate matter.  Based on the relevant medical studies and the Veteran's medical history, the VA examiner opined that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea was more likely than not due to environmental exposures, while he was deployed overseas.

As discussed in the previous section, the Veteran has not been shown to possess the necessary competence to know that he chemicals he mixed in service were Agent Orange, and he has not provided any corroborating evidence to support his contention.  Therefore, any conclusions based on the Veteran's exposure to Agent Orange from reportedly mixing it in service are not probative.  While the remainder of the April 2023 VA medical opinion contains rationale that demonstrates a possible correlation between the Veteran's in-service environmental exposure and his sleep apnea, the evidence does not demonstrate that a causal link exists between the Veteran's in-service exposure to hazardous chemicals and his current sleep apnea.  Moreover, the April 2023 VA medical opinion also fails to discuss or consider any of the common risk factors for developing sleep apnea.  Given the April 2024 VA medical opinion is largely based on the assumption that the Veteran mixed agent orange in service without any consideration of the Veteran's full medical history, it is not persuasive, and therefore not probative.  See Coburn, 19 Vet. App. at 433; see also Reonal, 5 Vet. App. at 458.

VA provided the Veteran with an additional medical opinion in August 2023 to address the conflicting VA medical opinions of record.  The August 2023 VA examiner concluded that there was insufficient evidence to show that the Veteran's current obstructive sleep apnea was related to toxic exposure activities in service.  The VA examiner explained that the health risks associated with the Veteran's toxic exposure did not include obstructive sleep apnea.  The August 2023 VA medical opinion is probative as it is definitive and supported by a detailed rationale.  See Prejean v. West, supra.  

In October 2023, VA provided the Veteran with a TERA examination pursuant to 38 U.S.C § 1168.  Upon examination, the Veteran reported that his disability began during the 1980s.  Regarding the onset of his sleep apnea, the Veteran reported that his spouse told him he snored loudly and stopped breathing while he slept.  The Veteran stated that this went on for many years prior to him being diagnosed with sleep apnea.  The Veteran also reported that his sleep apnea continued to cause him exhaustion and tiredness throughout the day.  The VA examiner opined that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea "was less likely than not caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activity(ies), after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran."  As a rationale, the VA examiner explained that "there is no medical literature available to support [the] Veteran's toxic exposures during Vietnam caused the sleep apnea to develop."  The VA examiner further explained sleep apnea can result from a multitude of factors, such as age, endocrine disorders, changes in hormone levels, family history, genetics, heart or kidney failure, large tonsils and a thick neck, lifestyle habits, obesity, and sex.  

While the Veteran's spouse is competent to report observable symptoms of the Veteran's loud snoring, ceasing to breathe while sleeping; and, they are both competent to report the Veteran having excessive daytime tiredness or exhaustion, they are not competent to opine that those symptoms were manifestations or signs of the presence of sleep apnea.  See Jandreau v. Nicholson, supra.  In contrast, the October 2023 VA medical opinion was rendered by a medical professional who is competent to opine on the likely etiology of the Veteran's sleep apnea, and the opinion addresses multiple potential etiologies for the sleep apnea.  The October 2023 VA medical opinion also contains rationale that reflects familiarity with the Veteran's allegations regarding the onset date of his sleep apnea and symptoms, the claims file, and his medical history.  In considering all the evidence, both lay and medical, the examiner determined that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea was less likely than not related to active duty or due to any toxic exposures encountered in service.  Thus, the October 2023 VA medical opinion is entitled to significant probative weight as it contains a valid medical analysis based on the Veteran's relevant medical history.  See Nieves-Rodriguez, 22 Vet. App. at 297 (citing Stefl, supra).

Based on the foregoing, the competent and probative evidence of record shows that the Veteran's current obstructive sleep apnea was less likely than not related to in-service toxic exposure.  While the Veteran competently reported ongoing symptoms which he sincerely believes represented the onset of his current sleep apnea, he has not been shown to possess the medical training or credentials to make such determinations.  Accordingly, his statements and those of his spouse, are not persuasive.  Furthermore, the August 2023 and October 2023 VA medical examiners rendered competent and probative negative nexus opinions based on sound medical principles and accurate facts.  As there is no other competent evidence or opinion of record that would otherwise diminish the probative value of the August 2023 and October 2023 VA medical opinions, the evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran's currently diagnosed obstructive sleep apnea began during active service or is otherwise related to an in-service injury or disease, to include in-service exposure to industrial solvents or herbicide agents.  Accordingly, service connection for obstructive sleep apnea is not warranted.

Notably, in argument submitted with the Veteran's September 2024 VA Form 10182, the Veteran's attorney, Mr. John S. Berry, requested the Board to, "[p]lease furnish us paper copies of all decisions in accordance with the changes in M21-1, Part I, Chapter 3, Section B-Power of Attorney (POA) Rights to Notification and Review of Records, change dated March 9, 2016.  At the outset, the Board is not bound by the M-21, and moreover, any "change" to the M21-1 that occurred in March 2016, has no bearing on this appeal, which was initially filed in 2020.  Additionally, the Veterans Benefits Management System (VBMS) indicates that Mr. Berry has e-folder access.  Furthermore, a review of the Veteran's claims file shows that the attorney's November 2021 privacy act request for a copy of the complete claims file was fulfilled in March 2022.  As such, Mr. Berry should have copies of or access to all the documents in the claims file that the Board may consider in this appeal.  Accordingly, any failure to address the September 2024 request for additional records in the claims file is harmless, and the Board finds no reason to delay this appeal further in order to respond to the September 2024 request.

Finally, as noted above, the Veteran raised concerns regarding the competency of the various VA medical examiners.  When a veteran challenges the competency of a medical examiner, the Board must make factual findings regarding the medical examiner's qualifications and provide sufficient reasons and bases for any conclusions surrounding the medical examiner's competency.  Francway v. Wilkie, 940 F.3d 1304, 1308 (Fed. Cir. 2019) (citing 38 U.S.C. § 7104(d)).  The Federal Circuit has held that a Veteran must raise the issue of an examiner's competency in the first instance.  Id.  "Once the request is made for information as to the competency of the examiner, the veteran has the right, absent unusual circumstances, to the curriculum vitae and other information about [the] qualifications of a medical examiner."  Id.  In addition, whether an examiner is competent to render a medical opinion is a separate inquiry from whether an examiner has rendered an adequate examination and/or opinion.  Id. at 1309.  

Notably, the Veteran was provided with information surrounding the education, training, and medical experience of all the VA examiners who provided medical opinions in the present case when he received notice of the date and time of his various VA medical examinations.  Specifically, VA provided the Veteran with the August 2021, August 2023, and October 2023 VA examiners' qualifications via the April 2021, July 2023, and September 2023 appointment notification letters, respectively.  As demonstrated in the April 2021 appointment notification letter, the August 2021 VA examiner is a board-certified general medicine nurse practitioner (NP) with eleven years of medical experience.  Prior to evaluating the Veteran, the August 2021 VA examiner completed the VA examination curriculum necessary for providing medical opinions.  As reflected in the July 2023 appointment notification letter, the August 2023 VA examiner is a licensed general practice/family nurse practitioner (NP) with eleven years of medical experience.  The August 2023 VA examiner had seven years of experience providing VA medical examinations in 2023 and completed the VA examination curriculum necessary for assessing deployment related environmental exposures and rendering VA medical opinions.  The September 2023 appointment notification letter shows that the October 2023 VA medical examiner was also a general practice family nurse practitioner with five years of medical experience and four years of experience providing VA medical examinations in October 2023.  The October 2023 VA medical examiner also completed the VA medical examination curriculum necessary for assessing deployment related environmental exposures and providing general VA medical opinions.  Considering the foregoing, the Veteran's assertion that the VA examiners are not competent due to their lack of expertise in dermatology and pulmonology is unfounded.  Although the Veteran asserts his disabilities are unusually complex, he has not provided any evidence to support this assertion, or otherwise explained why the claimed absence of expertise renders the August 2021, August 2023 and October 2023 VA examiners' medical training inadequate.  In essence, the Veteran's argument is not whether any one medical examiner lacks the qualifications to provide an adequate medical opinion; but rather, the Veteran argues that a nurse practitioner, generally, is not capable of providing an adequate medical opinion, asserting that a medical professional with a specialty in dermatology and pulmonology, respectively, is necessary to obtain an adequate medical opinion in this case because the Veteran's disabilities ae complex.  These generalized lay assertions are unsupported, and as noted above, the examiners' credentials are already included in the record.  Therefore, the Veteran's reliance on Francway to support his contentions regarding the VA examiners' competence, or lack thereof, is misguided.  Accordingly, a remand for an additional VA examination from a dermatology or pulmonology specialist is not warranted.  Moreover, remand is not warranted to provide the Veteran with any additional information regarding the VA examiners' qualifications because he was provided with the examiner's qualifications prior to all of his VA medical examinations for squamous cell carcinoma and sleep apnea.  See 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).  

 

 

L. B. CRYAN

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Jenkins Moody, Morgan B.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.