Citation Nr: A25032089
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 210614-165700
DATE: April 8, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an earlier effective date of July 9, 2019, for the assignment of a 70 percent rating, but no higher, for posttraumatic stress disorder is granted.

REMANDED

Entitlement to a total disability rating based on individual unemployability due to service-connected disabilities is remanded. 

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. In August 2018, the Veteran filed an increased rating claim for his posttraumatic stress disorder. 

2. In July 2019, a Disability Benefits Questionnaire was completed which focused on the Veteran's posttraumatic stress disorder. 

3. A 70 percent rating was granted in an August 2020 rating decision, effective August 3, 2020.  

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to an earlier effective date of July 9, 2019, but no earlier, for a rating of 70 percent for PTSD have been met. 38 U.S.C. § 5110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.400.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from November 1999 to September 2005 to include service in Iraq. 

In August 2015, the Veteran submitted his initial claim for service connection for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD). A November 2015, Rating Decision issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO) granted service connection and assigned an initial 30 percent rating for PTSD. This decision was not appealed, and the decision became final. In July 2017, the Veteran submitted a new claim for an increased rating for his PTSD. In August 2017, the RO denied an increased PTSD rating finding that the Veteran's disability more closely resembled the criteria for a 30 percent rating. In August 2018, the Veteran filed a new claim for an increased PTSD rating. A September 2018 RO decision continued the Veteran's PTSD rating at 30 percent finding that the recent evidence actually showed some improvement in his condition. In October 2018, the Veteran filed a Notice of Disagreement (NOD) with this September 2018 rating decision. A May 2019, Statement of the Case (SOC) denied an increased rating for the Veteran's PTSD. In August 2019, the Veteran submitted a Disability Benefits Questionnaire (DBQ) that included an increased rating claim for 70 percent. An August 2020 RO rating decision granted an increased rating of 70 percent for the Veteran's PTSD. The RO assigned an August 3, 2020, effective date based upon the date of a VA examination. In December 2020, the Veteran requested Higher-Level Review (HLR) for an earlier effective date for the 70 percent PTSD rating. A March 2021, HLR rating decision denied an earlier effective date for the 70 percent PTSD rating. The HLR decision determined that it could not give probative value to the July 2019 DBQ as there was no information about the review completed by the examining physician. In June 2021, the Veteran appealed that decision to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) via a VA Form 10182 (Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement)). The Veteran requested the Direct Review docket.

As an appeal in which the appellant requested, on the Notice of Disagreement, direct review by the Board without submission of additional evidence and without a Board hearing, the Board's decision is based on a review of the evidence of record at the time of the decision on the issue on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301.

Evidence has been submitted during a window of time when the Board may not consider it in reaching this decision. This evidence includes, but is not limited to, additional medical records. If the Veteran wishes for this evidence to be considered, he may do so by filing a supplemental claim. Instructions for filing a supplemental claim are included with this decision.

The record reflects the Veteran's PTSD may have prevented him from maintaining substantially gainful employment during the appeal period. See, e.g., VA Treatment Records; July 2019 Private Examination. Because a TDIU rating is inherent in any claim for an increased rating, it must be added as an issue. See Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447 (2009). 

INCREASED RATING

The June 2021, appeal to the Board sought an effective date of July 9, 2019, which was the date of the Veteran submitted DBQ which the Veteran's attorney argues shows symptoms which warrant a 70 percent rating.

Disability evaluations are determined by the application of a schedule of ratings, which is based on average impairment of earning capacity caused by the given disability. Separate diagnostic codes identify the various disabilities. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. Part 4.

When a question arises as to which of two ratings applies under a particular Code, the higher rating is assigned if the disability more closely approximates the criteria for the higher rating. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7. After careful consideration of the evidence, any reasonable doubt remaining, including degree of disability, is to be resolved in favor of the Veteran. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.3. 

In any claim for an increased rating, "staged" ratings may be warranted where the factual findings show distinct time periods when the service-connected disability exhibits symptoms that would warrant different ratings. Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007); Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App, 119 (1999).

If a Veteran has a service-connected psychiatric disorder and a non-service connected psychiatric disorder, all symptoms should be attributed to the service-connected disorder if it is not possible to distinguish the symptoms. Mittleider v. West, 11 Vet. App. 181 (1998). 

The appeal period before the Board is from August 21, 2018, the date VA received the claim for an increased rating for PTSD, plus the one year look back period. Gaston v. Shinseki, 605 F.3d 979, 982 (Fed. Cir. 2010). Prior to August 3, 2020, the Veteran's PTSD is rated as 30 percent disabling, pursuant to Diagnostic Code 9411, which provides that such disability is evaluated under the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders found in 38 C.F.R. § 4.130. 

A 50 percent evaluation is warranted where there is occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity. This may be due to such symptoms as flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships. Id.

A 70 percent evaluation is warranted where the disorder is manifested by occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking or mood due to such symptoms as suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech that is intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic of depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately, and effectively; impaired impulse control, such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence; spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work-like setting; and an inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.

A 100 percent evaluation is warranted for total occupational and social impairment. This may be due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name. Id.

When evaluating a mental disorder, the rating agency shall consider the frequency,

severity, and duration of psychiatric symptoms, the length of remissions, and the

capacity for adjustment during periods of remission. The rating agency shall

assign an evaluation based on all the evidence of record that bears on occupational

and social impairment, rather than solely on the examiner's assessment of the level

of disability at the moment of the examination. When evaluating the level of

disability from a mental disorder, the rating agency will consider the extent of

social impairment but shall not assign an evaluation solely on the basis of social

impairment. 38 C.F.R. § 4.126.

The specified factors for each incremental psychiatric rating are not requirements

for a particular rating but are examples providing guidance as to the type and

degree of severity, or their effects on social and work situations. Analysis should

not be limited to whether the symptoms listed in the rating scheme are exhibited;

rather, consideration must be given to factors outside the rating criteria in

determining the level of occupational and social impairment. Mauerhan v.

Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436 (2002).

Under the General Formula for Mental Disorders (General Formula), the Board must conduct a "holistic analysis" that considers all associated symptoms, regardless of whether they are listed as criteria. Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 10, 22 (2017); 38 C.F.R. § 4.130. However, a Veteran may only qualify for a given disability rating under § 4.130 by demonstrating the particular symptoms associated with that percentage, or others of similar severity, frequency, and duration. Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112 (Fed. Cir. 2013). Furthermore, when evaluating the level of disability from a mental disorder, the rating agency will consider the extent of social impairment, but shall not assign an evaluation solely on the basis of social impairment. 38 C.F.R. § 4.126. All reasonable doubt as to the degree of disability will be resolved in favor of the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b); 38 C.F.R. § 4.3.

Evidence 

As previously noted, the Veteran's PTSD is rated as 30 percent disabling prior to August 3, 2020, and 70 percent disabling from August 3, 2020. 

In 2018, the Veteran repeatedly reported feelings of anger and irritability. See VA Treatment Records. For example, an October 9, 2018 VA treatment note documents the Veteran's reports that his spouse left him because of his anger and he was fired after getting into an argument with another man. A November 9, 2018 VA treatment note reflects the Veteran's reports of irritability and difficulty dealing with people. 

In a September 2018 VA examination, the examiner did not provide any symptoms related to the Veteran's PTSD diagnosis. Instead, the VA examiner indicated the Veteran could not be adequately assessed due to the Veteran's level of alcohol impairment at the time of the examination. During the examination, the Veteran reported panic attacks, chronic sleep impairment, anger issues, and financial, housing, and relationship difficulties. While the Veteran reported panic attacks, the examiner stated that the Veteran's report of panic attacks did not meet the DSM-V criteria for panic attacks. The Veteran denied suicidal or homicidal ideations and there was no indication of audiovisual hallucinations or delusions. 

In July 2019, the Veteran submitted a DBQ completed by private examiner, Dr. C.M... Dr. C.M. found the Veteran to have occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking and/or mood. During the exam, the Veteran described having no close friends, that he self-isolated, and expressed his anger with violence. The Veteran further suffered from employment, financial, and housing difficulties. Some of the Veteran's documented symptoms included difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, inability to establish and maintain effective relationships, and obsessive rituals which interfere with daily activities. The examiner also noted that the Veteran suffered from impaired impulse control such as an unprovoked irritability resulting in periods of violence. The Board affords this private opinion significant probative weight as the opinion is consistent with the evidence of record.

Analysis 

The Board resolves all reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor and finds that a 70 percent rating is warranted for his PTSD, beginning on July 9, 2019. 

A review of the July 2019, private DBQ shows the Veteran was suffering from symptoms including anxiety; chronic sleep impairment; disturbances of motivation and mood; impaired impulse control; social disengagement; and significant interpersonal relationship issues. The examiner completed a review of the Veteran's VA records as well as completed an assessment via telehealth. Therefore, the Board feels it can afford this examination appropriate probative weight in disagreement with the March 2021 HLR rating decision. The examiner found that overall, the Veteran was suffering from occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, and thinking and/or mood. As discussed above, the Veteran's symptoms included mild memory loss, suspiciousness, and difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances.  Collectively, these symptoms are of the type, extent, severity, and/or frequency that more nearly approximate occupational and social impairment in most areas of the Veteran's life. 

As to whether the Veteran's rating is deserves a 100 percent rating, the Board does not find gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent ability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; and memory loss for names of closes relatives, own occupation, or own name, or other manifestations on par with the level of severity contemplated by those symptoms.

The Veteran's June 2021, appeal to the Board sought an effective date of July 9, 2019, the date of the submitted DBQ that the Board received on August 8, 2019. The Board finds that as the Veteran's appeal for an increased rating was filed in July 2017, and his symptoms reached the level of a 70 percent rating on July 9, 2019, the later of these dates is July 9, 2019, and therefore the earliest possible effective date for the Veteran's 70 percent rating is July 9, 2019. 38 U.S.C. § 5110(a); 38 C.F.R. § 3.400.

Accordingly, entitlement to an earlier effective date of July 9, 2019, for the assignment of a 70 percent rating, but no higher, for PTSD is granted.

REASONS FOR REMAND

In Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447 (2009), the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) held that a claim for TDIU is part and parcel of an increased rating claim when such claim is raised by the record. The Court recently reaffirmed the central holding in Rice and noted TDIU should be considered during the same time period as the rating on appeal. Phillips v. McDonough, 2024 U.S. App. Vet. Claims LEXIS 1178, No. 22-2574 (June 30, 2024). An informal claim to TDIU can be raised merely by VA's receipt of hospitalization and medical examination reports.  See Norris v. West, 12 Vet. App. 413, 421 (1999); See also 38 C.F.R. § 3.157 (2009).

TDIU is granted where a Veteran's service-connected disabilities are rated less than total, but they prevent him from obtaining or maintaining all gainful employment for which his education and occupational experience would otherwise qualify him. 38 C.F.R. § 4.16 (2015). Marginal employment shall not be considered as constituting substantially gainful employment. 38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a).

The regulations provide that if there is only one such disability, it must be rated at 60 percent or more; and if there are two or more disabilities, at least one disability must be rated at 40 percent or more, and sufficient additional disability must bring the combined rating to 70 percent or more. Disabilities resulting from common etiology or a single accident or disabilities affecting a single body system will be considered as one disability for the above purposes of one 60 percent disability or one 40 percent disability. 38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a).

From August 21, 2018, the Veteran met the percentage standards set forth in § 4.16(a) for a single service-connected disability (PTSD), rated at 70 percent. 

The record reflects evidence that shows the Veteran may have been unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation as a result of his service-connected disabilities, at the time he filed his claim on August 21, 2018, seeking an increased rating in excess of 30 percent for PTSD.

Throughout the appeal period, VA treatment records reflect the Veteran's on and off employment, with the Veteran having employment around April 2018 and unemployment from March 2019. See July 2019 Private Examination. The Veteran has further indicated he was fired "due to not being functional. See October 2018 VA Treatment Note. The Board notes the September 2018 VA examiner failed to provide information regarding the Veteran's level of occupational and social impairment. The July 2019 private opinion by Dr. C.M. reflects a finding of occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, and/or mood. The private examiner also noted the Veteran's loss of employment opportunities. Id. In July 2019, the Veteran became entitled to Veteran Readiness and Employment (VR&E) (formerly Vocational Rehabilitation and Employment) benefits and services but requested discontinuance a few months later. See July 2019 VRE Correspondence; October 2019 VRE correspondence. 

The Veteran should be provided the opportunity to complete a VA Form 21-8940, Veteran's Application for Increased Compensation Based on Unemployability, and provide any additional evidence relating to an inability to secure or maintain substantially gainful employment at any time during the appeal period.

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

1. Provide the Veteran appropriate notice of VA's duties to notify and assist regarding how to substantiate a claim for entitlement to TDIU, to include providing him a VA Form 21-8940. The Veteran should assist in the matter by providing the requested information. 

The letter should inform the Veteran it is vital he provide the information requested on the VA Form 21-8940, to include, but not limited to, a detailed explanation of his employers, the nature of the work performed, the dates of employment, earned income, and his reasons for leaving his employment during the appeal period.

 

RAY BARTO SLABBEKORN, JR.

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Andrew Ledman

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.