Citation Nr: A25032626
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240815-464092
DATE: April 9, 2025

ORDER

New?and?relevant?evidence has been received to warrant readjudication of the claim of service connection for major depressive disorder.

Entitlement to service connection for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and major depressive disorder due to military sexual trauma (MST) is granted.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1.   New?evidence was?received?after an April 2022 rating decision denying the claim of service connection for major depressive disorder that is?relevant?to the  claim on appeal of service connection for major depressive disorder.

2.  The evidence is approximately evenly balanced as to whether the Veteran's PTSD and major depressive disorder are due to in-service MST.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1.  New?and?relevant?evidence has been received to warrant readjudication of the claim of service connection for major depressive disorder.? 38 U.S.C. § 5108;?38 C.F.R. §§ 3.156(d), 3.2501.

2.  With reasonable doubt resolved in favor of the Veteran, the criteria for service connection for PTSD and major depressive disorder are met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.304(f).

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from February 1980 to February 1983. 

These matters come before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a December 2023 rating decision of a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO) that declined to readjudicate the claim of service connection for major depressive disorder (previously claimed as PTSD due to MST) because the evidence submitted was not new and relevant.? The Board is bound by the favorable?finding?in the decision that the Veteran has a diagnosis of major depressive disorder.? 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).? 

The Veteran timely appealed the December 2023 rating decision in an August 2024 Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) (VA Form 10182) and selected direct review by a Veterans Law Judge (VLJ).? 38 C.F.R. § 20.202(b)(1).? Accordingly, the Board will review the evidence of record as of the date of the December 2023 rating decision.? 38 U.S.C. § 7113(a); 38 C.F.R. § 20.301.? The Board will not consider evidence added to the record after the date of the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal.? If evidence was added during this ineligible period, the Board did not consider it.? If the Veteran wishes to have VA consider any evidence that was not considered, he may at any time file a supplemental claim with the AOJ after receiving this decision and the additional evidence will be considered in connection with the supplemental claim.? 38 U.S.C. §§ 5104C(a)(1)(B), (b); 5108; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.2501, 20.1105(a).? If filed within one year, this supplemental claim will preserve the date of the claim denied herein as the effective date of the?grant?of the benefit or benefits sought.? 38 U.S.C. § 5110(a)(2)(B); 38 C.F.R. § 3.2500(h).??? 

The Board will broaden the Veteran's claim of service connection for major depressive disorder and consider all psychiatric diagnoses raised by the record.  Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1, 4-5 (2009).

As a final preliminary matter, the Veteran submitted a Privacy Act request in February 2021 that has yet to be fulfilled by the VA.  However, given that the Board is granting the benefit sought in full, there is no prejudice to the Veteran in proceeding with adjudication of this claim.

Whether new and relevant evidence was presented to warrant readjudication of the claim of service connection for major depressive disorder

In April 2022, the AOJ denied the Veteran's claim of service connection for major depressive disorder.  VA will readjudicate a claim if?new?and?relevant?evidence is presented or secured.  38 C.F.R. §§ 3.156(d), 3.2501(a)(1).  "New" evidence means existing evidence not previously submitted to agency decisionmakers.? 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501(a)(1).  "Relevant?evidence" is evidence that tends to prove or disprove a matter in issue.  Id. 

In this case,?new?evidence was presented after the most recent denial in April 2022 that is?relevant?to the Veteran's claim.  Specifically, a March 2023 letter from a VA staff psychiatrist indicated that the Veteran had been a patient in the Trauma Recovery Program (TRP) at the VA and was diagnosed with, among other things, PTSD and major depressive disorder.  This letter was not already of record and may prove or disprove the current disability element of the claim of service connection on appeal.  Readjudication of the claim is therefore warranted. 

Entitlement to service connection for PTSD and major depressive disorder due to MST

The Veteran contends that he has PTSD that is a result of MST that occurred in service at a house party.  He further reported that the perpetrators of the assault threatened him the day after the incident.  Additionally, the Veteran indicated that he self-medicated with drugs and alcohol as a result of the incident and never told anyone about the assault.

Service connection will be granted if the evidence demonstrates that current disability resulted from an injury suffered or disease contracted in active military, naval, air, or space service.  38 U.S.C.§ 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a).  Establishing service connection generally requires competent evidence of three things: (1) current disability; (2) in-service injury or disease; and (3) a relationship between the two.  Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356, 1361 (Fed. Cir. 2018).  Consistent with this framework, service connection is warranted for a disease first diagnosed after service when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).

In addition, there are particular requirements for establishing service connection for PTSD in 38 C.F.R. § 3.304(f) that are separate from those for establishing service connection generally.  Arzio v. Shinseki, 602 F.3d 1343, 1347 (Fed. Cir. 2010).  Service connection for PTSD generally requires: (1) medical evidence diagnosing the condition in accordance with applicable criteria; (2) a link, established by medical evidence, between current symptoms and an in-service stressor; and (3) credible supporting evidence that the claimed in-service stressor occurred.  38 C.F.R.§ 3.304(f).

If a PTSD claim is based on in-service personal assault, evidence from sources other than the Veteran's service records may corroborate the Veteran's account of the stressor incident.  Examples of such evidence include but are not limited to: records from law enforcement authorities, rape crisis centers, mental health counseling centers, hospitals, or physicians; pregnancy tests or tests for sexually transmitted diseases; and statements from family members, roommates, fellow service members, or clergy.  Evidence of behavior changes following the claimed assault is one type of relevant evidence that may be found in these sources. Examples of behavior changes that may constitute credible evidence of the stressor include but are not limited to: a request for a transfer to another military duty assignment; deterioration in work performance; substance abuse; episodes of depression, panic attacks, or anxiety without an identifiable cause; or unexplained economic or social behavior changes.  38 C.F.R. § 3.304(f)(5).

For the following reasons, entitlement to service connection for PTSD and major depressive disorder due to MST is warranted.

The evidence of record demonstrates the Veteran has current diagnoses of PTSD and major depressive disorder.  Specifically, in October 2019, a VA psychiatrist noted the Veteran's diagnoses of PTSD and major depression disorder.  Therefore, the Veteran meets the current disability requirement for the claim.  Martinez-Bodon v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 393, 404 (2020), aff'd sub nom. Martinez-Bodon v. McDonough, 28 F.4th 1241, 1247 (Fed. Cir. 2022) (a valid DSM-5 diagnosis is required to warrant compensation for a psychiatric disability).

The evidence of record reflects that there is credible supporting evidence that the claimed in-service stressor occurred.  The Board recognizes that the present case involving allegations of personal assault falls within the category of situations in which it is not unusual for there to be an absence of service records documenting the events about which a veteran complains.  Patton v. West, 12 Vet. App. 272, 281 (1999).  Service records may not contain evidence of personal assault, and alternative sources, including testimonial statements from confidants such as family members, roommates, fellow servicemembers, or clergy, may provide credible evidence of an in-service stressor premised on personal assault.  YR v. West, 11 Vet. Ap. 393, 399 (1998).  Likewise, in cases involving an allegation that PTSD is connected to military sexual assault, the Federal Circuit has held that "the absence of a service record documenting an unreported sexual assault is not pertinent evidence that the sexual assault did not occur."  AZ v. Shinseki,731 F.3d 1303, 1318 (Fed. Cir. 2013).

In this case, the Veteran's reports throughout the appeal period of his in-service stressor are credible and competent.  As noted above, the current PTSD regulation relating to personal assault reflects VA's judgment that unreported personal assaults occur frequently in the military.  See Proposed Rule, PTSD Based on Personal Assault, 65 Fed. Reg. 61132 (Oct. 16, 2000) ("Many incidents of in-service personal assault are not officially reported, and veterans may find it difficult to produce evidence to prove the occurrence of this type of stressor").  The record here does not include any contemporaneous corroborating evidence such as police reports or medical examinations.  However, the Veteran reported that he was told to remain quiet about the assault by his perpetrators, which resulted in self-medication with drugs and alcohol.  This is consistent with the nature of personal assaults as indicated in VA regulations, and the Board finds the Veteran's reports that he was told to remain quiet about the assault by his perpetrators, as well as the reports of the assault itself, credible.  

The Board notes that there have been some inconsistencies in the Veteran's reports throughout the appeal period in regard to the specifics of the assault, to include a denial that he ever experienced MST in a November 2007 VA treatment record.  However, the Veteran reported in a March 2019 VA treatment record that he felt significant shame regarding his trauma and that he should have been able to prevent his MST.  It is therefore reasonable to infer that the Veteran denied he was a victim of MST not because it did not occur but because he felt ashamed that it happened.  Further, even though there are discrepancies in the Veteran's accounts of the specifics of the assault, such as inconsistencies on where in the house the assault occurred, the Veteran has been relatively consistent throughout the appeal period, with the exception of the November 2007 denial of MST, that an assault occurred in service.  Thus, the Veteran's reports that he was a victim of an assault in service are credible.

In addition, the Veteran's military personnel records reflect evidence of deterioration in work performance after the assault.  Specifically, the Veteran was separated from the Army Reserve for nine unexcused absences in 1984.  Thus, this evidence of deterioration in work performance corroborates the Veteran's account of the stressor incident.

Further, the evidence of record shows that the Veteran participated since 2018 in mental health treatment with mental health professionals and has relatively consistently related his history of MST while in the military.  In this regard, a VA staff psychiatrist determined that the Veteran experienced PTSD and major depressive disorder symptoms related to his claimed MST.  Menegassi v. Shinseki, 628 F.3d 1379, 382 & n. 1 (Fed. Cir. 2011) (under 38 C.F.R. § 3.304(f)(5), medical opinion evidence may be submitted for use in determining whether a claimed stressor occurred, and such opinion evidence should be weighed along with the other evidence of record in making this determination).  Thus, the lay statements from the Veteran, including the Veteran's reports to treatment providers during the pendency of the claim, are significant pieces of competent and credible evidence corroborating the Veteran's account of the MST.  Therefore, there is credible supporting evidence of record that the claimed in-service stressor occurred.

The remaining issue is whether there is a valid PTSD diagnosis associated with the MST stressor.  In October 2019, a VA psychiatrist found that the Veteran had diagnoses of PTSD and major depressive disorder secondary to MST, that he reported being a victim of MST, and that he had been consistent in visits and endorsed symptoms that appeared consistent with the diagnoses.  Cohen v. Brown, 10 Vet. App. 128, 139, 140 (1997) (mental health professionals "are presumed to know the DSM requirements applicable to their practice and to have taken them into account in providing a PTSD diagnosis").  As the VA psychiatrist explained the reasons for her conclusion based on an accurate characterization of the evidence of record, her opinion is entitled to substantial probative weight. Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008) (most of the probative value of a medical opinion comes from its reasoning).  

Moreover, December 2020 and August 2021 VA opinions that found the Veteran did not have PTSD that was associated with an MST stressor because there were no markers of an in-service stressor in the Veteran's records are inadequate given that they did not consider the Veteran's reports of substance abuse during and after separation from service.  38 C.F.R. § 3.304(f)(5) (examples of behavior changes that may constitute credible evidence of the stressor include, but are not limited to: a request for a transfer to another military duty assignment; deterioration in work performance; substance abuse; episodes of depression, panic attacks, or anxiety without an identifiable cause; or unexplained economic or social behavior changes).

For the above reasons, given the evidence of record showing diagnoses of PTSD and major depressive disorder based on credible and competent supporting evidence corroborating that the in-service MST occurred, entitlement to service connection for PTSD and major depressive disorder due to MST is warranted.  

Given that there is no indication that there are psychiatric symptoms clearly attributable to psychiatric disorders other than PTSD and major depressive disorder, for which service connection is being granted, and the Veteran will be compensated for all of his psychiatric symptoms, further discussion of any other psychiatric disorder is unnecessary.  Mittleider v. West, 11 Vet. App. 181, 182 (1998) (when it is not possible to separate the effects of the service-connected and non-service-connected disabilities, the benefit of the doubt doctrine described in 38 C.F.R. § 3.102 dictates that such signs and symptoms be attributed to the service-connected disability or disabilities); Wells v. McDonough, No. 22-0259, 2023 U.S. App. Vet. Claims LEXIS 760 (May 8, 2023) (mem dec) (Meredith, J.) (dismissing an appeal from a Board decision granting service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder diagnosed as depressive disorder and generalized anxiety disorder, in which the Board noted that the evidence did not support a diagnosis of PTSD but did not expressly deny service connection for PTSD, based on lack of standing, because the Veteran did not argue that he experienced manifestations of PTSD that are distinct from the manifestations of his diagnosed depressive disorder and generalized anxiety disorder); Bethea v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 252, 254 (1992) (single judge decisions may be relied upon for any persuasiveness or reasoning they contain).

 

 

Jonathan Hager

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	H. Styer, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.