Citation Nr: A25032408
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 231102-391072
DATE: April 8, 2025

ORDER

The character of the appellant's discharge from active military service is not a bar to the receipt of Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) benefits; the claim is granted.

Entitlement to service connection for left hand condition is granted.

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder to include depression and anxiety is granted.

Entitlement to service connection for right knee condition is granted.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1.  The appellant first enlisted in the United States Marine Corps on July 25, 2016; for a period of four years.  

2.  The appellant was discharged from active military service on March 26, 2020, under other than honorable conditions (OTH), due to willful and persistent misconduct.   

3.  Resolving all reasonable doubt in favor of the appellant, compelling circumstances mitigated the acts of misconduct. 

4.  A December 2022 rating decision granted service connection for a left hand condition, right knee condition and an acquired psychiatric disorder for treatment purposes only under 38 U.S.C. chapter 17 based on the period of service from July 25, 2016 to March 26, 2020.  The Board will not disturb this favorable finding. 

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1.  The character of the appellant's discharge from service does not constitute a bar to his receipt of VA benefits.  38?U.S.C. §?5303; 38?C.F.R. §?3.12. 

2.  The criteria for service connection for a left hand condition, right knee condition and an acquired psychiatric disorder, for VA compensation purposes, are met.  38?U.S.C. §§?1110, 5104A, 5107(b), 5303; 38?C.F.R. §§?3.12, 3.102, 3.303

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The appellant served on active duty from July 2016 to March 2020; the character of discharge is the subject of this appeal.  

The appellant appeals a December 2022 Appeals Modernization Act (AMA) rating decision.  In the appellant's November 2023 AMA Notice of Disagreement (NOD), he elected the Direct Review option; therefore, the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 

Additionally, Board has re-characterized the issue of entitlement to service connection for depression and anxiety, to entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, in order to encompass more broadly the appellant's anxiety and depressive disorders, pursuant to Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1 (2009).

CHARACTER OF DISCHARGE CLAIM

The appellant asserts that his OTH character of discharge from his period of service should not act as a bar to VA benefits imposed under 38 C.F.R. § 3.12 because his misconduct was mitigated by compelling circumstances.   

In sum, the Board agrees. 

The Board highlights that VA benefits are not payable unless the period of service upon which the claim is based, was terminated by discharge or release under conditions other than dishonorable.  38?U.S.C. §?101(18); 38?C.F.R. §?3.12(a). 

The Board highlights the appellant's other than honorable discharge is not the same as a dishonorable discharge.  However, for claimants with an other than honorable discharge, there are two types of bars, statutory and regulatory, which will deny him or her entitlement to VA compensation benefits, thus rendering the character of discharge dishonorable for VA purposes.  

Statutory bars are found at 38?U.S.C. §?5303(a) and 38?C.F.R. §?3.12(c) and regulatory bars are listed in 38?C.F.R. §?3.12(d).  

The statutory bars are not applicable in this claim.  See 38?U.S.C. §?5303(a); 38?C.F.R. §?3.12(c). 

Relevant to the issue on appeal, an other than honorable discharge or release because of willful and persistent misconduct is considered to have been issued under dishonorable conditions and acts as a bar to all gratuitous VA benefits.  38?C.F.R. §?3.12(d)(2)(ii). 

Willful misconduct means an act involving conscious wrongdoing or known prohibited action.  38?C.F.R. §?3.1(n).  It involves deliberate or intentional wrongdoing with knowledge of or wanton and reckless disregard of its probable consequences.  38?C.F.R. §?3.1(n)(1).  Mere technical violation of police regulations or ordinances will not per se constitute willful misconduct.  38?C.F.R. §?3.1(n)(2). 

Notably, the determination as to whether a discharge is based on willful and persistent misconduct is a matter of fact to be determined by the Board.  See Stringham v. Brown, 8?Vet. App.?445, 447 (1995). 

Importantly, the regulatory bar found under § 3.12(d)(2) for willful and persistent misconduct will not be applied if compelling circumstances mitigate the misconduct at issue.  See e.g., 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.12(d)(2); 3.12(e). 

The regulations under 38 C.F.R. § 3.12(e) outline the factors to be considered in a determination of the compelling circumstances exception. 

Under 38 C.F.R. § 3.12(e), the Board must consider the claimant's length and character of service, exclusive of the period of prolonged AWOL or misconduct, which should generally be of such quality and length that it can be characterized as honest, faithful, and meritorious and of benefit to the Nation.  38 C.F.R. § 3.12(e)(1).  

The next factor to consider are the reasons for prolonged AWOL or misconduct.  38 C.F.R. § 3.12(e)(2).  Reasons to consider include: (i) mental or cognitive impairment at the time of the prolonged AWOL or misconduct, to include but not limited to a clinical diagnosis of (or evidence that could later be medically determined to demonstrate existence of) posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), depression, bipolar disorder, schizophrenia, substance use disorder, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), impulsive behavior, or cognitive disabilities; (ii) Physical health, to include physical trauma and any side effects of medication; (iii) combat-related or overseas-related hardship; (iv) sexual abuse/assault; (v) duress, coercion, or desperation; (vi) family obligations or comparable obligations to third parties; as well as (vii) age, education, cultural background, and judgmental maturity. 

Additionally, the Board must also consider whether a valid legal defense would have precluded a conviction for AWOL or misconduct under the Uniform Code of Military Justice.  38 C.F.R. § 3.12(e)(3).  For purposes of §3.12(e)(3), the defense must go directly to the substantive issue of absence or misconduct rather than to procedures, technicalities, or formalities. 

Lastly, the Board highlights that no bar to benefits under 38 C.F.R. § 3.12 shall be applied if VA determines that the former service member was insane at the time he or she committed the offense(s) leading to the discharge or release under dishonorable conditions.  See 38 U.S.C. 5303(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.12(b), 3.354. 

In all cases, VA will resolve reasonable doubt in favor of the appellant where VA must determine whether a claimant possesses veteran status.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021); Newman v. McDonough, 35?Vet. App.?310 (2022).

1.  The character of the appellant's discharge from active military service is not a bar to the receipt of Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) benefits

Turning to the evidence, in November 2017, the appellant mother passed away while he was in training status at Camp Pendleton, California.

Thereafter, the appellant was primarily stationed at Camp Lejeune, North Carolina and sought transfer to Camp Pendleton during service, to be closer to his family after his mother's death.

A June 2018 mental health treatment note from Camp Lejeune Naval Medical Center shows that the appellant received orders moving him to Camp Pendleton, California, at that time.

However, he reported he was "having a hard time over the last year after [the] passing of his mother in California."  See Camp Lejeune Naval Medical Center, Mental Health Treatment Notes, June 2018.  He reported that this "circumstance was made even more unfortunate by the way it was handled by his command."  Id.  He reported he "was in school at Pendleton and 29 Palms during various stages of his mother's illness, and was allowed to be with her from 'time to time' but the command [there] was never overly supportive."  Id.

The appellant further reported that he "was sent to Camp Lejeune a few days before his mother['s] funeral and was told that there was nothing the command could do to hold him a little longer."  Id.

The appellant was seen on multiple visits at the mental health clinic during service, where he is shown to have "expressed significant sadness" over his mother's passing and "regrets which he wished he had spent more time with her."  Id.; see also Camp Lejeune Naval Medical Center, Mental Health Treatment Notes, May 11, 2018 (indicated reduction in anxiety due to command approval of his transfer to California; feeling as if a big weight has been lifted off his shoulders); April 17, 2018 (spike in anxiety and nightmares in past few weeks); March 23, 2018 (improvement in mood; primary concern has been finding a way to transfer back to west coast); February 9, 2018 (mood improving slightly and continues to struggle with separation from his family and wife); January 31, 2018 (mental health therapy began again after a lengthy field ops); November 28, 2017 (struggling in first holiday to be home with family after Mom's death; will go home for Christmas); November 15, 2017 (continues to endorse bereavement symptoms in regards to sadness, motivation nad ruminations over loss of mother).

The June 2018 psychologist noted that he has had a "dysthymic mood since her passing and can't seem to shake it."  Id.

After his transfer to Camp Pendleton, the appellant continued to seek mental health treatment.  See 1st Marine Division OSCAR Mental Health Clinic Intake Assessment, November 2018.

Here, the examiner noted that "last month was the anniversary of his mother's passing and [he] reports that his symptoms returned although not resulting in the previous level of distress."  Id.

The examiner reported his symptoms were described as "depressed mood, difficulty concentrating, diminished sleep and irritability."

In September 2019, the appellant tested positive on urinalysis for cocaine.  In October 2019, the appellant was charged with nonjudicial punishment (NJP) for one count of violation of Article 112a of the Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ) for wrongful use of a controlled substance.   

The Board highlights that his commander, R.F.C., initially recommended discharge with general under honorable conditions characterization.  See Memorandum for Recommendation for Administrative Discharge, from R.F.C., dated March 2, 2020.

Unfortunately, in January 2020, the appellant tested positive again for cocaine use during service, prior to being discharged.  The results of this positive urinalysis testing were returned to the unit on, approximately, March 4, 2020. 

However, the appellant was not charged for the second violation under Article 112a of the UCMJ.  

Instead, his commander changed the recommended discharge from a general under honorable condition to, an other than honorable characterization for misconduct - drug abuse - presumably based on the second positive urinalysis result.  See Memorandum for Recommendation for Administrative Discharge, from R.F.C., dated March 20, 2020.

The appellant was discharged from active military service on March 26, 2020, under other than honorable conditions (OTH) due to willful and persistent misconduct, occurring between September 2019 through January 2020.  Id.

The question remains, whether his period of service is dishonorable for VA purposes, or whether some other defense to the bar of misconduct applies in this case.  38?C.F.R. §?3.12. 

An other than honorable discharge due to willful and persistent misconduct is a regulatory bar to VA benefits pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 3.12(d)(2)(ii).  

In this regard, when determining if compelling circumstances exist, sufficient to mitigate the misconduct, the Board must consider service exclusive of his incidents of misconduct under 38?C.F.R. §?3.12(e)(1). 

Put simply, the Board finds the fact the appellant was awarded the Good Conduct Medal prior to his initial positive drug test in September 2019 as the most probative evidence of record on this matter.  

The Marine Corps Good Conduct Medal (MCGCM) is awarded to enlisted Marines for three years of honorable and faithful service, requiring continuous active duty with no court-martial convictions and limited non-judicial punishments.  While not awarded based on "meritorious" conduct, or conduct "of benefit to the Nation," the appellant at least showed honorable and faithful service prior to testing positive on urinalysis toward the end of his service obligation, which is a factor for consideration in this claim.

Notably, in addition to the above, the Board must also consider the compelling circumstance factors found in 38?C.F.R. §?3.12(e)(2), including any reasons for the misconduct.  In this regard, the Board finds that the appellant's mental health, to include trauma, as explained above, is a compelling circumstance mitigating his misconduct during service under 38 C.F.R. § 3.12(e)(2)(ii). 

The Board has reviewed the record in great detail and finds the appellant's reasons for the misconduct, given as his inability to cope with the loss of his mother during service, to include seeking treatment during service and the fact that his commanders did not allow him to attend the funeral, to be competent, credible and probative evidence in this claim.   

Moreover, the fact that his pattern of misconduct began around the same time as the anniversary of his mother's passing, which was shown to have had caused increased symptoms of his mental health disorder during service, is further competent and probative evidence in favor of this claim. 

Given all the above, the Board finds his misconduct is shown to be mitigated by the noted compelling circumstances, as outlined above, and pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 3.12(e).   

The Board highlights that this is not to excuse the misconduct, but rather, the Board finds the misconduct was more than likely mitigated by the specific facts shown in this case, which includes a very unfortunate circumstance, made worse by the fact that he was not allowed to attend his mother's funeral through no fault of his own.

Accordingly, the Board finds compelling circumstances demonstrated by the competent, credible and probative evidence, are sufficient to lift the regulatory bar to VA benefits during the appellant's period of service.  As a result, the appellant is entitled to VA benefits. 

SERVICE CONNECTION CLAIMS

2. Entitlement to service connection for left hand condition

3. Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder to include depression and anxiety

4. Entitlement to service connection for right knee condition

The Veteran asserts he is entitled to VA compensation for service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, left hand condition and right knee condition.

Generally, to establish service connection a Veteran must show: "(1) the existence of a present disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease incurred or aggravated during service."  Davidson v. Shinseki, 581 F.3d 1313, 1315-16 (Fed. Cir. 2009).    

In this regard, the record shows that the RO in a December 2022 rating decision adjudicated entitlement to service connection and granted the appellant's claim for an acquired psychiatric disorder, left hand condition and right knee condition, for health care purposes only under 38 U.S.C. Chapter 17, finding his under other than honorable discharge at the time was a bar to VA compensation benefits.

This bar has been lifted.  

The grant of service connection for health care purposes only under 38 U.S.C. Chapter 17 in the December 2022 rating decision was based on the appellant's period of service, from July 2016 to March 2020, for which he is now not barred from receiving VA compensation benefits, due to his character of discharge being mitigated by compelling circumstanced, noted above.  

Accordingly, to fully address the issues before the Board in this claim, the Board must consider the Veteran's claim as a claim for service connection for VA compensation benefits for the claimed conditions on appeal.   

In this regard, the Board has decided to grant the claims based on the favorable findings made by the AOJ in the January 2021 rating.  See 38 U.S.C. 5104A. 

To this extent only, the appeal as to entitlement to service connection for VA compensation purposes for an acquired psychiatric disorder, left hand condition and right knee condition is granted, to avoid a possible confusion with the December 2022 grant already awarded.  Cf. Sabonis v. Brown, 6?Vet. App.?426, 430 (1994) (where the law and not the evidence is dispositive, the Board should deny the claim on the ground of lack of legal merit). 

 

 

John J. Crowley

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Davidson, Christopher M.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.