Citation Nr: A25032020
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 250205-514097
DATE: April 8, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include PTSD and unspecified trauma and stressor related disorder, is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the Air Force from March 1965 to October 1986, to include service in the Republic of Vietnam. 

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an October 2024 rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

By way of background, in a July 2022 rating decision, the RO, inter alia, denied the Veteran's service connection claim for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD). 

In a January 2024 VA Decision Review Request: Supplemental Review Claim Review (VA Form 20-0995), the Veteran, inter alia, elected to appeal the July 2022 rating decision via the Supplemental Review lane in accordance with the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA). 38 U.S.C. § 5108.

In May 2024, after Supplemental Review, the RO, inter alia, found that new and relevant evidence had been received warranting readjudication of the Veteran's claim, but denied entitlement to service connection on the merits. The Board is bound by this favorable finding that sufficient evidence to reconsider the claim for PTSD was warranted due to receipt of new and relevant evidence. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).

In a July 2024 Decision Review Requests: Higher-Level Review (VA Form 20-0996), the Veteran elected to appeal the effective date assigned in the May 2024 rating decision via the Higher-Level Review Lane in accordance with the AMA. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2601.

In October 2024, after Higher-Level Review, the RO denied the service connection claim for PTSD

In a February 2025 Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) (VA Form 10182), the Veteran timely appealed the July 2024 decision to the Board and elected the direct review docket. The Board notes that the evidentiary record in a higher-level review is limited to the evidence of record as of the date the agency of original jurisdiction issued notice of the prior decision under review and the higher-level adjudicator may not consider additional evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2601(f). Accordingly, the Board will review the evidence of record as of the date of the January 2024 rating decision. 

This appeal has been advanced on the Board's docket pursuant to 38 U.S.C. § 7107(a)(2) and 38 C.F.R. § 20.900(c). 

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder is remanded.

As noted above, the Veteran asserted that he has PTSD that is related to in-service stressors while serving in Vietnam, such as sustaining rocket fire on a daily basis, collecting and being exposed to burnt bodies. In addition, the Veteran stated that he saw Agent Orange spread throughout Vietnam.

The Board is bound by the favorable findings identified by the RO in its October 2024 rating decision. Favorable findings included the diagnosis of unspecified trauma and stressor related disorder and presumed herbicide agent exposure based on his service in Vietnam. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).

In Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1, 5 (2009), the Court explained that in determining the scope of a claim, the Board must consider the Veteran's description of the claim, symptoms described, and the information submitted or developed in support of the claim. In light of the Court's decision in Clemons and based on the favorable finding of unspecified trauma and stressor related disorder, the Board has recharacterized the claim as one for service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include PTSD and unspecified trauma and stressor related disorder. 

In March 2024, prior to adjudication of the rating decision on appeal, the Veteran underwent VA initial PTSD examination. The examiner noted there was no PTSD diagnosis that met DSM-5 criteria; there was however a diagnosis of unspecified trauma and stressor related disorder. The Veteran was not afforded a medical opinion regarding whether his diagnosed unspecified trauma and stressor related disorder was etiologically related to service.

The Board notes that VA must provide a VA medical examination when there is (1) competent evidence of a current disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability, (2) evidence establishing that an event, injury, or disease occurred in service or establishing certain diseases manifesting during an applicable presumptive period for which the claimant qualifies, and (3) an indication that the disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability may be associated with the Veteran's service, but (4) insufficient competent medical evidence on file for VA to make a decision on the claim. McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 81 (2006).

Here, Veteran asserted that his psychiatric disorder is related to combat related stressors of sustaining enemy fire and having to move burnt bodies, as well as Agent Orange exposure in Vietnam. Moreover, the VA examination report and favorable finding by the RO document diagnosed unspecified trauma and stressor related disorder.

Thus, there is medical evidence of an acquired psychiatric disorder, which may be related active service. However, there is no adequate medical opinion on file to determine the etiology of his acquired psychiatric disorder to service.

Therefore, a remand based on this pre-decisional duty to assist error is warranted to afford the Veteran an VA examination and opinion. McLendon, 20 Vet. App. at 79; 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(d); 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Attempt to corroborate any reported in-service stressor as to which verification has not yet been attempted, to include contacting all appropriate entities and alternate or collateral sources, with appropriate notification to the Veteran.

2. Request an opinion from a psychiatrist or psychologist as to the nature and etiology of the Veteran's claimed PTSD, diagnosed unspecified trauma and stressor related disorder, and/or any other acquired psychiatric disorder. If an examination is deemed necessary, one should be conducted. The claims file should be made available to the psychologist or psychiatrist.

3. The psychologist or psychiatrist should first indicate all psychiatric diagnoses. Then, as to any diagnosed psychiatric disorder other than PTSD, the psychologist or psychiatrist should indicate whether any such psychiatric disorder had its onset in service or is otherwise related to service, to include any of the Veteran's claimed traumatic events or stressors during service.

(Continued on the next page)

?

4. As to PTSD, the psychologist or psychiatrist should indicate whether it is related to an in-service stressor.

 

 

Marcus N. Fulton

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Kovacs, Mayer

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.