Citation Nr: A25032803
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240401-430109
DATE: April 9, 2025

REMANDED

Service connection for passive aggressive personality disorder is remanded.

Service connection for an acquired psychiatric disability, to include major depressive disorder, anxiety, and post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran honorably served in the United States Army from December 1979 to September 1980 and in the Army National Guard of an unverified nature and duration.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a January 2024 rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO). 

On August 23, 2017, the President signed into law the Veterans Appeals Improvement and Modernization Act, Pub. L. No. 115-55 (codified as amended in scattered sections of 38 U.S.C.), 131 Stat. 1105 (2017), also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA). The law creates a new framework for veterans dissatisfied with VA's decision on their claim to seek review, and this decision has been written consistent with the new AMA framework.

In the April 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. 

The Notice of Disagreement appealed a January 2024 higher level review rating decision stemming from a June 2023 supplemental claim rating decision. 

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the June 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision. See 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, the Board did not consider it in its decision. See 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of passive aggressive personality disorder and persistent depressive disorder, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a), the Board's authority to remand a claim is limited to instances requiring (1) correction of an error on the part of the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) to satisfy its duties under 38 U.S.C. § 5103A , if the error occurred prior to the date of the AOJ decision on appeal, or (2) the correction of any other error by the AOJ in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty, if correction of the error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the Veteran's claim.

Following a complete review of the electronic claims file, the Board finds that the below referenced matters must be remanded for the correction of duty to assist errors that occurred prior to the promulgation of the respective rating decision on appeal. 

Although the Board regrets the additional delay, the claim on appeal must be remanded to the AOJ to ensure that due process is followed and that there is a complete record upon which to decide the Veteran's claim.

1. Entitlement to service connection for passive aggressive personality disorder is remanded.

2. Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disability, to include major depressive disorder, anxiety, and post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), is remanded.

The Veteran contends his passive aggressive personality disorder and persistent depressive disorder are a result of his military service.

Given the complexity of the matters, a recitation of the pertinent facts is warranted.

As an initial matter, the AOJ rendered the following favorable findings in its January 2024 rating decision: The Veteran has been diagnosed with a disability. A VA treatment note dated May 12, 2023, confirmed a diagnosis of major depressive disorder, recurrent mild. This diagnosis is also confirmed by VA examination of October 12, 2022. 

Pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c), unless there is a finding of clear and unmistakable error, the Board is bound by the AOJ's favorable finding. The Board will not disturb the finding that the Veteran has been diagnosed with an acquired psychiatric disability. However, the Board wishes to clarify that the Veteran was diagnosed with persistent depressive disorder in October 2022 at his VA examination, and the evidence of record shows a diagnosis of major depressive disorder in May 2011, confirmed again in May 2023 as major depressive disorder, recurrent, mild. See May 2011 and May 2023 VA treatment records; See also October 2022 VA Disability Benefits Questionnaire (DBQ). January 2023 VA psychotherapy notes reflect that the Veteran presented with depression and anxiety symptoms. A November 2022 primary care physician outpatient note shows that the Veteran reported having anxiety, depression and PTSD, and the physician provided the assessment of "adjustment disorder - depression/anxiety and PTSD" with the plan of continuing medication and following up with mental health. In October 2022, the Veteran reported that he initially sought treatment as a result of a positive PTSD screen, though the Veteran's primary concerns were around his major depressive episodes. See October 2022 VA psychotherapy consult response, mental health consult.  The Board observes that while the Veteran is not competent to diagnose himself with a medically complex condition such as an acquired psychiatric condition, the Veteran is competent to provide lay statements regarding related symptoms. See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372 (Fed. Cir. 2007).  

The Court has held that the scope of a mental health disability claim includes any mental disability that may reasonably be encompassed by the Veteran's description of the claim, reported symptoms, and the other information of record. See Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1, 5 (2009). Accordingly, the Board has broadened and recharacterized the claim as one seeking entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disability, to include major depressive disorder, anxiety, and PTSD.

The Veteran was discharged from active-duty service in September 1980. In December 1980, he submitted a VA Form 21-526, Application for Compensation or Pension, seeking service connection for a "nervous condition." The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in February 1981 and was diagnosed with passive aggressive personality disorder.  In March 1981, the AOJ denied service connection for a "nervous condition," because the Veteran's diagnosis of passive aggressive personality disorder was not a disability within the current laws for which compensation could be paid. See March 1981 Rating Decision.  The Veteran took no further action on this matter and it became final.

The Veteran sought service connection for hearing loss and tinnitus in July 2012 and was denied service connection in May 2013. The Veteran concurrently filed a VA Form 21-526 and supplemental claim seeking service connection for depression as secondary to hearing loss in May 2014 and a Notice of Disagreement regarding the prior hearing loss and tinnitus denials. In August 2014, the AOJ denied secondary service connection of depression to hearing loss because hearing loss was not service connected at that time. In October 2014, a Statement of the Case (SOC) was issued regarding the May 2013 rating decision denying service connection for hearing loss and tinnitus. Subsequently, the Veteran filed a Form 9 appeal regarding the May 2013 rating decision. See November 2014 Form 9. In February 2016, the Veteran filed a supplemental claim for hearing loss and tinnitus, which was denied for lack of new and material evidence in April 2016. In April 2018, the Veteran filed another VA Form 21-526 for service connection of hearing loss and tinnitus, and depression, secondary to hearing loss. These claims were denied in June 2018 on the basis of no new and material evidence.  Later, in June 2019, VA received notice of the Veteran's intent to file a claim.  In July 2019, the Veteran filed for service connection for hearing loss and tinnitus. See July 2019, VA Form 20-0995, (Supplemental Claim Application). The AOJ granted service connection for tinnitus in September 2019, effective June 2019. 

In September 2022, the Veteran filed a supplemental claim seeking service connection of insomnia as secondary to tinnitus. The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in October 2022, and the VA examiner diagnosed the Veteran with persistent depressive disorder, indicating that the Veteran's insomnia was subsumed under the Veteran's diagnosed depressive disorder. The VA examiner did not find a medical nexus between the Veteran's persistent depressive disorder and tinnitus, but instead opined that the Veteran's symptomatology had its onset during military service. See October 2022 VA medical opinion. The VA examiner did not diagnose the Veteran with passive aggressive personality disorder, nor was it otherwise listed, addressed or discussed in the VA Mental Disorders Disability Benefits Questionnaire (DBQ) or medical opinion. The VA examiner's opinion was predicated on the lay statements provided retrospectively by the Veteran in prior written statements, VA treatment records, and in-person examination. In November 2022, the AOJ requested an addendum to the medical opinion because the opinion was not supported by the evidence of record and not adequately justified. The requested addendum maintained the nexus between the Veteran's persistent depressive disorder and cited to written statements in the Veteran's claims file about the onset of the Veteran's mental health issues. See November 2022 VA Addendum Opinion. The AOJ then issued a rating decision in November 2022 denying service connection of persistent depressive disorder stating that there was no evidence to support that the Veteran's current persistent depressive disorder began in or was caused by or aggravated by his military service, nor secondary to a service-connected disability.

In June 2023, the Veteran filed a supplemental claim to reopen his claim for "mental health." Shortly thereafter, the AOJ sought clarification on the Veteran's contended claims, and it was confirmed that the Veteran wanted his contentions to be passive aggressive personality disorder and persistent depressive disorder. See June 2023 Report of General Information. In its June 2023 rating decision, the AOJ reconsidered these claims as new and relevant evidence had been received but denied service connection for both conditions on the basis of no evidence showing that the contended conditions began in or was caused or aggravated by the Veteran's military service or were secondary to a service-connected disability. See June 2023 Rating Decision. The AOJ provided the favorable finding that evidence in May 2013 VA medical records reflected a similar condition to persistent depressive disorder. Id. In August 2023, the Veteran sought a higher-level review of the June 2023 rating decision. See August 2023 VA Form 09-0996, Higher Level Review Request. 

After conclusion of the higher-level review, the AOJ again denied service connection for passive aggressive personality disorder and persistent depressive disorder. See January 2024 Rating Decision. 

Regarding passive aggressive personality disorder, the AOJ provided that current evidence, including the October 2022 VA examination, did not support a clinical diagnosis of the claimed disability. Further, the AOJ stated that passive aggressive personality disorder was a congenital or developmental defect which is unrelated to military service and not subject to service connection.

Regarding persistent depressive disorder, the AOJ provided that the Veteran's service treatment records to not support mental health treatment, complaints, or diagnosis of the claimed condition. The AOJ explained that despite the notation of nervous trouble on a Report of Medical History, no clinical impression of mental health disability was supported, and depression and excessive worry were denied on the same report. The AOJ found that the October 2022 VA medical opinion that supported a medical nexus between the Veteran's diagnosed persistent depressive disorder and his military active-duty service relied solely on the Veteran's reported history.  The AOJ did not find the VA medical opinion adequate because the examiner's conclusion "merely echoes" the reported history of the Veteran and did not offer any medical rationale and must include supporting data. The AOJ also provided the reasoning that in the February 1981 VA examination, the main complaint of nervousness was related to work and the Veteran had denied any psychological problems. The AOJ noted that at the time, the VA examiner had diagnosed the Veteran with passive aggressive personality disorder. 

The Board has identified several predecisional errors that must be corrected on remand. 

First, the record shows that the Veteran had active-duty training (ACDTURA) with the United States Army beginning in November 1975 and was released in March 1976, transferring to the Army National Guard of the 225th Infantry Division in Detroit, Michigan. See DD-214, November 1975 - March 1976. The Veteran had active-duty service with the United States Army and the Army National Guard from December 1979 to September 1980. See DD-214, December 1979 - September 1980. This DD-214 record reflects that that the Veteran was discharged under honorable conditions through the expeditious discharge program for failure to maintain acceptable standards for retention. Id. Service connection may be granted for disability resulting from disease or injury incurred or aggravated while performing ACDUTRA or from injury incurred or aggravated while performing inactive duty training (INACDUTRA). 38 U.S.C. §§ 101 (24), 106, 1131. Such a determination cannot be made without ascertaining the scope of the Veteran's service. The Veteran has reported that he had an "emotional breakdown" in the late 1970s or early 1980s. See July 2014 VA 21-4148 Statement in Support of Claim. In May 2013, the Veteran reported to his VA psychologist that he sought mental health treatment in 1976. May 2013 VA MH treatment note. The AOJ sought records for the periods of December 1979 through September 1980 and November 1975 through March 1976. See July 2010 VA Form 21-3101 Request for Information; See January 1981 VA Form 07-310 Request for Information. The Board observes that in 1981, the AOJ requested verification of prior active service period of November 1975 through March 1976 and all related medical records, and in its July 2010 request, only requested separation documents for the same period. While some records were received, no other additional efforts appear to have been undertaken to obtain the totality of the Veteran's service records, nor the scope and nature of his reserve service. Thus, the failure of the AOJ to take the aforementioned actions, particularly in light of the Veteran's contention of receiving mental health treatment in 1976, constitutes a predecisional error that must be corrected on remand.

Next, the AOJ failed to obtain adequate VA medical opinions prior to the promulgation of the rating decision on appeal regarding the Veteran's claimed conditions. 

As discussed, the AOJ determined that the October 2022 VA medical opinion and addendum opinion regarding the Veteran's diagnosed persistent depressive disorder were not adequate. When VA undertakes to provide an examination or opinion, it must be an adequate one. See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007). The Board agrees that the October 2022 VA medical opinion and November 2022 addendum opinion were inadequate to the extent that the VA examiner did not address the report of nervous trouble in the February 1980 service treatment record, nor the February 1981 VA examination and its diagnosis of passive aggressive personality disorder, it is not adequate. See Reonal v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 458, 461 (1993) (holding that an opinion based upon an inaccurate factual premise has no probative value). As there is no adequate medical opinion of record, a new opinion is warranted consistent with VA's duty to assist the Veteran. See Barr, 21 Vet. App. at 312; 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

Moving to the Veteran's claimed condition of passive aggressive personality disorder, the AOJ made predecisional errors that require a remand for correction. The record shows that the Veteran was diagnosed with passive aggressive personality disorder at his VA examination in February 1981. Without obtaining an adequate medical opinion, the AOJ impermissibly made the medical determination that the current evidence, to include the VA examination of October 2022, "did not support a clinical diagnosis of passive aggressive personality disorder." See Colvin v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 171, 174 (1991) (the Board may not make independent medical assessments). Thus, the AOJ's conclusion that current evidence did not support a clinical diagnosis of the Veteran's previously diagnosed personality disorder without any medical determination to support such a finding constitutes a predecisional error that must be corrected on remand.

The AOJ further determined that passive aggressive personality disorder was not a compensable disability for VA regulation purposes.  Personality disorders are not diseases or injuries within the meaning of applicable legislation providing VA compensation benefits. See 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303 (c), 4.9, 4.127; see also Winn v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 510, 516 (1996); Beno v. Principi, 3 Vet. App. 439 (1992) (holding that personality disorders are developmental in nature, and, therefore, not entitled to service connection); see also 61 Fed. Reg. 52,695-98 (Oct. 8, 1996) (regulatory history providing that personality disorders are not diseases or injuries for VA compensation purposes). However, service connection may be granted, in limited circumstances, for disability due to aggravation of a constitutional or developmental abnormality (to include personality disorder), by superimposed disease or injury. See VAOPGCPREC 82-90, 55 Fed. Reg. 45,711 (1990). 

Here, the Veteran has a documented history of diagnosed depression and "other occupational circumstances or maladjustment" throughout his VA treatment records. The record establishes that the Veteran experienced years of periodic homelessness, job loss, and mental health treatment. See August 2016 HCHV assessment note. The Veteran stated he was first diagnosed with depression after an emotional breakdown in the late 1970s or early 1980s, and received counseling at that time, then again in about 1993-1994 and 1999. See July 2014 VA Form 21- 4138, Statement in Support of Claim. The Veteran sought service connection for a "nervous condition" in December 1980, and notably reported feelings of nervousness and upset manifesting at work while a manager at a McDonald's restaurant when people raised their voices or complained. See February 1981 VA consultation report. He stated that he had seen multiple psychologists to try to determine why he got so anxious. Id. 

A May 2011 VA psychiatric progress note reflects that the Veteran felt that his time in the Army made him more aggressive. A June 2011 group therapy note reflects that the Veteran reported that he was learning "to try not to personalize things."  The Veteran reported that he continued to receive mental health treatment in various forms until approximately 2013 and continued to utilize homeless program services through the VA until approximately 2018. See July 2022 VA mental health note. In July 2022, the Veteran presented at VA for a mental health assessment seeking to address depression, anxiety, and flashbacks. See July 2022 VA Mental Health Assessment Note. The Board observes that the Veteran sought the assessment in connection with a PTSD Questionnaire and discussion with an attorney regarding VA disability benefits, and the Board also acknowledges that the VA clinical psychologist determined that the Veteran was a reliable historian. Id. It was noted at that time that the Veteran voiced anxiety symptoms that bordered on panic attacks, and the Veteran reported feeling on edge at times, sensitivity to large crowds, and masking his feelings. Id. He reported feeling depressed about half the time and anxious most of the time. Id.  In October 2022, the Veteran reported that he hated and avoided conflict to the point of ending relationships for fear of what would happen if he became angry. See October 2022 VA psychotherapy note. May 2023 VA mental health treatment records reflect an assessment of adjustment disorder with depression, anxiety, and PTSD, managed with medication. The totality of evidence reasonably raises the issue of whether the Veteran has a current diagnosis of passive aggressive personality disorder, as well as whether the Veteran's diagnosed depressive disorder was "superimposed" personality disorder.  As such, the AOJ's failure to obtain a medical opinion regarding whether the Veteran's diagnosed acquired psychiatric disability was "superimposed" upon the diagnosed personality disorder is a predecisional failure to in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty, as correction of the error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the Veteran's claim. 

Accordingly, the claim must be remanded to correct these errors.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. The AOJ must obtain the Veteran's complete service and treatment service personnel records from the National Archives and Records Administration (NARA), the National Personnel Records Center (NPRC), the Records Management Center, the Department of the Army, the Defense Finance and Accounting Service (DFAS), and any other appropriate record repository from the totality of his Reserve service. 

2. Using the evidence obtained from the above actions, the AOJ must create a summary of all dates of each period of ACDUTRA and INACDUTRA served by the Veteran and associate it with the claims file. A listing of the Veteran's retirement points for his Reserve service will NOT suffice to address this remand directive. 

3. After all the available requested records are associated with the Veteran's claims file, the AOJ is requested to obtain VA medical opinions and examinations from an appropriate examiner to address the nature and etiology of the Veteran's claimed acquired psychiatric conditions, to include major depressive disorder, anxiety, and PTSD, and personality disorder of passive aggressive personality disorder. Any and all indicated evaluations, studies, and tests deemed necessary by the examiner should be accomplished, and a rationale for any opinion expressed should be provided. The claims file must be made available to the examiner for review of the history in conjunction with the examination, and the examination report should reflect that such review was accomplished.

(a.) The examiner should first identify any and all acquired psychiatric disorder that presently exists or that has existed during the appeal period.

(b.) The examiner should identify any and all personality disorders, to include passive aggressive personality disorder that presently exists or has existed during the appeal period. The examiner is to opine to the following:

	(c.) The examiner should offer the following opinions:

i. Whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorders had their onset in, or us otherwise related to, the Veteran's periods of active service. 

ii. If the Veteran has or had a diagnosis of a personality disorder, whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the personality disorder was subject to a superimposed acquired psychiatric disability during active duty service? The examiner is asked to specifically address the February 1981 diagnosis of passive aggressive personality disorder.

Note: The term "at least as likely as not" does not mean merely within the realm of medical possibility, but rather that the weight of medical evidence both for and against a conclusion is approximately balanced such that it is as medically sound to find in favor of causation as it is to find against it. All opinions are to be accompanied by a rationale consistent with the evidence of record. A discussion of the pertinent evidence, including both lay and medical evidence should be considered.  Consideration of relevant medical treatises, and generally accepted medical principles is requested. If the examiner cannot provide an opinion without resorting to speculation, he or she shall provide complete explanations stating why this is so. In so doing, the examiner shall explain whether any inability to provide a more definitive opinion is the result of a need for additional information, or that he or she has exhausted the limits of current medical knowledge in providing an answer to that particular question.  

4. Thereafter, the AOJ must readjudicate the Veteran's appealed issues in light of the totality of evidence of record. If any benefit sought is not granted to the fullest extent, the AOJ must provide the Veteran and his representative with a copy of the readjudication and afford them an appropriate period to respond.  

 

 

Cynthia M. Bruce

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	M.E.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.