Citation Nr: A25032079
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240626-450443
DATE: April 8, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for hypothyroidism with non-toxic thyroid enlargement due to Hashimoto's thyroiditis is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

Resolving all doubt in the Veteran's favor, his current hypothyroidism with non-toxic thyroid enlargement due to Hashimoto's thyroiditis had its onset in service.  

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for Service connection for hypothyroidism with non-toxic thyroid enlargement due to Hashimoto's thyroiditis have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1116, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.307, 3.309.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Air Force from April 2002 to August 2006.  

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a rating decision issued in December 2023 by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office denying the Veteran's August 2023 claim for entitlement to service connection for hypothyroidism with non-toxic thyroid enlargement due to Hashimoto's thyroiditis (claimed as Hashimoto's), under the modernized appeals system known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA).  

In June 2024, the Veteran timely filed a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request:  Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), and elected the Direct Review docket.  Based on the Veteran's election, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the December 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued this decision, the Board did not consider such evidence in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

Entitlement to service connection for hypothyroidism with non-toxic thyroid enlargement due to Hashimoto's thyroiditis.

The Veteran contends his diagnosed hypothyroid disability is related to his active service, including his exposure to burn pits and other toxic substances during his Gulf War service.

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by service.  38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a).  Service connection may also be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge, when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).  Direct service connection may not be granted without evidence of a current disability; in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and a nexus between the claimed in-service disease or injury and the present disease or injury. Id.; see also Caluza v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 498, 506 (1995) aff'd, 78 F.3d 604 (Fed. Cir. 1996).

Certain chronic diseases, including endocrinopathies such as hypothyroidism, are subject to presumptive service connection if manifest to a compensable degree within one year from separation from service even though there is no evidence of such disease during the period of service.  This presumption is rebuttable by affirmative evidence to the contrary.  See 38 U.S.C. §§ 1112, 1113; see also 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307 (a)(3), 3.309(a).  

Alternatively, when a disease recited in 38 C.F.R. § 3.309(a) is not shown to be chronic during service or the one-year presumptive period, service connection may also be established by showing continuity of symptomatology after service.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(b).  However, the use of continuity of symptoms to establish service connection is limited only to those diseases listed at 38 C.F.R. § 3.309(a) and does not apply to other disabilities which might be considered chronic from a medical standpoint.  See Walker v. Shinseki, 708 F.3d 1331 (Fed. Cir. 2013).

A Veteran's lay statements may be competent to support a claim for service connection by supporting the occurrence of lay-observable events or the presence of disability or symptoms of disability subject to lay observation.  38 C.F.R. §§ 3.159(a), 3.303(a); Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1376-77 (Fed. Cir. 2007); Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331 (Fed. Cir. 2006).  Fatigue is the type of symptom capable of observation by a lay person.  See also Davidson v. Shinseki, 581 F.3d 1313 (2009) (noting that a layperson may comment on lay-observable symptoms).  Thus, a layperson is competent to report on the onset and continuity of his current symptomatology.  38 C.F.R. § 3.159(a); Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 470 (1994).  "Symptoms, not treatment, are the essence of any evidence of continuity of symptomatology."  See Savage v. Gober, 10 Vet. App. 488, 496 (1997) (citing Wilson v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 16, 19 (1991)).

When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, the Secretary shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; see also Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49, 53 (1990).

Upon review of the record, and resolving all doubt in favor of the Veteran, the Board finds that the Veteran's diagnosed hypothyroidism had its onset in or is otherwise related to his service.

As an initial matter, in the December 2023 rating decision, the AOJ favorably found that the Veteran had sufficient service to meet the minimum requirements for presumptive service connection, that the Veteran has been diagnosed with hypothyroidism with non-toxic thyroid enlargement due to Hashimoto's thyroiditis, citing a November 2023 VA examination, and that the claimed disability of hypothyroidism is an endocrinopathy, a chronic disease which may be presumptively linked to his military service under 38 CFR 3.309(a).  The AOJ also favorably found that the Veteran performed service in a qualifying location, Iraq, and thus exposure to burn pits and other toxins, to include fine particulate matter pollution (BPOT) is conceded.  As per the AOJ, evidence further demonstrates that the Veteran performed service in the defined Southwest Asia theater of operations during the Gulf War and exposure to certain Toxic Exposure Risk Activities (TERA) during service based on his MOS of 3E351-Structural with associated exposure to building materials also has been conceded.  The Board is bound by favorable findings made by the AOJ in AMA appeals absent a finding of clear and unmistakable evidence to the contrary.  38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).  

As the favorable findings reflect, therefore, the Veteran has a current disability of an endocrinopathy, i.e., hypothyroidism, which is a chronic disease recited in 38 C.F.R. § 3.309(a) and thus subject to presumptive service connection if manifest to a compensable degree within one year from separation from service, even if there is no evidence of such disease during the period of service.  Alternatively, however, as noted above, service connection may also be established by showing continuity of symptomatology of such qualifying chronic disease after service.  Moreover, the favorable findings concede that the Veteran was exposed to burn pits and other toxins, to include fine particulate matter pollution (BPOT), as well as certain building materials.  

With respect to toxic exposure activities, although an in-service incurrence of toxic exposure to these particular toxins has been conceded, the Board also notes that a more complete picture of the Veteran's toxic exposures in service includes mold, diesel combustion by-products, x-ray, bacteriological/chemical/radiological contamination of municipal and bottled water, radio frequency radiation, VOCs, JP-8 Vapors from fuel operations, and metals from welding, as reported in the TERA memo associated with the Veteran's claims file in August 2023.  

Accordingly, both a current disability and an in-service incurrence of certain toxic exposures have been established.  The Board therefore turns to the issue of a nexus, including consideration of whether service connection of the Veteran's chronic disease can be established on a presumptive basis or, alternatively, through demonstration of a continuity of symptomatology.   

As noted, the Veteran has been diagnosed with hypothyroidism, and the record reflects ongoing private medical treatment for this disability.  Consistently noted in the treatment records is a description of the range of symptoms that includes, among others, feeling weak or fatigued, and experiencing depression.  (See e.g., December 2019 private treatment record).  

With respect to service treatment records (STRs), an April 2002 record reflects no abnormalities upon entrance except as to certain optometry findings and in a September 2002 examination for eyeglasses, the Veteran checked "no" with respect to personal or family history of thyroid disease.  Therefore, the Veteran had no reported symptoms referable to his thyroid condition prior to service and is presumed sound upon entry.

The Veteran was deployed to Southwest Asia (United Arab Emirates) from November 2003 to March 2004, and a March 2004 post-deployment health assessment reflected the Veteran's notations of various exposures during the deployment, including vehicle exhaust fumes, solvents, paints, loud noises, and sand and dust.  The provider marked "environmental" with respect to exposure concerns during the Veteran's deployment and an October 2004 STR records the Veteran's exposure to chemicals and dust.  The Veteran was again deployed to Southwest Asia, including to Kuwait and Iraq, from February 2005 to July 2005 and in a July 2005 post-deployment assessment reported further exposures that included DEET insect repellant, pesticide strips, smoke from oil fire, smoke from burning trash or feces, excessive vibrations, and JP8 or other fuels.  Upon separation, in June 2006, the Veteran reported intermittent abdominal pain, stating he gets it after he runs, and that it had been going on for about two years, but that he "just never got it checked out."

In a subsequent post-deployment health reassessment summary in November 2010, relating again to his 2005 deployment, in connection with questions about his health concerns that may be deployment related, the Veteran reported feeling tired or having little energy, as well as having little interest or pleasure in doing things for several days.  The provider reported the Veteran indicated that the lack of interest or pleasure occurred during more than half of the days during the past month.

There are no additional post-service records in the Veteran's claims file during the period between his service and his ultimate diagnosis of hypothyroidism, and thus, no conclusions can be drawn as to the presence or absence of symptoms during that period.  The Board notes an absence of any further visits reporting symptoms would be consistent with the Veteran's similar delay, noted above, that he "just never got his" abdominal pain checked out or reported it until experiencing it for approximately two years.  

The Veteran underwent VA examination in connection with his claim in November 2023.  In the Thyroid and Parathyroid DBQ, the examiner noted the Veteran's diagnoses of hypothyroidism and thyroid enlargement.  In describing the history of the Veteran's thyroid disability, the examiner reported that "[a]round 2016," the Veteran had noted a "progressive" onset of fatigue and went to a physician who ordered thyroid tests "around 2018," which were positive for Hashimoto's.  The Veteran reported that his energy did not come back after treatment.  The examiner indicated a review of TERA-related documents, including references to the Veteran's deployment and reported daily toxic exposures with no reported PPE use.  The examiner further stated that STRs were negative for thyroid problems. 

The examiner proceeded to provide a negative TERA opinion, stating "[t]he claimed condition is less likely than not (likelihood is less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activity(ies), after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the veteran."  The rationale provided was that the Veteran served in the Persian Gulf as a civil engineer "and was presumed exposed to burn pits, but also has presumed exposure to mold, diesel combustion byproducts, x-ray, bacterial logical/chemical/radiological contamination of municipal and bottled water, radiofrequency radiation etc.  However, none of these are known to be causal for Hashimoto's thyroiditis which is an autoimmune condition.  Therefore, no nexus can be established."  However, in both the DBQ and the opinions provided, the examiner also stated that "[t]he pathogenesis of Hashimoto's thyroiditis which is also called chronic autoimmune thyroiditis due to lymphocytic infiltration and autoimmune mediated destruction of the thyroid gland.  The primary etiology is high serum concentrations of antibodies against thyroid antigens.  There is no clear evidence that an environmental exposure such as chemicals, radiation or infections causes the condition to develop.  There is some evidence that radiation may cause initiation, however the evidence is not clear and is not consistent."  Therefore, the examiner explicitly acknowledged that there is some evidence suggesting that radiation, to which the Veteran was exposed during service, may cause the type of disability the Veteran has been diagnosed with, but the examiner did not further opine on this or otherwise discuss what such evidence actually demonstrates, and why it would not have contributed to this specific Veteran's diagnosed hypothyroidism with Hashimoto's.  For at least this reason, the TERA opinion is inadequate, and the Board assigns it no probative weight.

The examiner further provided a negative nexus opinion purportedly addressing direct service connection, stating "the claimed condition is less likely than not (likelihood is less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness," and providing a rationale that simply stated "[t]he hypothyroidism is attributed to his toxic exposure while in service.  Thus there is no separate opinion for his work and exposure to what he handled."  It is unclear what the examiner was attempting to convey as a rationale, other than, perhaps, an indication that only a TERA opinion was needed as the claim attributed the etiology of the Veteran's disability to toxic exposure.  In any event, this opinion does not address direct service connection whatsoever, provides no reasoned medical rationale, and is therefore wholly inadequate.  The Board similarly affords it no probative weight. 

Moreover, neither opinion addressed the Veteran's earlier reports of fatigue and depression, and whether such reports could indicate an early manifestation of his current thyroid disability which, as noted, is characterized by symptoms that include fatigue and depression.  Furthermore, neither opinion considered or further explored the Veteran's reports of a "progressive" increase in his fatigue that eventually led him to go to the doctor, which ultimately confirmed his thyroid disability.  The examiner's opinions are also inadequate for at least this additional reason.  

In view of the above, therefore, the competent evidence of record contains no adequate medical nexus opinions regarding the Veteran's diagnosed hypothyroidism disability (a chronic endocrinopathy recited in 38 C.F.R. §3.309(a)), that the Board can rely upon when adjudicating the claim. 

As such, based on the foregoing, the Board finds the evidence of record, including the conceded in-service incurrence of toxic exposures, including at least radiation, which the VA examiner acknowledged could have played a role in the development of the Veteran's disability, as well as the Veteran's early reports of symptoms consistent with the diagnosed disability, and the Veteran's reports of a "progressive" development of the disease, is at least approximately equal as to the etiology of the Veteran's chronic endocrinopathy, to include a demonstrated continuity of symptomatology.  Thus, the Board resolves all doubt in the Veteran's favor and finds that the Veteran's disability had its onset in or is otherwise related to his active service.  Accordingly, service connection is warranted.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

Finally, the Board could remand the Veteran's claim for entitlement to service connection for his hypothyroidism disability, decided herein, for further medical opinions, but such a request could be construed as obtaining additional evidence for the sole purpose of denying a claim, which is impermissible.  38 C.F.R. § 3.304(c) ("The development of evidence in connection with claims for service connection will be accomplished when deemed necessary but it should not be undertaken when evidence present is sufficient for this determination"); Andrews v. McDonough, 34 Vet. App. 216, 225 (2021) ("Remand is inappropriate where the predominant purpose is not to allow the Board to make a fully informed decision unencumbered by error but to allow VA to obtain more evidence so that it can properly deny the claim").      

 

 

Melanie J. Mann

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

 

Attorney for the Board	Skacel, Patrick T.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.