Citation Nr: A25032285
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240604-446101
DATE: April 8, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for right hip strain, to include as secondary to service-connected lumbosacral intervertebral disc syndrome (IVDS) with degenerative arthritis, bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy, and/or bilateral knee degenerative arthritis with chondrocalcinosis painful motion with limitation of flexion and limitation of extension, is remanded.   

Entitlement to service connection for left hip strain, to include as secondary to service-connected IVDS with degenerative arthritis, bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy, and/or bilateral knee degenerative arthritis with chondrocalcinosis painful motion with limitation of flexion and limitation of extension, is remanded.   

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from May 1990 to May 1995.  The rating decision on appeal was issued in June 2023.  In June 2024, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) and elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the June 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of entitlement to service connection for right and left hip strain, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

The Board must discuss all theories of entitlement raised by the Veteran or by the evidence of record.  Robinson v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 545 (2008).

Accordingly, the Board has recharacterized the claims as indicated above to afford the Veteran the broadest possible scope of review.  See Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1, 5-6 (2009).

Although the Board regrets the delay, a remand is necessary to ensure that due process is followed and that there is a complete record upon which to decide the Veteran's claims so that he is afforded every possible consideration.  38 U.S.C. § 5103A; 38 C.F.R. § 3.159.

The Board finds that the issues, to include entitlement to service connection for right and left hip strain must be remanded to correct duty to assist errors that occurred prior to the June 2023 rating decision on appeal.

Entitlement to service connection for right and left hip strain, to include as secondary to service-connected IVDS with degenerative arthritis, bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy, and/or bilateral knee degenerative arthritis with chondrocalcinosis painful motion with limitation of flexion and limitation of extension, is remanded.   

The Veteran alleges that he suffers from right and left hip strain as a result of his service.  Specifically, he contends that such disabilities were either caused by or began during service or in the alternative that such were caused by or aggravated by his service-connected IVDS with degenerative arthritis, bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy, and/or bilateral knee degenerative arthritis with chondrocalcinosis painful motion with limitation of flexion and limitation of extension.

VA's duty to assist includes a duty to provide a medical examination or obtain a medical opinion where it is deemed necessary to make a decision on the claim. 38 U.S.C. § § 5103A (d); 38 C.F.R. § § 3.159 (c)(4); Duenas v. Principi, 18 Vet. App. 512 (2004); Robinette v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 69 (1995); McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006).  In addition, once VA undertakes the effort to provide an examination when developing a service connection claim, even if not statutorily obligated to do so, it must provide an adequate one or, at a minimum, notify the claimant why one will not or cannot be provided.  Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007).  The Board notes that while the Veteran has undergone examinations for his claimed disabilities, for the below noted reasons, the Board finds that addendum opinions are necessary to determine the nature and etiology of his disabilities.

In October 2022 the Veteran underwent a VA Hip and Thigh Conditions examination with an accompanying disability benefits questionnaire (DBQ).  The examiner confirmed the Veteran's right and left hip strain diagnoses.  The Veteran stated that during his service he participated in air assault training and parachute jumps but did not experience any specific hip injuries or related isolated events.  The examiner opined that the Veteran's right and left hip strain were less likely than not incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness.  The examiner provided the rationale that there was "scant data supporting a nexus between the current [diagnoses] and military service."  The examiner noted that the Veteran left the service in 1995 and that his service treatment records, and immediate post-service treatment records were silent for any complaints, treatment, or diagnoses of hip disabilities.  Therefore, he found that "without chronicity during service or after service, a post-service event, illness, or injury is considered to be a more likely etiology." Unfortunately, the Board finds the examiner's rationale lacking as simply the passage of time or a lack of contemporary symptoms is not enough to justify a denial-of-service connection. Therefore, the Board finds that the examiner failed to provide a medically supported rationale with supporting data and reasoned medical explanations.  See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295 (2008); Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 124 (2007) ("[A]medical opinion... must support its conclusion with an analysis that the Board can consider and weigh against contrary opinions").  In addition, the October examiner failed to consider the Veteran's allegations of secondary service connection.  

In June 2023 additional VA Medical Opinions were obtained. The June examiner found that the Veteran's right and left hip strain were less likely than not proximately due to or the result of his service-connected left lower extremity radiculopathy, IVDS with degenerative arthritis, and/or bilateral knee degenerative arthritis with chondrocalcinosis painful motion with limitation of flexion and limitation of extension. The examiner provided the rationale that hip strain and radiculopathy are not medically related and are separate entities.  He noted that lumbosacral radiculopathy affects the function of one or more lumbosacral nerve roots whereas strain involves muscles and tendons.  Furthermore, the examiner found that there was no clear evidence to suggest that an injury to one joint would have any significant impact on another or opposite uninjured joint or limb, unless the injury resulted in major muscle or nerve damage causing partial or complete paralysis, or shortening of the injured limb resulting in length discrepancy of more than 5cm so that the individual's gait pattern was altered to the extent that there was an obvious Trendelenburg gait.  The examiner found that this level of severity was not supported based on a review of the Veteran's records, his history, and examination.  

The examiner further found that while it is not unusual for two joints to share properties in the same person, one joint's disease does not "spread" to another or cause damage to it.  In addition, he found that while it is plausible that compression of peripheral nerves or lumbosacral nerve roots can manifest as hip pain, lumbosacral IVDS with degenerative arthritis does not cause a hip strain.  Furthermore, he noted that the use of contralateral body components as a result of avoiding use of a painful or limited component is a natural compensation.  However, whether the contralateral body part is capable of the increased load is a property of the contralateral part, but again a joints disease does not spread to another or cause damage to it.  Thus, he found that the Veteran's bilateral hip strain was due to something intrinsic in his hips and not due to his other joints.  Therefore, the examiner determined that as the medical literature failed to demonstrate causal relationships, nexuses could not be established, and the Veteran's bilateral hip strain was less likely than not proximately due to or caused by his left lower extremity radiculopathy, lumbosacral IVDS with degenerative arthritis, and/or bilateral knee degenerative arthritis with chondrocalcinosis painful motion with limitation of flexion and limitation of extension.  Unfortunately, the Board finds the June 2023 opinions lacking as the examiner not only failed to discuss the aggravation prong of secondary service connection, but he also did not consider the Veteran's service-connected right lower extremity radiculopathy.  

Therefore, the Board finds that to correct the pre-decisional duty to assist errors, adequate addendum opinions must be obtained which fully address the Veteran's allegations of direct and secondary service connection, to include both causation and aggravation.  See Barr, 21 Vet. App. at 311.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Provide the Veteran with an appropriate VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of his claimed right and left hip strain.  Based on the examination, review of the record, and any tests or studies deemed necessary, the examiner should provide opinions responding to the following:

a)  Identify all manifestations of the Veteran's right and left hip strain.

b)  For any diagnosed right and left hip strain, is it at least as likely as not (50 percent or greater probability), that such disabilities had their onset during service, or are otherwise related to such service, to include the Veteran's reported air assault training and parachute jumps. 

c)  For any diagnosed right and left hip strain, which the examiner finds did not have its onset during or is otherwise related to service, is it at least as likely as not that the disabilities: (a) were caused OR (b) are aggravated (worsened beyond natural progression) by the Veteran's service-connected: 1) IVDS with degenerative arthritis; 2) bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy; 3) and/or bilateral knee degenerative arthritis with chondrocalcinosis painful motion with limitation of flexion and limitation of extension.  If aggravation is found, the physician must attempt to quantify a pre-aggravation baseline of disability and the degree of additional disability resulting from the aggravation. The examiner must discuss both causation AND aggravation.

A detailed explanation (rationale) MUST be provided for ALL opinions rendered.  (By law, the Board is not permitted to rely on any conclusion that is not supported by a thorough explanation.  Providing an opinion or conclusion without a thorough explanation will delay processing of the claim and may also result in a clarification being requested).

 

 

L. M. BARNARD

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Unger, Julie

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.