Citation Nr: A25032391
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240805-467452
DATE: April 8, 2025

ORDER

New and relevant evidence has been received to readjudicate the previously denied claim for service connection for schizoaffective disorder, bipolar type (also claimed as chemical imbalance of the brain) (hereinafter "schizoaffective disorder") is granted.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for acquired psychiatric disability, to include schizoaffective disorder, is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

In a June 2021 rating decision, the RO denied service connection for schizoaffective disorder; evidence received following notice of that determination was not previously part of the actual record before agency adjudicators, and the evidence tends to prove or disprove a matter at issue in the claim for service connection for schizoaffective disorder.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

As new and relevant evidence has been received since the June 2021 rating decision that denied service connection for schizoaffective disorder, the criteria for readjudicating the previously denied claim of service connection for schizoaffective disorder have been met.  38 U.S.C. § 5108; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.156(d), 3.2501.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The appellant is a Veteran who served on active duty in the United States Army from November 1979 to March 1980.

This case comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a February 2024 rating decision of a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO), which is an agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ).  In that decision, the RO denied readjudication of the issue of entitlement to service connection for schizoaffective disorder because the evidence submitted was not new and relevant.

In the August 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the February 2024 AOJ decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim for entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include schizoaffective disorder, on the merits, any evidence the Board could not consider for such claim will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of that claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Whether new and relevant has been received sufficient to readjudicate the previously denied claim for service connection for schizoaffective disorder, bipolar type (also claimed as chemical imbalance of the brain).

Under the modernized review system, VA will readjudicate a previously denied claim if new and relevant evidence is present or secured after notice of the prior denial of a veteran's claim(s).  38 C.F.R. § 3.156 (d).  "New evidence" is evidence not previously submitted to agency decisionmakers.  "Relevant evidence" is evidence that tends to prove or disprove a matter in issue.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501(a)(1).  In short, any new evidence which addresses a previously deficient element of a claim, will be sufficient to warrant readjudication of the previously denied claim.

The Veteran has previously submitted claims for service connection for psychiatric disabilities in October 2018 and May 2021, which were denied in September 2019 and June 2021 rating decisions, respectively.  VA received the Veteran's VA Form 21-526EZ claim for service connection for psychiatric disabilities in September 2023.  The RO denied service connection in a February 2024 rating decision, finding that the evidence submitted was new, but not relevant. 

Evidence of record at the time of the prior June 2021 rating decision included service treatment records, VA treatment records dated May 24, 2016, and June 8, 2020, the Veteran's personal statements, lay statements written by the Veteran's ex-husband and her sister, both received May 29, 2020, and numerous private treatment records.  The private treatment records included records from: St. Elizabeth's from July to August 2006 and January 2013 to August 2016, received on July 2 and July 17, 2019; St. Luke's Memorial Hospital from March 2014 to August 2014 and June 2017, received June 19, 2019; Mohawk Valley Psychiatric Center from May 1994 to June 2019, received June 3, 2019; and Hutchings Psychiatric Hospital from May 2015 to June 2015, received June 7 and June 24, 2019.

Evidence added to the claims file since that June 2021 rating decision and prior to the February 2024 AOJ decision on appeal includes statements in support of claim submitted by the Veteran on September 18 and September 28, 2023, VA treatment records from May 24, 2016, to July 6, 2022, and private treatment records from Hutchings Psychiatric Hospital from August 3, 2020, to November 28, 2023, received on November 28, 2023.   The Veteran was scheduled for, but was unable to attend, a VA examination with respect to her claim for entitlement to service connection for a psychiatric disorder.  The Veteran's representative submitted a written brief in October 2024 and argued that the Veteran was adamant that she did not have mental health issues prior to joining the military and that the Veteran should be afforded an opportunity to attend a new mental health C&P exam after missing her originally scheduled exam due to out-of-date contact information. 

This evidence is found to be "new and relevant evidence" in accordance with 38 C.F.R. § 3.156(d).  When considered with evidence previously of record, this evidence is new in that it was not of record at the time of the February 2024 rating decision.  Also, this evidence relevant as it tends to prove or disprove a matter at issue.  The AOJ has already made a favorable finding that the Veteran has a diagnosed disability - schizoaffective disorder, bipolar type.  Accordingly, the matter of whether or not the Veteran has a current disability is not at issue.  Rather, the issue is whether or not the Veteran's schizoaffective disorder began in service or is otherwise etiologically related to service.  The new medical evidence shows the Veteran reported that she experienced extreme trauma in the military and that she has severe trauma from that time.  As the new evidence addresses the previously deficient criteria of service connection, it tends to prove or disprove, a matter at issue.

Accordingly, the evidence received since the June 2021 rating decision is new and relevant and therefore readjudication of the previously denied claim for service connection for schizoaffective disorder is warranted.

REASONS FOR REMAND

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include schizoaffective disorder

The Veteran contends that her schizoaffective disorder onset in or is otherwise related to service.

As discussed above, readjudication of the previously denied claim is warranted.  As such, remand is necessary so that the AOJ can comply with a regulatory duty to readjudicate the claims on the merits in the first instance, taking into consideration all of the evidence of record.  38 C.F.R. §§ 3.156, 20.802(a); Hickson v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 394 (holding that when the Board reopens a claim after the AOJ did not, the matter generally must be returned to the AOJ for consideration of the new evidence submitted and the merits in the first instance so as to preserve for the claimant the one review on appeal as provided by 38 U.S.C. § 7104.  To do otherwise would deny the Veteran due process of law.)  While the standard has changed from "reopen" to "readjudicate" the entitlement to due process remains the same in the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA) as it does in the legacy review system.

Additionally, as noted above, the record reflects diagnosis of schizoaffective disorder, with some medical records noting a potential relationship to service.  While the Veteran was scheduled for examination, she did not report.  Her representative noted, and the record does reflect, that the Veteran called the VA to reschedule her examination and let it be known that her contact information was out-of-date, which is why she missed her opportunity for examination. It is unclear as to whether the Veteran was informed of the date and time of a rescheduled examination.

The failure to provide the Veteran an examination, or proper notice thereof, constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error. Given the foregoing, the Board finds that remand is warranted to afford the Veteran an examination with medical opinion based on full consideration of the Veteran's documented medical history and assertions, and supported by clearly-stated rationale. See 38 U.S.C. § 5103A; 38 C.F.R. § 3.159; McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 83 (2006).

In remanding this matter, no finding is made, implicit or otherwise, as to the credibility of the Veteran's assertions unless otherwise stated.  Neither the Veteran's credibility nor any lack thereof should be presumed in this remand unless otherwise stated.

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

1. Arrange for a VA examination of the Veteran, to ascertain the nature and likely etiology the claimed acquired psychiatric disorder, to include schizoaffective disorder.  

The Veteran should be informed that failure to appear for the examination, without good cause, may cause her claim to be denied. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.655. All efforts to schedule the requested examinations should be documented in the file.

The examiner should review the record prior to examination and illicit specific details from the Veteran of claimed in-service trauma.

Based on review of the record, applicable medical literature, and examination of the Veteran, the examiner is asked to respond to the following: 

(a.) Opine whether it is at least as likely as not (the likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not greater) that the Veteran's diagnosed schizoaffective disorder had its onset during active duty, or within one year of discharge from service, or is otherwise etiologically related to any in-service injury or disease.

The examiner must explain the rationale for all opinions, citing to relevant evidence, supporting factual data, the Veteran's particular risk factors for developing schizoaffective disorder, and medical principles and literature, as deemed appropriate.  If an opinion cannot be given without resort to mere speculation, (to satisfy legal requirements) state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts) or by a deficiency in the record or examiner (additional facts are required, or the examiner lacks the requisite knowledge or training.

The examiner is advised that the absence of documentation of complaints referable to the claimed disability during or after service cannot be the sole basis for rejecting a possible nexus to service, but it can be considered along with other evidence, including an opinion as to likely [alternate] etiology (beyond any assertion that there was no documentation of the disability during service and/or for years after service).

 

 

G. E. Wilkerson

Acting Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	S. A. Feroce

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.