Citation Nr: A25032529
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 230825-372445
DATE:  April 8, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an effective date earlier than December 9, 2020, for the grant of service connection for lumbosacral strain with stenosis status post fusion (hereinafter "back disability") is denied.

Entitlement to an effective date earlier than December 9, 2020, for the grant of service connection for right lower extremity (RLE) radiculopathy is denied.

Entitlement to an effective date earlier than December 9, 2020, for the grant of service connection for left lower extremity (LLE) radiculopathy is denied.

Entitlement to a total rating based on individual unemployability due to service-connected disabilities (TDIU) for the entire period on appeal is granted.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. In an unappealed October 2016 rating decision, the Veteran was denied entitlement to service connection for a back injury.

2. The Veteran filed VA Form 21-526EZ requesting review of the previously denied claim of entitlement to service connection for a back injury that was received by VA on September 13, 2019. 

3. In a November 20, 2019, letter, the Veteran was informed that VA had received mail indicating that she would like VA to review a claim that was previously denied, but that VA regulations required such requests to be filed on the proper form. The Veteran was provided with information regarding which form would be appropriate and was informed that no further action would be taken.

4. The Veteran filed a VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim that was received by VA on December 9, 2020, in which the Veteran requested review of, in pertinent part, the October 2016 denial of entitlement to service connection for a lower back injury; and the Veteran was granted entitlement to service connection for la back disability in an April 2022 rating decision, effective December 9, 2020. 

5. Prior to December 9, 2020, VA did not receive a claim to readjudicate the previously denied claim of entitlement to service connection for a back disability on the required form.

6. Service connection for RLE and LLE radiculopathy was established based on a finding that those disabilities were caused or aggravated by the Veteran's back disability; and, there is no evidence of record indicating that RLE and/or LLE radiculopathy had its onset during the Veteran's active service, was manifest to a compensable degree within one year of her service separation, or is otherwise etiologically related to such service.

7. For the entire period on appeal, beginning on December 9, 2020, the Veteran has a combined rating of at least 70 percent with one disability rated 40 percent or higher, and the evidence is at least evenly balanced as to whether her service-connected disabilities precluded her from being able to secure or follow substantially gainful employment.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for an effective date earlier than December 9, 2020, for the grant of service connection for a back disability have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1112, 5107, 5110 (2018); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.155, 3.156, 3.303, 3.307, 3.309, 3.400 (2024).

2. The criteria for an effective date earlier than December 9, 2020, for the grant of service connection for RLE radiculopathy have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1112, 5107, 5110 (2018); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.155, 3.303, 3.307, 3.309, 3.310 3.400 (2024).

3. The criteria for an effective date earlier than December 9, 2020, for the grant of service connection for LLE radiculopathy have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1112, 5107, 5110 (2018); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.155, 3.303, 3.307, 3.309, 3.310 3.400 (2024).

4. The criteria of entitlement to a TDIU have been met for the entire period on appeal. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107 (2018); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102, 3.340, 3.341, 4.16 (2024).

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran had active military service from July 2003 to November 2003. 

These matters are before the?Board of Veterans' Appeals?(Board) on appeal of an August 2023 Higher-Level Review (HLR) rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ). Initially, the Veteran was granted entitlement to service connection for her back disability, and RLE and RLE radiculopathy in an April 2022 rating decision. She was subsequently granted entitlement to a TDIU in January 2023 rating decision. In August 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996: Decision Review Request: HLR, at which time she requested review of the effective dates assigned for the grant of service connection for her back disability, RLE radiculopathy, LLE radiculopathy, and TDIU. While the August 2023 request for HLR was not technically timely with regard to the issuance of the April 2022 rating decision, it was accepted as such in light of the Veteran's request for an extension of time for filing due to the COVID-19 pandemic. The August 2023 HLR rating decision on appeal was issued in response to that request.

In the August 2023 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the April 2022 and January 2023 AOJ decisions, which were subsequently subject to HLR. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decisions, which were subsequently subject to HLR the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim[s], considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Earlier Effective Date - Back Disability and RLE and LLE Radiculopathy

The Veteran asserts that she should have an effective date of November 9, 2018, the date VA received her formal Intent to File, for service connection for her back disability.

The effective date of an evaluation and grant of compensation, or dependency and indemnity compensation based on an original claim, a claim reopened after final disallowance, or a claim for increase will be the date of receipt of the claim or the date entitlement arose, whichever is the later.?38 U.S.C. § 5110?(a);?38 C.F.R. § 3.400. The effective date for a grant of service connection is the day following the date of separation from active service or the date entitlement arose, if the claim is received within one year after separation from active service; otherwise, date of receipt of claim, or date entitlement arose, whichever is later. See?38 U.S.C. § 5110.?The effective date of an award based on a claim reopened after final adjudication shall be fixed in accordance with the facts found but shall not be earlier than the date of receipt of application therefor.?38?U.S.C. §?5110;?38?C.F.R. §?3.400.??? 

Effective March 24, 2015, a change in regulation requires claims be filed on standard forms, eliminating constructive receipt of claims and informal claims. See 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.1 (p), 3.151, 3.155. Instead of informal claims, the new regulation provides that a claimant may request an application for benefits, upon receipt of which, the Secretary shall notify the claimant of the information necessary to complete the application form or form prescribed by the Secretary. 38 C.F.R. § 3.155 (a). Non-standard narrative communications/submissions previously construed as informal claims will be considered a request for an application for benefits. See Standard Claims and Appeals Forms, 79 Fed. Reg. 57660, 57661 (Sept. 25, 2014) (where a claimant submits an informal claim, VA will deem it a request for an application for benefits). The amendments also eliminate the constructive receipt of VA reports of hospitalization or examination and other medical records as informal claims to reopen under 38 C.F.R. § 3.157. See id. 

The amended regulation also allows a claimant to submit an "intent to file a claim," which operates similarly to the informal claim process. Specifically,?38 C.F.R. § 3.155?(b) provides that, if VA receives a complete application form within one year of the receipt of the intent to file a claim, VA will consider the complete claim filed as of the date of the intent to file a claim was received. There are three ways in which a claimant may submit an intent to file a claim: (i) by electronically initiating and saving a benefits application in a claims-submission tool with a VA web-based electronic claims application system; (ii) by submitting a written intent, signed and dated on the intent to file a claim form prescribed by the Secretary; or (iii) by orally communicating intent to designated VA personnel that is subsequently recorded in writing and documented in the claimant's records.?38 C.F.R. § 3.155?(b).

By way of history, the Veteran filed a claim for entitlement to service connection for a lower back injury that was received by VA on August 21, 2016. In an October 2016 rating decision, the Veteran's claim was denied. The Veteran did not appeal that decision, nor did she submit new and material evidence within the applicable timeframe. Therefore, the October 2016 rating decision became final.

The Veteran submitted a VA Form 21-0966, Intent to File a Claim that was received by VA on November 9, 2018. The Veteran subsequently filed a claim of entitlement to service connection for, in pertinent part, a back injury, numbness/nerve loss, and chronic nerve damage that was received by VA on September 21, 2019. In a November 20, 2019, letter, the Veteran was informed that VA had received mail indicating that she would like VA to review a claim that was previously denied, to include her back injury. At that time, the Veteran was informed that the request had not been filed on the proper form as VA regulations required, and that no further action would be taken on the claim. She was also informed of the specifics regarding which form was required should she wish to pursue such a claim. In a December 2019 rating decision, the Veteran was denied entitlement to service connection for RLE and LLE chronic nerve damage. 

In February 2020, the Veteran submitted both a VA Form 10182 in which she listed, in pertinent part, the issues of a back injury and chronic nerve damage. On the same day, she also submitted a VA Form 20-0996, but did not list any appealed issues. Later in February 2020, the Veteran was sent a letter informing her that the submitted VA Form 20-0996 was incomplete as it did not list specific issues or a date of decision for review. On March 2, 2020, the Veteran submitted a completed VA Form 20-0996, in which she requested, in pertinent part, review of the denials of service connection for a back injury and chronic nerve damage. In an April 2020 letter from the Board, the Veteran was informed that the VA Form 10182 submitted in February 2020 would not be accepted as it constituted impermissible concurrent election, and in a May 2020 letter from the Board, the Veteran was informed that the February 2020 VA Form 10182 had been incomplete as it did not contain a signature.

In July 2020, the Veteran was issued a HLR rating decision which, in pertinent part, continued the denials of entitlement to service connection for RLE and LLE chronic nerve damage. At that time, she was also issued a separate letter notifying her that VA had received her request for HLR of the prior denials of, in pertinent part, entitlement to service connection for a back disability, but that such request had not been accepted as the period of time allowed for such a request had passed and she would need to submit her request for review of that issue on the appropriate form. The Veteran then submitted a VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim that was received by VA on December 9, 2020. At that time, the Veteran, in pertinent part, requested review of the prior denials of entitlement to service connection for a back injury and chronic nerve damage. In a June 2021 rating decision, the previous denial of entitlement to service connection for a back disability was confirmed and continued. The prior denials of entitlement to service connection for chronic nerve damage in the RLE and LLE were not readjudicated based on a finding that new and relevant evidence had not been presented. In December 2021, the Veteran filed a request for HLR of the June 2021 denials identified above. In a December 2021 rating decision, it was determined that a duty-to-assist error was made in the development and adjudication of the December 2020 supplemental claim and that the issues of entitlement to service connection for a back disability and RLE and LLE chronic nerve damage were being referred for additional development. Following additional development, the Veteran was granted entitlement to service connection for a back disability, RLE radiculopathy, and LLE radiculopathy in an April 2022 rating decision, all effective December 9, 2020. The current appeal stems from the effective date of service connection assigned in that decision. 

Prior to December 9, 2020, there was no valid claim to review the prior denial of entitlement to service connection for a back disability. The Board acknowledges the September 2019 attempt to file a new claim of entitlement to service connection for a back disability. However, as discussed above, the Veteran was duly informed that her request for review of the October 2016 denial of entitlement to service connection for a back disability had not been received on the proper form, and that no action would be taken on that claim. She was informed of the requirements of filing such a request on the proper form. Further, the Veteran again attempted to request review of the prior denial of entitlement to service connection for a back disability with the submission of her March 2020 HLR request. She was again informed that a request to review the prior denial of entitlement to service connection for a back disability must be submitted on the proper form and no action would be taken until such form had been submitted. As such, the Board finds that a claim to review the prior denial of entitlement to service connection for a back disability was not received on the proper form until December 9, 2020. As such, the date of claim in the issue of entitlement to service connection for a back disability is appropriately set as December 9, 2020, the day VA received the Veteran's supplemental claim for that benefit. 

To the extent that the evidence may establish that the Veteran has a back disability that is related to her active service prior to December 9, 2020, such finding is irrelevant to the effective date of service connection for that disability in this case. In this regard, as noted above, the date of service connection for a previously denied claim can be no earlier than the date of claim for that benefit, which as noted, is December 9, 2020. Entitlement to service connection for the Veteran's back disability is already established as of that date. As such, the date entitlement arose would not entitle the Veteran to an earlier effective date for the grant of service connection for the Veteran's back disability. 

The Board acknowledges the argument from the Veteran's attorney that the claim to review the prior denial of entitlement to service connection for a back disability should have been inferred with the submission of the Veteran's new claim of entitlement to service connection for lower extremity chronic nerve damage that was received by VA in September 2019. In this regard, the Veteran's attorney has argued that because it was ultimately determined that the chronic nerve impairment claimed was actually radiculopathy that was caused by the Veteran's back disability, the adjudication of the claim for chronic nerve damage required consideration of the claim for service connection for the back, and VA should have inferred the claim pursuant to DeLisio v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 45 (2017).

The Board is not persuaded by that argument in this case. In this regard, at the time of her claim of entitlement to service connection for chronic nerve impairment, the Veteran did attempt to file a claim to review the prior denial of her back disability, and as discussed at length above, was informed that her claim for such was not a valid claim. VA is not under an obligation to infer a claim that was expressly made. In fact, to do so would be counterintuitive as, why would a claim that is expressly made need to be inferred in the first place. Further, even had the Veteran not included the back disability on her September 2019 filing, VA still would not have been obligated to infer that claim in this case because the claim had been previously denied and any request for review of such denial was required to be submitted on the proper form, which in this case was a VA Form 20-0995, regardless of any other benefits claimed. So, yes, while the ultimate adjudication of the claim of entitlement to service connection for RLE and LLE chronic nerve damage ended up being dependent on the grant of entitlement to service connection for a back disability, inference of such claim not only would not have been required, it would not have been proper to do so. Therefore, the Board finds that the Veteran's argument of an earlier effective date based on the holding in DeLisio is unavailing.

With regard to the Veteran's claim that she should have an effective date of November 9, 2018, for the grant of service connection for RLE and LLE radiculopathy, the Board notes that the disabilities were granted based on the fact that they were caused by the Veteran's now service-connected back disability. As such, service connection for a secondarily related disability cannot precede the effective date of service-connection for the primary disability, in this case, the Veteran's back disability. As the effective date of service connection for the Veteran's back disability is set as December 9, 2020, service connection for RLE and LLE radiculopathy caused by the back cannot predate December 9, 2020.

Further, the Veteran has not alleged, and the evidence does not otherwise suggest, that the Veteran's RLE and/or LLE radiculopathy had its onset during her active service or is otherwise etiologically related to such service, or that it was manifest to a compensable degree within one year of her service separation. In this regard, service treatment records are silent for complaints of, treatment for, or a diagnosis of radiculopathy in either lower extremity while the Veteran was in active service, to include symptoms which could be attributed to a later diagnosis of such. Additionally, the evidence of record tends to show that the Veteran's diagnosis of radiculopathy did not pre-date, at the very earliest, 2005, more than one year following her service separation. As such, to the extent that service connection may be warranted on a basis other than secondarily related to the service-connected back disability, the Board finds that there is no basis in the record for such a finding, and the Veteran is not entitled to an effective date earlier than December 9, 2020, for the grant of service connection for RLE and LLE radiculopathy. 

Accordingly, the Board finds that the benefit-of-the-doubt rule is not applicable as the evidence weighs persuasively against the claims and is not in approximate balance. Therefore, entitlement to an effective date earlier than December 9, 2020, for the grant of service connection for the Veteran's back disability and RLE and LLE radiculopathy is not warranted. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc). ? 

Earlier Effective Date - TDIU

The Veteran is currently in receipt of a TDIU beginning May 9, 2022. However, she has asserted that she is entitled to a TDIU prior to that date. Specifically, the Veteran has argued that the claim for a TDIU should have been considered part and parcel of her appeal of the initial ratings assigned for her back disability, RLE radiculopathy, and LLE radiculopathy pursuant to Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447 (2009). The Board agrees. As such, the Board will consider entitlement to a TDIU for the period on appeal prior to May 9, 2022. 

A review of the record shows that beginning December 9, 2020, the Veteran is in receipt of a combined rating of at least 70 percent, with one disability rated 40 percent or greater. As such, the Veteran meets the schedular criteria for assignment of a TDIU beginning December 9, 2020. 38 C.F.R. § 4.16.

A review of the record shows that the Veteran last worked full-time in June 2018, at which time she reportedly stopped working as a result of all of her service-connected disabilities. The Veteran reported that she had worked from July 2016 to June 2018 for Amazon as a picker and dock loader. She reported that she had a bachelor's degree in information technology. 

At a February 2020 VA psychiatric examination, the Veteran reported that she had an occupational history of working as a web editor for two years, she had worked at an Applebee's restaurant as a cook and in management, and had worked for Amazon for three years. She reported that she had stopped working at Amazon as a result of a back and neck injury. The examiner at that time noted that the Veteran had depressed mood, anxiety, chronic sleep impairment, flattened affect, disturbances in motivation and mood, and difficulty establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships. Overall, the examiner determined that the Veteran's psychological impairment resulted in occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.

At a February 2021 VA back examination, the Veteran reported progressively worsening back pain and stiffness. She reported that she experienced daily flare-ups of her back disability, during which her pain was moderate and lasted for several hours at a time. She reported that her flare-ups were precipitated by repetitive lifting, quick movements, prolonged standing, and prolonged walking. The Veteran reported that her functional impairment consisted of difficulty with heavy lifting, bending, prolonged walking, and prolonged standing. The examiner noted that the Veteran exhibited pain on all excursions of thoracolumbar spine motion, on weight-bearing, in active motion, and in passive motion. The examiner was also noted to experience significant limitations due to pain and lack of endurance during a flare-up or following repeated use over a period of time. The examiner noted that the Veteran's back disability impacted her ability to work in that she was limited as a result of pain, stiffness, and limitation of motion; and, that she would be limited in her ability to lift in excess of 50 pounds, walk for more than one mile at a time, or stand for more than one hour at a time. 

At a January 2022 VA back examination, the Veteran reported that continued to experience pain in her back. She reported that her back pain had increased in severity with sharp pain and stiffness. The Veteran reported experiencing flare-ups of her back disability approximately 3-6 times per week, that they were moderate in severity, and were precipitated by heavy lifting, quick movements, and prolonged standing and walking. The Veteran reported that her functional impairment consisted of difficulty with heavy lifting, bending, prolonged walking, and prolonged standing. The Veteran was noted to have pain on all excursions of motion, in weight-bearing, in active motion, and in active motion. The examiner noted that the Veteran would be significantly limited by pain and lack of endurance during a flare-up and following repeated use over a period of time. Sensory examination revealed decreased sensation to light touch in the lower leg/ankle and foot/toes, bilaterally. The Veteran reported mild intermittent pain, mild paresthesias and/or dysesthesias, and mild numbness in both legs. The examiner noted that the Veteran had right and left sciatic nerve radiculopathy. The examiner noted that the Veteran's back disability and her radiculopathy impacted her ability to work in that she experienced pain, stiffness, limited range of motion, difficulty lifting in excess of 25 pounds, difficulty walking for more than 12 mile at a time, and difficulty standing for longer than 30 minutes at a time. 

At a January 2022 VA hip examination, the Veteran reported pain and stiffness in her right hip. She reported that she experienced flare-ups of her hip disability that occurred 2-3 times a week, lasted a few hours at a time, and were precipitated by prolonged standing, walking, jogging, and lifting heavy weights. The Veteran was noted to have pain in the right hip in all excursions of motion, in active motion, in passive motion, and in weight-bearing. The examiner noted that the Veteran would be significantly limited by pain and lack of endurance during a flare-up and following repeated use over a period of time. The examiner found that the Veteran's right hip impairment would impact her ability to work in that she was limited by pain and stiffness, experienced limitation of motion, and would have difficulty lifting in excess of 25 pounds, walking more than 12 mile at a time, and standing for longer than 30 minutes at a time. 

At a January 2022 VA foot examination, the Veteran reported that she experienced right foot pain that had gotten progressively worse over time. She reported that her pain was sharp and throbbing in nature. She reported that she experienced painful flare-ups of her right foot disability that occurred daily, were moderate in severity, lasted a few hours at a time, and were precipitated by prolonged standing, walking, and running. The Veteran's right foot disability was noted to be moderate in severity and would chronically compromise weight-bearing. The examiner noted that factors contributing to the Veteran's disability consisted of interference with standing, pain, and lack of endurance; that the Veteran experienced foot pain and tenderness with prolonged standing, walking, and running; and that she experienced pain on passive motion, active motion, and in weight-bearing. The examiner noted that the Veteran's right foot disability impacted her ability to work in that she would have difficulty lifting over 25 pounds, walking for more than 12 mile at a time, and standing for longer than 30 minutes at a time. 

Based on the above, the Board finds that the Veteran is unable to obtain and maintain gainful employment as a result of service-connected disabilities. In this regard, the Veteran has significant impairment in her ability to perform any significant physically laborious work as a result of her musculoskeletal disabilities. Further, the Veteran's mental health disability impacts her ability to perform reliably and consistently in an environmental setting due to such symptoms as anxiety, depression, disturbances in motivation and mood, and interference with ability to maintain successful work relationships. As such, the Board finds that the combined effects of the Veteran's service-connected disabilities prevent her from obtaining and maintaining gainful employment consistent with her education and industrial history. 

Accordingly, the Board finds that the evidence for and against the claim is in approximate balance. Therefore, the benefit-of-the-doubt must be resolved in favor of the Veteran, and entitlement to a TDIU for the entire period on appeal, beginning December 9, 2020, is warranted. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc). 

 

 

Kristin Haddock

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	UmezEronini, Ikechukwu

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.