Citation Nr: A25032997
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240102-404811
DATE: April 9, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for left upper extremity (LUE) neuropathy is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for right upper extremity (RUE) neuropathy is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for right lower extremity (RLE) neuropathy is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for left lower extremity (LLE) neuropathy is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from July 1969 to November 1969.

In the January 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Hearing docket. In November 2024, the Veteran withdrew the hearing request.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the December 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or representative within 90 days following receipt of the withdrawal of the hearing request. 38 C.F.R. § 20.302(b). If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal and prior to receipt of the withdrawal, or (2) more than 90 days following receipt of the withdrawal, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.302(b), 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

1. Entitlement to service connection for LUE neuropathy

2. Entitlement to service connection for RUE neuropathy

3. Entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea

4. Entitlement to service connection for RLE neuropathy

5. Entitlement to service connection for LLE neuropathy

The Veteran contends his bilateral upper extremity (BUE) and bilateral lower extremity (BLE) neuropathy was due to barrels of Agent Orange and VX which he was required to move.  Further, the Veteran asserts he suffered from sleep apnea in service and as such it should be service connected.  See February 2025 Appellate Brief.

In the December 2023 rating decision, the RO found the Veteran had been diagnosed with diabetes mellitus type II neuropathy and sleep apnea.  The Board is bound by this favorable finding.  38 U.S.C. § 5104A; 38 C.F.R. § 20.801.

The Board finds the RO erred in satisfying the VA's duty to assist the Veteran in obtaining a VA examination and medical opinion necessary to make a decision on the claim.  38 U.S.C. § 5103A(d); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(4).

The VA's duty to assist includes providing a medical examination or opinion when there is (1) competent evidence of a current disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability; (2) evidence establishing that an event, injury, or disease occurred in service or establishing certain diseases manifesting during an applicable presumptive period for which the veteran qualifies; (3) an indication that the disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of the disability may be associated with the veteran's service or with another service-connected disability; and (4) insufficient competent evidence on file for the Secretary to make a decision on the claim.  McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 81 (2006); see 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(d)(2); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(4)(i).

Based upon the favorable finding in the December 2023 rating decision, it has already been conceded that the Veteran has been diagnosed with neuropathy and sleep apnea.  The Veteran asserted that his diabetic neuropathy was due to his exposure to Agent Orange and other hazardous materials while he served at the Anniston Army Depot.  See February 2025 Appellate Brief.  The Veteran has also submitted an opinion from registered nurse P.W. that opined the Veteran's conditions can be service connected to his service at Anniston Army Depot.  See January 2026 Medical Treatment Record.  Further, the Veteran contends that his sleep apnea began during service.  Thus, the Board finds the record is sufficient to meet the low threshold for providing a medical examination in response to the BUE and BLE neuropathy and sleep apnea claims.  

Lastly, the Veteran has another claim pending for service connection for diabetes mellitus.  As the Veteran's neuropathy is directly related to the Veteran's diabetes mellitus, the Board must remand the claims for entitlement to service connection for BUE and BLE neuropathy as they are inexplicably intertwined with the Veteran's entitlement to service connection for diabetes mellitus.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule a VA examination of the Veteran to determine the nature and etiology of his BLE and BUE neuropathy.  The examiner should provide an opinion with detailed rationale as to whether the Veteran's BLE and/or BUE neuropathy was incurred in or is otherwise related to the Veteran's active-duty service?

2. Schedule a VA examination of the Veteran to determine the nature and etiology of his sleep apnea.  The examiner should provide an opinion with detailed rationale as to whether the Veteran's sleep apnea was incurred in or is otherwise related to the Veteran's active-duty service.  

The clinician must provide a rationale to support the opinion.

The reviewing clinician is advised that the Veteran is competent to report his symptoms and history.  Such reports must be acknowledged and considered in formulating any opinion.  If the reviewing clinician rejects the Veteran's reports, he or she must provide an explanation for such rejection.

(Continued on the next page)

?

If an opinion cannot be provided without resorting to speculation, the reviewing clinician must provide a complete explanation for why an opinion cannot be rendered.  In so doing, the reviewing clinician must explain whether the inability to provide a more definitive opinion is the result of a need for additional information, or that he or she has exhausted the limits of current medical knowledge in providing an answer to that particular question.

 

 

DUSTIN L. WARE

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	J. Simons

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.