Citation Nr: A25032704
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 221208-305219
DATE:  April 9, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 20 percent for lumbosacral strain with intervertebral disc syndrome (IVDS) (back disability) is denied.

Entitlement to an initial 20 percent rating, but not higher, for radiculopathy (sciatic nerve), right lower extremity, is granted.

Entitlement to an initial 40 percent rating, but not higher, for radiculopathy (sciatic nerve), left lower extremity is granted.

Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 10 percent for degenerative arthritis, other than post-traumatic of the right hip (right hip disability), limitation of flexion, is denied.

Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 10 percent for degenerative arthritis, other than post-traumatic of the left hip (left hip disability), limitation of flexion, is denied.

Entitlement to an initial compensable rating for right hip disability, limitation of extension, is denied.

Entitlement to an initial compensable rating for left hip disability, limitation of extension, is denied.

Entitlement to an initial compensable rating for right hip disability, thigh impairment, is denied.

Entitlement to an initial compensable rating for left hip disability, thigh impairment, is denied.

Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 10 percent for right knee strain is denied.

Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 10 percent for degenerative arthritis, other than post-traumatic of the left knee (left knee disability) is denied.

Entitlement to an initial compensable rating for leg length discrepancy is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran's back disability was productive of forward flexion greater than 30 degrees but not greater than 60 degrees.

2. The Veteran's right lower extremity radiculopathy (sciatic nerve) was productive of symptoms that were moderate. 

3. The Veteran's left lower extremity radiculopathy (sciatic nerve) was productive of symptoms that were moderately severe. 

4. The Veteran's right hip disability was productive of painful motion.

5. The Veteran's left thigh disability was productive of flexion limited to at most 35 degrees and painful extension. 

6. The Veteran's right knee strain and left knee disability were productive of painful motion.

7. The Veteran's leg length discrepancy was 1.5 centimeters (cm).

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for an initial rating in excess of 20 percent for back disability have not been met. 38 U.S.C. § 1155 (2018); 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.7, 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5242-5237 (2024).

2. The criteria for an initial 20 percent rating, but not higher, for radiculopathy (sciatic nerve), right lower extremity, have been met. 38 U.S.C. § 1155 (2018); 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8520 (2024).

3. The criteria for an initial 40 percent rating for radiculopathy (sciatic nerve), left lower extremity, have been met. 38 U.S.C. § 1155 (2018); 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8520 (2024).

4. The criteria for an initial rating in excess of 10 percent for right hip disability, limitation of flexion, have not been met. 38 U.S.C. § 1155 (2018); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.159, 4.7, 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5252 (2024).

5. The criteria for an initial compensable rating for right hip disability, limitation of extension, have not been met. 38 U.S.C. § 1155 (2018); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.159, 4.7, 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5251 (2024).

6. The criteria for an initial compensable rating for right hip disability, thigh impairment, have not been met. 38 U.S.C. § 1155 (2018); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.159, 4.7, 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5253 (2024).

7. The criteria for an initial rating in excess of 10 percent for left hip disability, limitation of flexion, have not been met. 38 U.S.C. § 1155 (2018); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.159, 4.7, 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5252 (2024).

8. The criteria for an initial compensable rating for left hip disability, limitation of extension, have not been met. 38 U.S.C. § 1155 (2018); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.159, 4.7, 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5251 (2024).

9. The criteria for an initial compensable rating for left hip disability, thigh impairment, have not been met. 38 U.S.C. § 1155 (2018); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.159, 4.7, 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5253 (2024).

10. The criteria for an initial rating in excess of 10 percent for right knee strain have not been met. 38 U.S.C. § 1155 (2018); 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.7, 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5260 (2024).

11. The criteria for an initial rating in excess of 10 percent for left knee disability have not been met. 38 U.S.C. § 1155 (2018); 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.7, 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5003-5260 (2024).

12. The criteria for an initial compensable rating for leg length discrepancy have not been met. 38 U.S.C. § 1155 (2018); 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.7, 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5775 (2024).

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran had active military service from June 1960 to May 1962. He died in June 2023. The appellant is his surviving spouse, who has been properly substituted in the appeal. 

These matters come before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a November 2022 rating decision issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ). 

In the December 2022 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the hearing docket. A Board hearing was held on April 3, 2023; however, the transcript of that hearing was unavailable. Due to his death, the Veteran did not have the opportunity to appear for another optional Board hearing. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the November 2022 rating decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran [or representative] at the hearing or within 90 days following the hearing. 38 C.F.R. § 20.302(a). If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal and prior to the Board hearing, or (2) more than 90 days following the hearing, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.302(a), 20.801. 

Increased Rating

1. Back Disability

Prior to his death, the Veteran contended that his back disability was worse than that accounted for by the currently assigned rating. His back disability is rated 20 percent disabling pursuant to Diagnostic Code 5242-5237. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a. 

In September 2018, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination. He reported flare-ups and functional loss affecting his ability to pick up heavy objects, bend down, and hold a lawn mower. He occasionally used a cane and walker. The examiner indicated that he could not test the Veteran's active and passive range of motion (ROM), repeated use, and non-weight bearing due to pain. The Veteran exhibited pain on rest/non-movement and with weight-bearing. There was objective evidence of localized tenderness or pain on palpation of the joint. He had guarding and muscle spasm resulting in abnormal gait or spine contour. Additional factors contributing to the Veteran's back disability was less movement than normal and interference with sitting, standing, prolonged positioning, kneeling, and squatting. The examiner indicated that the Veteran's back disability impacted his ability to work. The examiner commented that the Veteran could not perform strenuous activity due to his limitations but could perform sedentary activities if he could avoid his limitations. The examination was unremarkable for any other pertinent physical findings, complications, conditions, signs, or symptoms, to include ankylosis and IVDS.

In September 2022, the Veteran was provided an additional VA examination. He reported chronic and daily low back pain and stiffness. He described his pain as aching, sharp, and stabbing. He endorsed severe flare-ups occurring four to five times a month over one to two days. He related that his flare-ups were precipitated by prolonged sitting or standing, bending, twisting, and lifting. He stated that his flare-ups involved sharp and stabbing pain, fatigue, and increased stiffness of the low back which limited his ability to bend, twist, lift, and sit or stand for prolonged periods. He added that his functional loss included difficulty with prolonged sitting or standing, bending, twisting, and lifting. On physical evaluation, he demonstrated forward flexion to 50 degrees, extension to 20 degrees, right and left lateral flexion to 25 degrees, and right and left lateral rotation to 25 degrees. The examiner noted that passive ROM testing was medically contraindicated. There was objective evidence of pain with active ROM and weight- and nonweight-bearing which caused functional loss such as difficulty with prolonged sitting or standing, bending, twisting, and lifting. After observed repetitive use, the Veteran did not have any additional loss of function or ROM. The examiner stated that pain, fatigability, weakness, and lack of endurance significantly limited the Veteran's functional ability with repeated use over time. Additionally, the examiner noted that pain, fatigability, and lack of endurance significantly limited the Veteran's functional ability during a flare-up. In this regard, estimated forward flexion was to 45 degrees, extension to 15 degrees, right and left lateral flexion to 20 degrees, and right and left lateral rotation to 20 degrees with repeated use over time and during a flare-up. Additional factors contributing to the Veteran's back disability was interference with sitting and standing and difficulty with prolonged sitting and standing. The examiner indicated that the Veteran had non-incapacitating IVDS. Further, the examiner noted that the Veteran's back disability impacted his ability to work due to his difficulty with prolonged sitting or standing, bending, twisting, and lifting. 

While a review of private and VA medical records show that the Veteran has received additional treatment for his back disability; there is no indication that his symptomatology was manifestly different from the findings discussed above.

Based on the foregoing, the Board finds that the Veteran is not entitled to a higher rating for the entire period on appeal. In this regard, the Veteran's demonstrated or estimated forward flexion was, at worst, greater than 30 degrees but not greater than 60 degrees. Therefore, a rating in excess of 20 percent for back disability is not warranted. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5242-5237.

The Board acknowledges the Veteran's pain and functional limitations due to pain; however, there is no medical evidence of record that any pain, fatigability, incoordination, or weakness resulted in additional limitation of function to meet the criteria for a higher evaluation. See DeLuca v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 202 (1995); see also Mitchell v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 32 (2011). Moreover, the effect of pain is already contemplated by the assigned rating. As such, even with consideration of all pertinent disability factors, there remains no reasonable basis for assignment of a higher rating for the Veteran's back disability. 

Consideration has been given to other appropriate diagnostic codes. However, the Board finds that the Veteran's IVDS was not considered incapacitating. Therefore, the Veteran was appropriately rated based on pain and limitation of function, and a higher rating is not warranted under another diagnostic code. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5243.

Consideration has been given to assigning separate ratings for neurological abnormalities or chronic neurologic manifestations. The record reflects that the Veteran is already service-connected for radiculopathy (sciatic nerve), right and left lower extremities. Furthermore, no other neurological abnormalities have been diagnosed. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, General Rating Formula, Note 1.

Accordingly, the Board finds that the benefit-of-the-doubt rule is not applicable as the evidence is not in approximate balance, and entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 20 percent for back disability is not warranted. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b) (2018); Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc). 

2. Radiculopathy (Sciatic Nerve), Right and Left Lower Extremity

Prior to his death, the Veteran asserted that his right and left lower extremity radiculopathy were worse than that accounted for by the currently assigned ratings. His right and left lower extremity radiculopathy are rated disabling pursuant to Diagnostic Code 8520. 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a. 

Although the Board is not bound by VA's Adjudication Procedures Manual (M21-1), the M21-1 provides benchmarks for mild, moderate, moderately severe, and severe peripheral nerve conditions. See Overton v. Willkie, 30 Vet. App. 257, 263-64 (2018). In this regard, mild incomplete paralysis involves sensory deficits that are lower graded, less persistent, or affecting a small area. Additionally, a very minimal reflex or motor abnormality potentially could also be consistent with mild incomplete paralysis. M21-1, V.iii.12.A.2.c.

Moderate incomplete paralysis involves the most significant cases of sensory-only impairment. These are cases where symptoms will likely be described by the claimants and medically graded as significantly disabling. In such cases a larger area in the nerve distribution may be affected by sensory symptoms. Additionally, other sign/symptom combinations that may fall into the moderate category including combinations of significant sensory changes and reflex or motor changes of a lower degree, or motor and/or reflex impairment such as weakness or diminished or hyperactive reflexes (with or without sensory impairment) graded as medically moderate. Id.

Moderately severe incomplete paralysis involves motor and/or reflex impairment (for example, weakness or diminished or hyperactive reflexes) at a grade reflecting a high level of limitation or disability. Atrophy may be present. Id.

Severe incomplete paralysis involves motor and/or reflex impairment (for example atrophy, weakness, or diminished or hyperactive reflexes) at a grade reflecting a very high level of limitation or disability. Trophic changes may be seen in severe longstanding neuropathy cases. For the sciatic nerve, marked muscular atrophy is expected. Additionally, the disability picture for severe incomplete paralysis may contain signs/symptoms resembling some of those expected in cases of complete paralysis of the nerve. Id.

Rather than applying a mechanical formula, the Board must evaluate all the evidence, to the end that its decisions are "equitable and just." 38 C.F.R. § 4.6 (2024).

In December 2015, the Veteran underwent a private electromyography (EMG) and nerve conduction study (NCS). He reported severe left hip and thigh pain and left leg weakness and dysesthesias. He denied any right leg or foot symptoms. On physical examination, his physician found some hypesthesia and allodynia of the left thigh/leg and mild/marked atrophy and weakness of the left quadricep. His deep tendon reflexes (DTRs) were hypoactive in the right lower extremity and absent in the left lower extremity. He used a walker to ambulate and was at high risk for falls due to his left leg weakness.

In September 2018, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination. His muscle strength was reduced in the right and left lower extremities. His DTRs were hypoactive, bilaterally. His light touch sensation was decreased. He had positive straight leg raising test results. The examiner determined that the Veteran did not have radiculopathy. The examination was unremarkable for any other pertinent physical findings, complications, conditions, signs, or symptoms, to include muscle atrophy.

In September 2022, the Veteran was provided an additional VA examination. He described numbness, tingling, and weakness of the left leg with burning and sharp pain radiating down the left leg. He reported that he experienced mild intermittent pain, numbness, and tingling of right leg. The examiner indicated that the Veteran had mild pain, mild paresthesias/dysesthesias, and mild numbness of the right lower extremity. The examiner noted that the Veteran experienced moderate to severe pain, moderate paresthesias/dysesthesias, and moderate numbness of the left lower extremity. His muscle strength was reduced in the left lower extremity. DTRs were hypoactive in his left ankle. His light touch was decreased in the right and left lower leg/ankle and foot. He had positive straight leg raising test results. The examination was unremarkable for any other pertinent physical findings, complications, conditions, signs, or symptoms, to include muscle atrophy.

Private and VA medical records show that the Veteran has received additional treatment for his right lower extremity radiculopathy. However, there is no indication that his symptomatology is manifestly different from the findings discussed above.

Resolving reasonable doubt in favor of the Veteran, the Board finds that the Veteran is entitled to higher initial ratings for right and left lower extremity radiculopathy (sciatic nerve). In this regard, the Veteran's right lower extremity symptomatology demonstrated more than wholly sensory findings at a moderate level. The evidence shows that the Veteran had a history of reduced muscle strength, hypoactive DTRs, and positive straight leg raise of the right lower extremity. Further, the Veteran's left lower extremity symptomatology demonstrated more than wholly sensory findings at a moderately severe level. The evidence shows that the Veteran had a history of reduced muscle strength, absent or hypoactive DTRs, positive straight leg raise, falling risk, and requiring an assistive device for the left lower extremity. 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8520. 

The Board has considered assigning higher ratings for right and left lower extremity radiculopathy (sciatic nerve). However, there is no lay or medical evidence of record that the Veteran has moderately severe or severe incomplete paralysis, to include marked muscular atrophy, of the right lower extremity. Furthermore, there is no lay or medical evidence of record that the Veteran has severe incomplete paralysis, to include marked muscular atrophy, of the left lower extremity. Subsequent VA examination reports showed that the Veteran did not have any objective evidence of muscle atrophy despite a notation of marked atrophy of the left lower extremity in December 2016. Id. 

Accordingly, a 20 percent rating, but not higher, for right lower extremity radiculopathy (sciatic nerve) and a 40 percent rating, but not higher, for left lower extremity radiculopathy (sciatic nerve) are warranted. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); Lynch, 21 F.4th 776.

3. Right and Left Hip Disabilities

Prior to his death, the Veteran claimed that his right and left hip disabilities were worse than that contemplated by the currently assigned ratings. His hip disabilities are rated disabling pursuant to Diagnostic Codes 5251, 5252, and 5253. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a. 

In September 2018, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination. He described flare-ups in which his hips would become stiff. He reported functional loss affecting his ability to pick up heavy objects, bend down, and hold a lawn mower. He occasionally used a cane and walker. The examiner indicated that he could not test the Veteran's active and passive ROM, repeated use, and non-weight bearing due to instability. The Veteran exhibited pain on rest/non-movement and with weight-bearing. There was objective evidence of localized tenderness or pain on palpation of the joint. Additional factors contributing to the Veteran's hip disabilities were less movement than normal, weakened movement, disturbance of locomotion, instability of station, and interference with standing, prolonged positioning, kneeling, and squatting. The examiner indicated that the Veteran's hips disabilities impacted his ability to work. The examiner commented that the Veteran could not perform strenuous activity due to his limitations but could perform sedentary activities if he could avoid his limitations. The examination was unremarkable for any other pertinent physical findings, complications, conditions, signs, symptoms, and/or scars, to include ankylosis or femur or flail hip joint impairment.

In September 2022, the Veteran was provided an additional VA examination. He reported frequent aching and throbbing pain and stiffness. He endorsed moderate flare-ups occurring weekly over one to two days. He related that his flare-ups were precipitated by prolonged sitting or standing and walking long distances. He stated that his flare-ups involved worsening pain, fatigue, and stiffness which limited his ability to sit, stand, or walk for prolonged periods. He added that his functional loss included difficulty with prolonged sitting, standing, and walking. On physical evaluation, he demonstrated right hip flexion to 65 degrees, extension to 25 degrees, abduction to 35 degrees, and adduction to 25 degrees, external rotation to 50 degrees, and internal rotation to 40 degrees. He demonstrated left hip flexion to 45 degrees, extension to 15 degrees, abduction to 35 degrees, and adduction to 25 degrees, external rotation to 40 degrees, and internal rotation to 40 degrees. Passive ROM remained the same, bilaterally. Limitation in active and passive adduction did not prevent the Veteran from crossing his legs, bilaterally. There was objective evidence of pain with active and passive ROM and weight- and nonweight-bearing which caused functional loss as detailed above. There was objective evidence of crepitus. After observed repetitive use, the Veteran did not have any additional loss of function or ROM. Furthermore, limitation in adduction after repeated use did not prevent the Veteran from crossing his legs, bilaterally. The examiner indicated that the Veteran's right hip pain, fatigability, and lack of endurance significantly limited his functional ability with repeated use over time and flare-ups. In this regard, the examiner estimated right hip flexion to 55 degrees, extension to 20 degrees, abduction to 30 degrees, adduction to 25 degrees, external rotation to 45 degrees, and internal rotation to 40 degrees. The examiner indicated that the Veteran's left hip pain, fatigability and/or weakness, and lack of endurance significantly limited his functional ability with repeated use over time and flare-ups. In this regard, the examiner estimated left hip flexion to 35 degrees, extension to 15 degrees, abduction to 30 degrees, adduction to 25 degrees, external rotation to 35 degrees, and internal rotation to 40 degrees. Limitation in adduction after repeated use over time did not prevent the Veteran from crossing his legs, bilaterally. Additional factors contributing to the Veteran's hip disabilities were disturbance of locomotion and interference with sitting and standing. The examiner noted that the Veteran's hip disabilities impacted his ability to work due to his reported functional loss. The examination was unremarkable for any other pertinent physical findings, complications, conditions, signs, symptoms, and/or scars, to include ankylosis other than service-connected femur or flail hip joint impairment.

Based on the foregoing, the Board finds that the Veteran is not entitled to higher ratings for the entire appeal period. In this regard, the Veteran's right hip disability had been productive of painful motion. The ROM findings of record do not demonstrate right thigh flexion limited to 45 degrees or less or extension limited to 5 degrees. In fact, the September 2022 VA examination report documented that the Veteran's right hip flexion was, at worst, 55 degrees with repeated use over time/flare-ups, and his right hip extension was, at worst, 20 degrees with repeated use over time/flare-ups. Additionally, the ROM findings of record did not demonstrate left thigh flexion limited to 30 degrees. Rather, the Veteran's left thigh flexion was at worst, 35 degrees with repeated use over time/flare-ups. Further, his left hip disability had been productive of painful extension with his extension to, at worst, an estimated 15 degrees with repeated use over time/flare-ups. Further, impairment of the right and left hip had not been productive of limited rotation of the affected leg such that he could not toe-out more than 15 degrees, limited adduction such that he could not cross his legs, or limited abduction lost beyond 10 degrees. As such, even with consideration of all pertinent disability factors, there remains no basis for assignment of initial ratings in excess of 10 percent for right and left hip disabilities (limitation of thigh flexion), in excess of 0 (zero) percent for right and left hip disabilities (limitation of thigh extension), and in excess of 0 (zero) percent for right and left hip disabilities (thigh impairment). Id. at Diagnostic Codes 5251, 5252, and 5253.

Consideration has been given to assignment of a higher, or separate, rating under another diagnostic code pertaining to the hip and thigh. However, there is no evidence of record showing that the Veteran had ankylosis, hip flail joint, or impairment of the femur. As such, a higher, or separate, rating for the Veteran's left hip and thigh is not warranted. Id. at Diagnostic Codes 5250, 5254, 5255. 

The Board has also considered the provisions of 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.40, 4.45, and 4.59. However, there is no medical evidence of record that any pain, fatigability, incoordination, or weakness resulted in additional limitation of function to meet the criteria for a higher evaluation. Furthermore, the effect of the pain on the Veteran's hips has been already contemplated by the assigned rating. See DeLuca, 8 Vet. App. 202; see also Mitchell, 24 Vet. App. 32. 

Consideration has been given to assigning staged ratings. However, at no time during the period in question has the disability warranted a higher schedular rating than that assigned. Hart, 21 Vet. App. 505. 

Accordingly, the Board finds that the benefit-of-the-doubt rule is not applicable as the evidence weighs persuasively against the claim and is not in approximate balance, and entitlement to higher ratings for right and left hip disabilities are not warranted. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); Lynch, 21 F.4th 776.

4. Right and Left Knee Disabilities

Prior to his death, the Veteran contended that his right knee strain and left knee disability were worse than that contemplated by the currently assigned ratings. His knee disabilities are currently rated 10 percent disabling pursuant to Diagnostic Code 5260. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a. 

In September 2018, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination. He reported flare-ups and functional loss affecting his ability to pick up heavy objects, bend down, and hold a lawn mower. He occasionally used a cane and walker. The examiner indicated that he could not test the Veteran's active and passive ROM, repeated use, and non-weight bearing due to pain. The Veteran exhibited pain on rest/non-movement, bilaterally. There was objective evidence of localized tenderness or pain on palpation of the joint, bilaterally. He had objective evidence of crepitus of the left knee. Additional factors contributing to the Veteran's knee disabilities were less movement than normal, weakened movement, disturbance of locomotion, and interference with sitting, standing, prolonged positioning, kneeling, and squatting. Further, he had reduced muscle strength. The examiner indicated that the Veteran's knee disabilities impacted his ability to work. The examiner commented that the Veteran could not perform strenuous activity due to his limitations but could perform sedentary activities if he could avoid his limitations. The examination was unremarkable for any additional pertinent procedures, physical findings, signs and/or symptoms, to include ankylosis and joint instability, and meniscal conditions.

In September 2022, the Veteran was provided an additional VA examination. He reported chronic and daily aching and throbbing knee pain and stiffness. He endorsed moderate flare-ups occurring one to two times a month over one to two days. He related that his flare-ups were precipitated by prolonged standing and walking. He added that his functional loss included difficulty with prolonged standing or walking. On physical evaluation, he demonstrated active right and left knee flexion to 120 degrees and extension to 0 (zero) degrees. Further, he demonstrated passive right and left knee flexion to 130 degrees. Passive extension remained the same, bilaterally. There was objective evidence of pain with active ROM and weightbearing which caused functional loss such as difficulty with prolonged walking or standing, bilaterally. There was objective evidence of crepitus, bilaterally. After observed repetitive use, the Veteran did not have any additional loss of function or ROM. The examiner noted that pain, fatigability, and lack of endurance significantly limited the Veteran's functional ability with repeated use over time and during a flare-up. In this regard, estimated right and left knee flexion was to 110 degrees and extension to 0 (zero) degrees. Additional factors contributing to the Veteran's knee disabilities were interference with standing, disturbance of locomotion, and difficulty with prolonged walking and standing. The examiner indicated that the Veteran's knee disabilities impacted his ability to work due to his difficulty with prolonged walking or standing. 

Based on the foregoing, the Board finds that the Veteran is not entitled to a higher rating. In this regard, the Veteran's right and left knee disabilities were productive of painful motion. The ROM findings of record do not demonstrate right and/or left knee flexion limited to 30 degrees or extension limited to 15 degrees to warrant a higher rating under Diagnostic Codes 5260 or 5261. Id. In fact, the September 2022 VA examination report documented that the Veteran's right and left knee flexion were, at worst, 110 degrees with repeated use over time/flare-ups while his knee extension remained normal. As such, even with consideration of all pertinent disability factors, there remains no basis for assignment of a rating in excess of 10 percent for service-connected right and left knee disabilities.

Consideration has been given to assignment of a higher, or separate, rating under another diagnostic code pertaining to the knee. Although the Veteran reported knee stiffness, there is no objective medical evidence that the Veteran has a disability affecting the knee meniscus. Additionally, there is no evidence of record showing that the Veteran had ankylosis, recurrent subluxation or instability, patellar instability, impairment of the tibia and fibula, or genu recurvatum. Id. at Diagnostic Codes 5256, 5258, 5259, 5262, 5263. As such, a higher or separate rating for the Veteran's left knee under another diagnostic code pertaining to the knee is not warranted. 

The Board has also considered the provisions of 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.40, 4.45, and 4.59. However, there is no medical evidence of record that any pain, fatigability, incoordination, or weakness resulted in additional limitation of function to meet the criteria for a higher evaluation. Furthermore, the effect of the pain on the Veteran's knees have been already contemplated by the assigned rating. See DeLuca, 8 Vet. App. 202; see also Mitchell, 24 Vet. App. 32. 

Consideration has been given to assigning staged ratings. However, at no time during the period in question has the disability warranted a higher schedular rating than that assigned. Hart, 21 Vet. App. 505. 

Accordingly, the Board finds that the benefit-of-the-doubt rule is not applicable as the evidence weighs persuasively against the claim and is not in approximate balance, and entitlement to initial ratings in excess of 10 percent for right knee strain and left knee disability are not warranted. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); Lynch, 21 F.4th 776.

5. Leg Length Discrepancy

Prior to his death, the Veteran asserted that his leg length discrepancy was worse than that accounted for by the currently assigned rating. His leg length discrepancy is rated 0 (zero) percent disabling pursuant to Diagnostic Code 5275. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a. 

In September 2018 and September 2022, the Veteran was afforded VA examinations for hip and thigh and knee and lower leg conditions. The examiners indicated that the Veteran's right leg was 117.5 cm, and his left leg was 116 cm.

Based on the foregoing, the Board finds that the Veteran is not entitled to a higher compensable rating. In this regard, there is a 1.5 cm leg length discrepancy which does not meet the minimal compensable criteria of 1 1?4 to 2 inches (or 3.2 to 5.1 cms). 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a. Accordingly, the Board finds that the benefit-of-the-doubt rule is not applicable as the evidence weighs persuasively against the claim and is not in approximate balance, and entitlement to a compensable rating for leg length discrepancy is not warranted. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); Lynch, 21 F.4th 776.

 

 

Kristin Haddock

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	D. Ware, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.