Citation Nr: A25032979
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 250305-522134
DATE: April 9, 2025

ORDER

An earlier effective date of March 6, 2018, for an initial 50 percent disability rating for service-connected posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is granted.

REMANDED

Entitlement to a total disability rating based on individual unemployability due to service-connected disabilities (TDIU) is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

From March 6, 2018, the severity, frequency, and duration of the symptoms of the service connected PTSD more nearly approximated occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for an effective date of March 6, 2018 for the grant of a 50 percent disability rating for service-connected PTSD have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5103, 5103A, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.159, 3.321, 3.326(a), 4.3, 4.7, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran, who is the appellant, had active service from November 1965 to October 1967.

The Veterans Appeals Improvement and Modernization Act, Pub. L. No. 115-55, 131 Stat. 1105 (2017), also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), creates a new framework of review for veterans who disagree with an Agency of Original Jurisdiction's (AOJ) decision on their claim.

At the outset the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) will review the procedural history of the PTSD rating issue on appeal.  In a June 2023 decision, the Board granted service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder (now service connected as PTSD).  This grant was effectuated by the AOJ in a subsequent June 2023 rating decision.  The AOJ granted an initial 30 percent disability rating effective March 6, 2018, the date of claim for service connection.

In August 2023, VA received a VA Form 20-0995, Supplemental Claim, from the Veteran challenging the initial disability rating assigned.  Following subsequent development, in an August 2023 rating decision the AOJ granted a staged initial disability rating of 50 percent from August 9, 2023, the date upon which the Veteran received a new VA mental health examination.

Within one year of the August 2023 rating decision, VA received a VA Form 20 0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR).  Per the HLR, the Veteran explicitly requested "entitlement to an earlier effective date for the 50% increased rating for his trauma disorder."  Along with the HLR request, the Veteran's representative submitted an argument brief.  The argument brief explicitly stated that the Veteran was seeking to have the 50 percent disability rating for the service-connected PTSD be awarded from March 6, 2018, the effective date of service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder.  The Veteran did not argue that an initial disability rating in excess of 50 percent was warranted at any point during the initial rating period on appeal, and the HLR form and argument brief do not indicate that the Veteran was seeking an initial rating in excess of 50 percent.  Again, the HLR merely requested that the grant of a 50 percent disability rating for the service-connected PTSD be awarded back to March 6, 2018.

In May 2024, the AOJ issued a rating decision denying the requested earlier effective date for the 50 percent disability rating.  Subsequently, in March 2025, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 10182, Notice of Disagreement (NOD), disagreeing with the denial of an earlier effective date for the grant of a 50 percent disability rating for the service-connected PTSD.  Again, the issue included in the NOD was listed as "entitlement to an earlier effective date for the 50% increased rating for his trauma disorder," and again, the Veteran's representative submitted an argument brief explicitly stating that the Veteran was seeking to have the 50 percent disability rating for the service-connected PTSD be awarded from March 6, 2018, the effective date of service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder.  The brief again did not argue that an initial disability rating in excess of 50 percent was warranted at any point during the initial rating period on appeal, and the HLR and argument brief do not indicate that the Veteran was seeking an initial rating in excess of 50 percent.  To the contrary, the argument section explicitly concludes, "therefore, [the Veteran] is entitled to a 50% rating for his trauma disorder effective March 6, 2018."

In sum, based upon the above procedural history, the Board finds that the Veteran and representative have only appealed the issue of entitlement to an effective date of March 6, 2018, for the grant of an initial 50 percent disability rating for the service-connected PTSD (along with the issue of entitlement to a TDIU, discussed below).  In the instant decision the Board grants an earlier effective date of March 6, 2018 for the award of a 50 percent disability rating for the service-connected PTSD.  For all the reasons discussed above, the Board finds this to be a complete grant as to the PTSD rating issue on appeal.

The Board notes that the January 2025 NOD requested direct review by the Board.  Direct review is the appeal option to the Board in which a Board decision is issued based on evidence of record at the time of the prior decision.  The Board cannot hold a hearing or accept into the record additional evidence in its direct review. 

Finally, the Board is cognizant that in Williams v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 305 (2024), the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) held that, generally, the Board should not decide an appeal before the deadline for requesting an AMA docket switch has elapsed; however, the instant matter has been advanced on the docket due to the Veteran's age as requested in the March 2025 argument brief.  Further, the instant decision either grants in full or remands the issues on appeal.  As such, the Board finds no prejudice to the Veteran in the Board proceeding with the instant matter at this time.

1. An Effective Date of March 6, 2018 for a 50 Percent for Disability Rating for PTSD is Granted.

As discussed in the introduction, the Veteran seeks an earlier effective date of March 6, 2018, the effective date of service connection for PTSD, for the grant of a staged initial 50 percent disability rating.

Disability ratings are determined by applying the criteria set forth in the VA Schedule for Rating Disabilities (Rating Schedule) found in 38 C.F.R. Part 4.  38 U.S.C. § 1155.  It is not expected that all cases will show all the findings specified; however, findings sufficiently characteristic to identify the disease and the disability therefrom and coordination of rating with impairment of function will be expected in all instances.  38 C.F.R. § 4.21.  Total disability is considered to exist when there is any impairment which is sufficient to render it impossible for the average person to follow a substantially gainful occupation.  Total disability may or may not be permanent.  38 C.F.R. § 3.340(a)(1).  Total ratings are authorized for any disability or combination of disabilities for which the Rating Schedule prescribes a 100 percent evaluation.  38 C.F.R. § 3.340(a)(2).

Where there is a question as to which of two disability ratings shall be applied, the higher rating will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating.  Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7.  It is the defined and consistently applied policy of VA to administer the law under a broad interpretation, consistent, however, with the facts shown in every case.  When after careful consideration of all procurable and assembled data, a reasonable doubt arises regarding the degree of disability such doubt will be resolved in favor of the claimant.  38 C.F.R. § 4.3.

A veteran is competent to report symptoms because this requires only personal knowledge, not medical expertise, as it comes to him through his senses.  See Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 470 (1994).  Lay testimony is competent to establish the presence of observable symptomatology, where the determination is not medical in nature and is capable of lay observation.  Barr, 21 Vet. App. 303.

Relevant to the instant matter, under Diagnostic Code 9411, a 30 percent rating will be assigned for occupational and social impairment which is productive of occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks (although generally functioning satisfactorily, with routine behavior, self-care, and conversation normal), due to such symptoms as depressed mood; anxiety; suspiciousness; panic attacks (weekly or less often); chronic sleep impairment; and mild memory loss (such as forgetting manes, directions, recent events).  A 50 percent rating will be assigned for occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to symptoms such as flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks occurring more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short- and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material or forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships.

The Secretary of VA, acting within the authority to adopt and apply a schedule of ratings, chose to create one general rating formula for mental disorders.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; see 38 U.S.C. § 501; 38 C.F.R. § 4.130.  By establishing one general formula to be used in rating more than 30 psychiatric disorders, there can be no doubt that the Secretary of VA anticipated that any list of symptoms justifying a particular rating would in many situations be either under- or over inclusive.  The Secretary's use of the phrase "such symptoms as," followed by a list of examples, provides guidance as to the severity of symptoms contemplated for each rating, in addition to permitting consideration of other symptoms, particular to each veteran and disorder, and the effect of those symptoms on the claimant's social and work situation.  This construction is not inconsistent with Cohen v. Brown, 10 Vet. App. 128 (1997).  See Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436, 442 (1992).

The evidence considered in determining the level of impairment under 38 C.F.R. § 4.130 is not restricted to the symptoms provided in the diagnostic code.  Instead, the rating specialist is to consider all symptoms of a claimant's condition that affect the level of occupational and social impairment, including, if applicable, those identified in the American Psychiatric Association's Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM-V).  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.126.  If the evidence demonstrates that a claimant suffers symptoms or effects that cause occupational or social impairment equivalent to what would be caused by the symptoms listed in the diagnostic code, the appropriate, equivalent rating will be assigned.  The schedular rating criteria rate by analogy psychiatric symptoms that are "like or similar to" those explicitly listed in the schedular rating criteria.  Mauerhan, 16 Vet. App. at 443.  The United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit (Federal Circuit) has embraced the Mauerhan interpretation of the criteria for rating psychiatric disabilities.  Sellers v. Principi, 372 F.3d 1318, 1326 (Fed. Cir. 2004).  

In Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 117 (2013), the Federal Circuit held that VA "intended the General Rating Formula to provide a regulatory framework for placing veterans on a disability spectrum based upon their objectively observable symptoms."  The Federal Circuit stated that "a veteran may only qualify for a given disability rating under § 4.130 by demonstrating the particular symptoms associated with that percentage, or others of similar severity, frequency, and duration."  It was further noted that "§ 4.130 requires not only the presence of certain symptoms but also that those symptoms have caused occupational and social impairment in most of the referenced areas."  See also Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 10 (2017) (indicating that the Board should consider the severity, frequency, and duration of the signs and symptoms of a mental disorder when determining the appropriate rating).

The Veteran received a VA mental health examination in August 2023.  Per the examination report, the VA examiner found that the Veteran's symptoms included depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, and chronic sleep impairment, all symptoms commonly associated with the 30 percent rating criteria.  The only other symptom noted was disturbances of motivation and mood, a symptom commonly associated with the 50 percent rating criteria.  Despite most of the symptoms being associated with the 30 percent rating criteria, the VA examiner found the severity, frequency, and duration of the Veteran's symptoms to more nearly approximate occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity, as contemplated by the 50 percent rating criteria.  In other words, the VA examiner appears to have found the Veteran's disturbances of motivation and mood alone to be severe enough to result in occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.

In a subsequent August 2023 rating decision, the AOJ granted a staged initial disability rating of 50 percent from August 9, 2023, the date of VA mental health examination, based upon the findings of the VA examiner.  As such, the only question before the Board is whether the symptoms warranting the 50 percent disability rating, namely disturbances of motivation and mood, have been present throughout the entire initial rating period on appeal, beginning March 6, 2018.

Following the original claim for service connection, the Veteran submitted a November 2018 private psychological intake summary.  Per the summary report, the Veteran's depression, anxiety, and sleep impairment had significantly worsened to the point where the Veteran was afraid to go to sleep at night due to vivid disturbing dreams.  Such evidence is consistent with a finding that these symptoms had worsened in severity, frequency, and duration to a point where they more nearly approximated disturbances of motivation and mood.  Further, it was reported that the Veteran's drinking had become more frequent and erratic following the aforementioned worsening in symptoms, which is also like or similar to a disturbance of motivation and mood.  

Upon examination in November 2018 the symptoms included intrusive distressing memories, like or similar to disturbances of motivation and mood, marked physiological reactions, like or similar to disturbances of motivation and mood, persistent and exaggerated negative beliefs, like or similar to disturbances of motivation and mood, persistent and exaggerated negative feelings, like or similar to disturbances of motivation and mood, and exaggerated startled responses, like or similar to disturbances of motivation and mood.

Again, the grant of a staged 50 percent disability rating for the service-connected PTSD by the AOJ was based upon the report from an August 2023 VA mental health examination finding that the disturbances of motivation and mood caused the overall symptomatology picture to more nearly approximate occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.  The report from the November 2018 private psychological intake summary is consistent with a finding that symptoms "like or similar to" disturbances of motivation and mood have been present throughout the entire initial rating period on appeal.

For these reasons, resolving all reasonable doubt in favor of the Veteran, the Board finds that the lay and medical evidence shows that a 50 percent disability rating for the service-connected PTSD was warranted throughout the entire initial rating period on appeal.  As such, the Board finds the appropriate effective date for the grant of a 50 percent disability rating for the service-connected PTSD to be March 6, 2018, the effective date of service connection for PTSD.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411.  For all the reasons discussed in the introduction, this is a complete grant as to this issue.

REASONS FOR REMAND

2. TDIU is Remanded.

Entitlement to a TDIU is remanded to correct one or more duty to assist errors that occurred prior to the rating decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

As discussed in the introduction, in May 2024 the Veteran filed a HLR form requesting an earlier effective date for the 50 percent disability rating for the PTSD.  On the same day, the Veteran also submitted a VA Form 21-8940, Veteran's Application for Increased Compensation Based on Unemployability.  While it is true that the Veteran limited the rating claim to the question of an earlier effective date for the 50 percent disability rating for the PTSD, the Board cannot say that this invalidated the relevant TDIU rating period pursuant to Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447 (2009).  As such, pursuant to Rice, the Board finds that the AOJ should have considered the TDIU rating period from March 6, 2018 forward.

Despite the above, in a September 2024 rating decision the AOJ found that the TDIU rating period only ran from May 8, 2024, the date of receipt of VA Form 21 8940, and denied a TDIU based upon the fact that, from May 8, 2024, the Veteran was in receipt of a 100 percent disability rating for prostate cancer; however, this was an error on the part of the AOJ as, for the reasons discussed above, the TDIU rating period ran from as early as March 6, 2018, when service connection was not established for prostate cancer.

A supplemental claim was subsequently received in October 2024, along with an argument brief arguing that the TDIU issue was not moot.  TDIU was again denied in a November 2024 rating decision, and yet another supplemental claim for TDIU was received in March 2025.  This supplemental claim remains pending adjudication.

Again, the pre-decisional error in this case was that the AOJ's should have adjudicated the issue of a TDIU for the rating period beginning March 6, 2018.  Considering the procedural history, the outstanding supplemental claim, the fact the AOJ may be preparing to undertake additional TDIU development, and the fact that a recent November 2024 rating decision granted service connection for four more disabilities dating back to November 2013, the Board finds the proper procedure in this case to be to remand the TDIU issue to allow the AOJ to complete any additional development deemed warranted, and then have the AOJ initially adjudicate the issue of a TDIU from March 6, 2018 forward.

The issue of entitlement to a TDIU is REMANDED for the following action:

After any additional development deemed warranted, adjudicate the issue of entitlement to a TDIU for the rating period beginning from March 6, 2018.

 

 

J. PARKER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	E. Blowers, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.