Citation Nr: A25032683
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 230810-368176
DATE: April 9, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for a right elbow disability, to include bursitis, is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for a right knee disability characterized by pain, to include patellofemoral pain syndrome, is granted.

Entitlement to an effective date prior to December 17, 2020, for the grant of service connection for right lower extremity sciatic radiculopathy is denied.

Entitlement to an effective date of February 11, 2021, for the grant of service connection for migraine headaches is granted.

Entitlement to a compensable rating for migraine headaches is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1.  The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran has a right elbow disability that began during active service or otherwise was caused by service.

2.  Resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, a right knee disability characterized by pain, to include patellofemoral pain syndrome, is at least as likely as not related to service.

3.  The Veteran filed an intent to file a claim for service connection for right lower extremity radiculopathy on December 17, 2020, and prior to that date there were no outstanding claims for service connection for headaches or residuals thereof.

4.  The Veteran filed a claim for service connection for migraine headaches on February 11, 2021, and prior to that date there were no outstanding claims for service connection for headaches or residuals thereof.

5.  During the entire appeal period, the Veteran experienced migraine headaches with less frequent attacks and the migraines did not manifest in characteristic prostrating attacks averaging one in 2 months over the last several months.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1.  The criteria for service connection for a right elbow disability have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

2.  The criteria for service connection for a right knee disability characterized by pain, to include patellofemoral pain syndrome, have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

3.  The criteria for entitlement to an effective date prior to December 17, 2020, for the grant of entitlement to service connection for right lower extremity radiculopathy have not been met.  38 U.S.C. § 5110(a)(2); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.1, 3.103, 3.104, 3.2500.

4.  The criteria for entitlement to an effective date of February 11, 2021, for the grant of entitlement to service connection for migraine headaches have been met.  38 U.S.C. § 5110(a)(2); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.1, 3.103, 3.104, 3.2500.

5.  The criteria for a compensable rating for migraine headaches have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.124a, Diagnostic Code (DC) 8100.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran had active service in the United States Marine Corps from December 1991 to October 1998.

As to the right lower extremity radiculopathy claim, in August 2022, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR), and requested review of a July 2022 decision.  In October 2022, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the HLR decision on appeal, which considered the evidence of record at the time of the prior July 2022 decision.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the July 2022 decision.

As to the remaining issues listed above, in November 2022, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, and requested readjudication of the headache, right elbow, and right knee issues most recently addressed in November 2022 (headaches) and March 2022 (right elbow and right knee) rating decisions.  In July 2023, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the supplemental claim decision on appeal, which found that new and relevant evidence had been received and denied the claim based on the evidence of record at the time of that decision.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the decision on appeal.

In the August 2023 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the July 2022 (right lower extremity radiculopathy) or July 2023 (headaches, right elbow, and right knee) AOJ decisions on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Service Connection

Service connection may be granted for disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303. 

The three-element test for service connection requires evidence of: (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury.  Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166-67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

1.  Entitlement to service connection for a right elbow disability, to include bursitis

The Veteran asserts that he has a right elbow disability that was incurred in or otherwise caused by service.

During service, in September 1994, the Veteran sought treatment for his right elbow following blunt trauma 3 weeks previously.  The assessment was olecranon bursitis.  September 1994 x-rays showed no right elbow fracture or dislocation and no effusion following a blunt trauma injury to the right elbow.  A February 1999 VA general medical examination report noted a past medical history that included a right elbow condition.  The Veteran reported symptom onset after his second motorcycle accident during service.  Left elbow symptoms included stiffness, soreness, popping, grinding, and swelling.  The diagnosis included right elbow condition that was normal on examination.  There was insufficient clinical evidence to warrant a diagnosis of any acute or chronic disorder or residuals thereof.

In July 2008 and September 2008, the Veteran had normal elbow bilateral muscle strength.

In October 2012, the Veteran had no pain at the medial elbow with resisted forearm pronation or palpation of the epicondyle.  The Veteran had normal muscle strength in the elbow

In September 2015, the Veteran had normal right elbow muscle strength in extension and slightly decreased muscle strength in flexion (4- out of 5), but there was pain in flexion.  

In January 2017, the Veteran sought treatment for left elbow pain.  During a February 2017 physical therapy treatment visit for low back and cervical spine problems, the Veteran had no neurological symptoms with respect to either elbow.  

The Veteran underwent a VA examination in April 2021.  The examiner concluded that the Veteran did not have a right elbow disability.  The Veteran reported that he hit his elbow in 1995 and experienced immediate swelling, but there had been no swelling or other symptoms for the past few years.  The Veteran denied any current right elbow symptoms.  Following examination, the examiner concluded that it was less likely than not that the Veteran's claimed right elbow disability was incurred in service or otherwise caused by service.  The rationale was that the prior right olecranon bursitis was gone and he had no sequalae related to it.

An October 2022 private medical opinion concluded, "it is my opinion, that it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's right elbow pain was caused by his in-service right elbow trauma."  The rationale discussed the Veteran's service treatment records documenting a right elbow injury due to blunt trauma.  The Veteran had pain for 3 weeks after the accident and the medical professionals considered whether he had a fracture.  Radiology did not find a fracture, but there was evidence of injury and inflammation of the bursa.  The Veteran's post-service history showed consistent issues with elbow pain, but the elbow complaints seemed to be comorbid with radiculopathy in both upper extremities.  The medical professional concluded, "It is likely that the veteran associated his right elbow pain with his upper extremity nerve pathology, which included multiple peripheral nerves.  Very likely his elbow pain was a result of both trauma to the elbow joint and his upper extremity radiculopathy.  Although they have similar symptoms, the pathology is totally different, and they do not overlap.  The radiating pain, numbness and tingling is associated with the radiculopathy, while the painful movement of the elbow joint is caused by his blunt trauma elbow injury.  Given that the veteran sustained blunt trauma to the right elbow, and that he has had elbow pain since that time, it is likely the soft tissues of the joint have been damaged and subsequently have been repetitively reinjured, to the point now that it is a chronic condition of the right elbow.  Given the in-service injury and the chronic pain in the right elbow it is at least as likely as not that his elbow pain is caused by his injury during active duty."

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in January 2023.  The examiner noted diagnoses of right olecranon bursitis and right medial epicondylitis.  The Veteran reported onset of right elbow symptoms in August 1994 after a motorcycle accident.  A September 1994 x-ray showed no fracture or effusion, but did show "triangular opacity within soft tissue posterior aspect of the distal humerus.  Suspect calcification in olecranon bursa."  Current symptoms included right elbow pain that the Veteran rated as 3 out of 10.  Following examination, the examiner concluded that it was not at least as likely as not that the claimed right elbow pain / bursitis was incurred in or caused by service.  The rationale acknowledged that there was a clear documentation of an elbow injury while in service in August 1994, but there was no nexus to connect that injury to the Veteran's current pain.  There were no subsequent records after 1994 that documented treatment for ongoing right elbow pain.  A January 2017 treatment note included the Veteran's report of left elbow pain and referral to occupational therapy, but there was no mention of right elbow symptoms.  An April 2021 examination report indicated that the Veteran's elbow condition and the Veteran was having no symptoms at that time.  The April 2021 examiner concluded that the Veteran had no current elbow diagnosis.  As such, the current examiner concluded, "Any current pain the veteran now has in elbow would not be due to the service injury of August 1994."

The question for the Board is whether the Veteran has a current right elbow disability that began during service or is at least as likely as not related to an in-service injury, event, or disease.

The Board concludes that, while the Veteran has a current diagnosis of a right elbow disability and evidence shows that he injured his right elbow in September 1994 occurred, the evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran's right elbow disability began during service or is otherwise related to an in-service injury, event, or disease. 

The record contains conflicting medical opinions regarding whether the Veteran's right elbow disability is at least as likely as not related to an in-service injury, event, or disease, including the 1994 right elbow injury. 

The VA medical opinions both concluded that it was not at least as likely as not that the right elbow disability was incurred in or otherwise caused by service.  Taken together, the above VA medical opinions establish that the Veteran's right elbow disability is not at least as likely as not related to an in-service injury, event, or disease, including the 1994 right elbow injury.  The April 2021 VA examiner concluded that the Veteran did not have a current right elbow disability and that the olecranon bursitis observed during service had fully resolved.  The January 2023 VA examiner concluded that while the Veteran did injure the right elbow in 1994 for many years thereafter he had no evidence of complaints or treatment for the right elbow.  Moreover, the April 2021 had found no evidence of a current right elbow disability, including bursitis.  The examiners' combined opinion is probative, because it is based on an accurate medical history and provides an explanation that contains clear conclusions and supporting data.  Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008).

By contrast, the October 2022 private medical opinion concluded that it was at least as likely as not that the Veteran's current right elbow pain was caused by his in-service trauma.  The Board notes at the outset that the private opinion failed to link any specific disability of the right elbow or to discuss symptoms reaching the level of a functional impairment of earning capacity.  Cf. Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356 (Fed. Cir. 2018).  Moreover, the private medical opinion failed to reconcile the opinion that the current right elbow symptoms were due to the in-service trauma given the absence of a continuity of symptomatology, as evidenced by the normal examinations of the right elbow over the years documented above.  

Given these inconsistencies, the Board affords greater probative weight to the above VA medical opinions.  

The Veteran believes the claimed right elbow disability is related to an in-service injury, event, or disease.  The Veteran in this case is not competent to provide a nexus opinion regarding this issue.  The issue is medically complex, as it requires the interpretation of complicated diagnostic medical testing.  Therefore, it is outside the competence of the Veteran in this case because the record does not show that the Veteran has the medical training or credentials to make such a determination.  Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 n.4 (Fed. Cir. 2007); see also Kahana v. Shinseki, 24. Vet. App. 428 (2011).  Consequently, the Board gives more probative weight to the VA examination reports of record.

The Board concludes that the evidence of record persuasively weighs against the claim, and that service connection is not warranted.  As such, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply, and the claim must be denied.  See generally Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49 (1990); Ortiz v. Principi, 274 F.3d 1361 (Fed Cir. 2001).

2.  Entitlement to service connection for a right knee disability, to include patellofemoral pain syndrome

The Veteran believes that he has a right knee disability that was incurred in service or otherwise caused by service.

During service, in October 1997, the Veteran described right knee pain and effusion.  The assessment was patellofemoral pain syndrome.  In a November 1997 Report of Medical Assessment, the Veteran indicated that his knees were in constant pain.  The treatment provider diagnosed patellofemoral syndrome.  A July 1998 Physical Evaluation Board concluded that the Veteran was unfit for duty and the diagnoses included moderate patellofemoral syndrome of the right knee (that was not separately unfitting and did not contribute to the unfitting condition).  

A February 1999 VA general medical examination report noted a past medical history that included a right knee condition.  The Veteran stated he was told he had retropatellar pain syndrome starting after a motorcycle accident in 1994.  He began having quite a bit of right knee problems in 1998.  Currently, the knee symptoms included aches, popping, and grinding.  He rated right knee pain at 2 out of 10 that was worse with running.  The Veteran also reported weakness, swelling, redness, fatigue, and lack of endurance.  The diagnosis was right knee condition x-ray normal.  

In December 2003, the Veteran had bilateral knee pain that was diagnosed as patellofemoral syndrome / chondromalacia patella.  

In January 2004 and March 2005, the Veteran had noted knee pain.  In July 2006, the Veteran complained of pain and crepitus in both knees

In July 2017, the Veteran's right knee ached and had worsened over the past 6 months.  

In April 2018, the Veteran felt like the right knee would buckle with pain.  

In April 2019, the Veteran described left knee joint pain and stated he "has not similar problem with his right knee."  In October 2019, the Veteran discussed right knee pain.  On testing, the Veteran had full range of motion in all extremities.  The treatment provider diagnosed "chondromalacia patella - left knee pain."

The Veteran underwent a VA examination in April 2021.  The examiner noted the past diagnosis of right patellofemoral pain syndrome from 1995.  Current symptoms were mild pain in the knee and no effusion.  The Veteran denied flare-ups involving the right knee or related functional loss.  Right knee ranges of motion were normal.  The Veteran had no further loss of motion with repetitive motion testing.  The Veteran had no right knee muscle atrophy and no ankylosis.  The Veteran had no recurrent subluxation, no persistent instability, no tibial or fibular impairment, no meniscal condition, and no prior surgeries.  Following examination, the examiner concluded that it was less likely than not that the Veteran's claimed right knee disability was incurred in service or otherwise caused by service.  The rationale was that the right knee was stable and the Veteran indicated that his pain was from training and not the in-service accident.  

A July 2021 VA knee examination report documented left knee patellofemoral pain syndrome, but did not diagnose a right knee disability.  

An October 2022 private medical opinion concluded, "it is my opinion, that it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's right knee patellofemoral pain syndrome began on and was caused by active-duty service in the Marine Corps."  The rationale noted consistent complaints of right knee pain since at least 1997.  The Veteran separated from service with three diagnoses of right knee disabilities found in a Physical Evaluation Board, one of which was patellofemoral pain syndrome of the right knee.  Post-service records show a continuity of the right knee patellofemoral pain syndrome from discharge in 1998 to his most recent VA examination.  The records show chronic right knee pain and indications of damage to the joint, including a finding of instability of the right knee in 2003.  "Given the clear diagnosis of Patellofemoral Pain Syndrome on active duty, and the chronic pain documented throughout the last 2 decades, it is at least as likely as not that the [patellofemoral pain syndrome] started during active-duty service in the Marine Corps."

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in January 2023.  The examiner concluded that the Veteran did not have a current right knee diagnosis.  The Veteran reported onset in August 1994 after a motorcycle accident with resulting knee pain.  The Veteran stated he was "laid up for one week... 4 days of no duty."  He treated the knee with ibuprofen, but the knee pain worsened with running in the Marine Corps in 1995.  At that time, the treatment provider diagnosed patellofemoral pain syndrome.  X-rays were initially reported to be normal.  Current symptoms were pain "inside" the knee, as well as the medial lateral aspects of the right knee.  Flare-ups occurred 3 to 4 times a month and lasted for 15 to 20 minutes, when he would feel weak, like the pain wanted to buckle, and pain went to 8 to 9 out of 10.  Precipitating factors included climbing steps, squatting, kneeling, and walking up and down hills.  The severity of the flare-ups was severe.  The Veteran had functional loss due to standing / walking for one hour, he could only kneel occasionally, and he could only squat for a "couple minutes" and it was hard to stand up afterwards.  On range of motion testing, right knee motion was from 0 to 132 degrees.  The Veteran had no further loss of motion with repetitive use testing.  Following examination, the examiner concluded that it was not at least as likely as not that the claimed patellofemoral syndrome was incurred in or caused by service.  The rationale noted that the most likely diagnosis was knee joint arthritis versus patellofemoral pain syndrome.  "Unfortunately, the veteran did not appear for x-ray which was ordered to document presence of knee joint arthritis and therefore per VA guidelines this diagnosis cannot be rendered.  It is admitted that there is documentation of knee pain associated with motorcycle accident of 1994."  The examiner also noted the November 1997 service treatment records documenting constant pain and patellofemoral syndrome.  Another November 1997 record indicated that the Veteran had "pain in knees with swelling and running."  A February 1999 VA examination report documented a right knee condition and a December 2003 VA treatment record diagnosed bilateral patellofemoral syndrome / chondromalacia.  During the January 2023 VA examination, however, the Veteran did not have patellofemoral syndrome / chondromalacia.  The Veteran had no tenderness over the patella, which would be present in he had patella pain syndrome.  The Veteran appeared to have knee joint arthritis.  The history the Veteran provided was consistent with patellofemoral pain syndrome through 2003, but the current examination was more consistent with knee joint arthritis.  Unfortunately, a diagnosis of knee joint arthritis could not be conclusively made because the Veteran failed to appear for his scheduled x-ray.  

Thus, there is conflicting evidence as to whether the Veteran has a current right knee disability.  The Veteran clearly has a past diagnosis of right knee patellofemoral pain syndrome until approximately December 2003.  From that time, there is conflicting medical evidence as to the existence of such a disability.  The October 2022 private examiner concluded that the Veteran continues to have right knee patellofemoral pain syndrome, while the April 2021 examiner concluded that the Veteran had no right knee disability and the January 2023 examiner found that the Veteran had no right knee patellofemoral pain syndrome, but likely had right knee arthritis.  The Veteran has a relatively clear continuity of right knee pain symptoms from service and the majority of medical professionals believe that he has some current right knee disability due to that pain (i.e. either right knee patellofemoral pain syndrome or, possibly, right knee arthritis).  In light of the foregoing, the Board concludes that entitlement to service connection for a right knee disability characterized by pain, to include patellofemoral pain syndrome, is warranted.

Earlier Effective Dates

For appeals governed by the AMA, 38 C.F.R. § 3.2500(h) controls the assignment of effective dates.  Under that provision, the effective date will be the date VA received a veteran's initial claim or the date entitlement arose, whichever is later, if a veteran continuously pursues an issue by timely filing in succession any of the available review options as specified in § 3.2500(c) within one year of the issuance of the decision.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2500(h).  Applicable laws and regulations define an initial claim as any complete claim, other than a supplemental claim, for a benefit on a form prescribed by the Secretary.  38 C.F.R. § 3.1(p)(1).  A first initial claim for one or more benefits received by VA is further defined as an original claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.160(b).

The Veteran appears to contend that earlier effective dates for service connection for right lower extremity radiculopathy and migraine headaches.  For each of these claims, other than the general assertion that earlier effective dates are warranted the Veteran has not advanced a specific argument as to why earlier effective dates should be awarded.

1.  Entitlement to an effective date prior to December 17, 2020, for the grant of service connection for right lower extremity sciatic radiculopathy 

On December 17, 2020, the Veteran submitted an intent to file a claim for compensation.  Within one year, on February 11, 2021, the Veteran filed a VA Form 21-526EZ, Application for Disability Compensation and Related Compensation Benefits, that included the issue of a bilateral lower extremity nerve condition secondary to the lumbar spine.  

Following multiple rating decisions denying the claim and supplemental claims, a July 2022 rating decision granted entitlement to service connection for right lower extremity radiculopathy, effective April 6, 2022.  A subsequent October 2022 rating decision granted an earlier effective date of December 17, 2020, based on a finding of clear and unmistakable error (CUE) in the June 2022 rating decision.

Prior to December 17, 2020, the Veteran had not brought claims for service connection for a right lower extremity radiculopathy disability.  The Veteran has not specifically argued why an earlier effective date should be awarded.  While it is possible that the disabilities had their onset prior to the date of claim in December 2020, the VA is constrained by the laws regarding effective dates.  In that regard, the right lower extremity radiculopathy is secondary to the Veteran's separately service-connected low back disability, which prior to December 2020 was last adjudicated in an October 2016 rating decision.  That rating decision was based on a September 2016 VA back examination where the Veteran denied any radiculopathy symptoms and testing was negative for any radiculopathy problems.  As such, there was no basis for granting service connection for right lower extremity radiculopathy at the time of the October 2016 rating decision.  Based on the above, as the December 17, 2020, date of claim is the earliest date for which service connection could be awarded, the claim for an earlier effective date is denied.

2.  Entitlement to an effective date prior to May 19, 2022, for the grant of service connection for migraine headaches

On February 11, 2021, the Veteran filed a VA Form 21-526EZ, Application for Disability Compensation and Related Compensation Benefits, that included the issue service connection for headaches on both a direct and secondary basis.  

A May 2021 rating decision denied entitlement to service connection for headaches on a direct and secondary basis.  That rating decision was mailed with a May 19, 2021, cover letter, which notified the Veteran that he had "one year from the date of this latter to select a review option in order to protect your initial filing date for effective date purposes."

On May 19, 2022, VA received a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review, the Veteran appealed the May 2021 rating decision denying service connection for headaches.

Thus, the Veteran appealed the May 2021 rating decision denial within one year of that decision.  As such, an earlier effective date of February 11, 2021, for the grant of service connection for migraine headaches is warranted.  

Prior to February 11, 2021, the Veteran had not brought claims for service connection for migraines or other headache disabilities.  While it is possible that the migraines had their onset prior to the date of claim in February 2021, VA is constrained by the laws regarding effective dates.  As the February 11, 2021, date of claim is the earliest date for which service connection could be awarded, an effective date prior to that date is not warranted.

Increased Rating

1.  Entitlement to a compensable rating for migraine headaches

The Veteran contends that a compensable rating is warranted for his migraine headache disability.  The July 2023 rating decision granted service connection for migraine headaches with a noncompensable rating effective May 19, 2022.  As discussed above, the Board grants herein an earlier effective date of February 11, 2021.

Migraine headaches are rated pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, DC 8100, for migraine.  Under DC 8100, a noncompensable rating is warranted for migraines with less frequent attacks.  A 10 percent rating is warranted for migraines with characteristic prostrating attacks averaging one in 2 months over the last several months.

The rating criteria of DC 8100 are considered successive, meaning that a claimant cannot fulfill the criteria of the higher rating without fulfilling those of the next lower rating.  Johnson v. Wilkie, 30 Vet. App. 245, 252 (2018).  This renders 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.7 and 4.21 inapplicable.  Johnson, 30 Vet. App. at 252.

The phrase "characteristic prostrating attacks" is used in the criteria corresponding to 10 percent and 30 percent ratings under DC 8100 to describe the nature and severity of migraines, but it is not defined in the regulation.  Pursuant to Dorland's Illustrated Medical Dictionary 1531 (32d ed. 2012), prostration is defined as "extreme exhaustion or powerlessness."  Thus, the phrase "characteristic prostrating attacks" is understood to describe migraine attacks that typically produce extreme exhaustion or powerlessness.

In rating headaches or migraines under DC 8100, the Board may not consider the ameliorative effects of medication.  See Jones v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 56, 63 (2012). 

An April 2021 VA headache examination report indicated that once or twice a year the Veteran got a headache that he treated with Flexeril or Tylenol as needed.  The Veteran also had the associated symptom of changes in vision.  The headaches lasted for less than 1 day.  The Veteran experienced no characteristic prostrating attacks of migraine / non-migraine headache pain.  The headaches did not impact the Veteran's ability to work.

In October 2021, the Veteran had an ongoing diagnosis of ocular migraines, but he had no complaints of migraines currently.

In October 2022, the Veteran had noted ocular migraine, but he denied any ocular migraines since the last appointment and was able to take ibuprofen and prevent the migraines from becoming bad.  

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in January 2023.  The Veteran indicated that current symptoms included mild headaches that he rated as 2 to 3 out of 10.  The Veteran had headaches 2 to 3 times a week and treated the symptoms with ibuprofen.  The Veteran also had associated symptoms of nausea, sensitivity to light and sound, changes in vision, red and blue flashing lights, little floaters, and a "ripple effect" that would last for a few minutes.  The Veteran had constant mild pain, with flare-ups of pain that lasted for 15 to 60 minutes.  The Veteran had no characteristic prostrating attacks of migraine or non-migraine headache pain.  The Veteran did not have very prostrating and prolonged attacks of migraines / non-migraine pain productive of severe economic inadaptability.  The Veteran had no other pertinent findings.  The headache disability affected the Veteran's ability to work.  The Veteran worked as a shop foreman and would occasionally have to go into his office to rest and take ibuprofen during a severe headache.  He took approximately a 15 to 20 minute break about 2 times per month.  

A compensable rating under DC 8100 is not warranted unless there are migraines with characteristic prostrating attacks averaging one in 2 months over the last several months.  The Veteran did report during the January 2023 examination that he had to take a 15 to 20 minute break in his office about 2 times a month.  The Board agrees with the January 2023 VA examiner that these symptoms do not more closely approximate characteristic prostrating attacks of migraine headache pain.  The short period of the break is similar in nature and duration to breaks typically taken by employees during work hours.  The Veteran has not reported that the duration of the breaks is impacted by the use or non-use of medication.  Thus, the Board concludes that the Veteran's migraines did not occur with characteristic prostrating attacks averaging one in 2 months over the last several months at any time during the appeal period.  A compensable rating under DC 8100 is not warranted.

Moreover, no other DC is appropriately applied.  The Board has considered alternative DCs relating to neurological conditions but finds that they are inapplicable in this case.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a.

In conclusion, the Board finds that the evidence of record persuasively weighs against the Veteran's claim for a compensable rating for migraine headaches.  For the reasons discussed above, the Board finds that staged ratings are not warranted.  As the evidence of record persuasively weighs against a higher rating, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7.

 

 

MICHAEL LANE

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	C. J. Houbeck, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.