Citation Nr: A25032965
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240409-429917
DATE: April 9, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Navy from October 1973 to August 1975.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal of a March 2024 rating decision issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA).  The Veteran appealed the decision by filing a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement (NOD)), in April 2024.  He chose the direct review docket.  This means that the evidentiary review period closed at the time of the initial decision.  The Board docketed the appeal in April 2024.

Remand - Analysis

In remanding this matter, the Board makes no credibility findings as to the lay evidence of record.  Such findings will be made when (or if) these matters return to the Board.  Smith v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 332 (2020).

Under the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), the Board must remand to the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) to correct pre-decisional duty to assist errors (including when the AOJ failed to make reasonable efforts to obtain VA treatment records or relevant federal or private treatment records, failed to obtain a VA exam, or provided an inadequate VA examination or opinion). 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.802(a).

The AOJ erred by failing to obtain an adequate medical opinion discussing the Veteran's lay contentions before the initial decision.  See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 312 (2007) (holding that when VA provides a medical opinion it must be adequate); Miller v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 249, 260 (2020) (stating that "[t]he examiner must address the veteran's lay statements to provide the Board with an adequate medical opinion").

The Veteran wrote on his application for benefits that he believed his sleep apnea was "caused by an in-service event, injury, or exposure [to] pneumonia and high speed blowers in boiler room on board ship".  He is competent to report being exposed to "high speed blowers" in the boiler room on a ship.  His records confirm service aboard the U.S.S. Richard E. Kraus and 1 year and 5 months of sea/foreign service.  While he is not competent to diagnose pneumonia because it requires medical knowledge, and the Board does not see a diagnosis of pneumonia in his service medical records, he does appear to have been treated during service for an upper respiratory infection (URI) in December 1973 and a sore throat in March 1975. It is also unclear as to whether the Veteran was reporting that he had been diagnosed as having pneumonia or that he was exposed to others that had a pneumonia diagnosis.  In any event, the VA examiner was not asked to consider this lay evidence and, thus, he did not discuss it. See Miller, 32 Vet. App. at 260.  It is not event clear from the report as to whether the examiner gather any lay evidence from the Veteran during the phone interview.  Further clarification is needed.    

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Obtain an addendum VA medical opinion from Dr. M.P. (who provided the medical opinion in March 2024).  If Dr. M.P. is not available, utilize another clinician.  The clinician is asked to review the claims file and opine:

Is it at least as likely as not (the likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea began during or is causally related to active duty, including exposure to "high speed blowers" in a ship boiler room and URIs/sore throat illnesses?

A complete rationale should be provided for all opinions.  While a thorough and independent review of the claims file is expected, the Board calls the examiner's attention to the following relevant lay and medical evidence:

"	VA medical records, including showing the Veteran's history of obesity/overweight

"	The Veteran's lay contentions that his obstructive sleep apnea is caused by exposure to high speed blowers in a ship boiler room, "exposure to pneumonia," and URI/sore throat infections during active duty service

"	Service treatment records, including treatment for a URI in December 1973 and a sore throat in March 1976

 

 

MICHAEL A. HERMAN

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	D. Reed, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.1303.