Citation Nr: A25032078
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240529-444001
DATE: April 8, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for chronic fatigue, other than chronic fatigue syndrome, due to toxic exposure risk activity (TERA), or, alternatively, secondary to service-connected post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) with generalized anxiety disorder (GAD), is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty for the United States Army from July 2006 to November 2009, to include deployment to Southwest Asia. 

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals on appeal from a rating decision issued in February 2024 by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office. 

The Veteran submitted a timely VA Form 10182 and selected the Direct Review docket. As the Veteran requested direct review, the Board may consider only the evidence of record at the time of the AOJ decision, as qualified above, on appeal. Any evidence submitted thereafter will not be considered and/or evaluated. However, as the appeal is being remanded to address pre-decisional duty to assist errors by the RO, the entire record will be readjudicated upon remand by the RO as the Agency of Original Jurisdiction. 

Entitlement to service connection for chronic fatigue, other than chronic fatigue syndrome, due to toxic exposure risk activity (TERA), or, alternatively, secondary to service-connected post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) with generalized anxiety disorder (GAD), is remanded.

The Veteran contends that she began experiencing fatigue following her return from deployment to Iraq. Alternatively, the Veteran contends her fatigue is secondary to her service-connected PTSD with GAD. See October 2023 VA 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim. 

Favorable findings identified in the February 2024 rating decision were 1) exposure to particulate matter during military service; 2) service connection of the claimed primary disability of PTSD; and 3) sufficient service to meet the minimum requirement for presumptive service connection. 

DD Form 214 indicates service in Iraq from February 2008 to April 2009. ILER confirms service in Kuwait from November 4, 2008, through November 26, 2008. An August 2023 TERA memorandum indicates that the Veteran participated in a TERA during service in the Southwest Asia theater of Operations. 

Service connection may be granted for a disability due to a qualifying chronic disability of a veteran who served in the Southwest Asia Theater of operations during the Persian Gulf War provided that such disability became manifest during either active service in the Southwest Asia Theater of Operations during the Persian Gulf War or to a degree of 10 percent or more, under the appropriate diagnostic code of 38 C.F.R. § Part 4, not later than December 31, 2026, and by history, physical examination, and laboratory tests, the disability cannot be attributed to any known clinical diagnosis. 38 U.S.C. § 1117; 38 C.F.R. § 3.317 (a)(1).

At the outset, the record reflects that the Veteran served in Southwest Asia during the Persian Gulf War and, therefore, such laws and regulations are potentially applicable to her claim.

VA treatment records include consistent complaints of chronic fatigue and overall lethargy, even after 8 full hours of sleep. See September 2022 Women's Health Annual Evaluation Note; June 2024 Mental Health Note.

A chronic qualifying disability means a chronic disability resulting from an (A) undiagnosed illness; (B) the following MUCMIs that are defined by a cluster of signs or symptoms: (1) chronic fatigue syndrome; (2) fibromyalgia; (3) irritable bowel syndrome; or (4) any other illness that the Secretary determines meets the criteria in paragraph (a)(2)(ii) of this section for a medically unexplained chronic multi-symptom illness; or (C) any diagnosed illness that the Secretary determines in regulations prescribed under 38 U.S.C. § 1117 (d) warrants a presumption of service connection. 38 C.F.R. § 3.317 (a)(2)(i).

The Veteran underwent VA examinations and was found to not have diagnosis of chronic fatigue syndrome. See December 2023 VA Examination; see also February 2024 VA Examination. 

An opinion was provided in February 2024. The VA examiner found that the four standard Gulf War disability patterns are not applicable as the Veteran is without diagnosis of chronic fatigue syndrome, and as there is no evidence of persistent/recurrent symptoms or concern of a diagnosis for fatigue. 

The Board deems this opinion inadequate. Specifically, the examiner's statement that there is no evidence of persistent/recurrent symptoms or concern of fatigue is inconsistent with the VA treatment reports of record. Indeed, there are several complaints of fatigue and lethargy even after a full night's rest within the Veteran's VA treatment records. See September 2022 Women's Health Annual Evaluation Note; June 2024 Mental Health Note.

Moreover, although the Veteran has not been diagnosed with chronic fatigue syndrome, for which service connection may be presumed for Gulf War veterans, the existence of the latter presumption does not limit her ability to establish service connection based on sufficient evidence of actual, as opposed to presumed, causation. See Combee v. Brown, 34 F. 3d 1039, 1044 (Fed. Cir. 1994). Therefore, even if chronic fatigue syndrome has not been diagnosed, a VA medical opinion is needed as to the likelihood that the Veteran's recurring fatigue symptoms are related to a disease or injury of service, to include toxic exposures associated with her Gulf War service.

The Board notes that VA has an obligation to obtain medical opinions for any service connection claim which cannot be granted where there is evidence of a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA) and of a current disability. 

A TERA opinion was obtained in February 2024. The VA examiner opined that the claimed condition was less likely than not caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activity(ies), after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran, and the synergistic combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran. The rationale states that the Veteran is without diagnosis of chronic fatigue syndrome; therefore, the claimed condition is less likely than not caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activities. 

The Board finds this opinion to be inadequate as the examiner failed to opine on whether the documented frequent fatigue symptom is more likely or less likely due to TERA exposure. 

Importantly, the Board highlights the fact that there is a difference between chronic fatigue and chronic fatigue syndrome. See https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/article/PMC6522773. Unlike chronic fatigue which is the sole symptom of fatigue which lasts more than 6 months, chronic fatigue syndrome has characteristics of brain and central nervous system symptoms and is counted as a complex, multisystem neuroimmune disease. Id. 

Therefore, a TERA opinion for the Veteran's consistent complaint of fatigue and lethargy is warranted. 

Lastly, the December 2023 VA examiner was asked to provide a secondary service connection opinion. The examiner concluded that the claimed condition is less likely than not proximately due to or the result of the Veteran's service-connected PTSD. The rationale states that the Veteran does not have diagnosis of chronic fatigue syndrome. 

As explained in greater detail above, the Board finds the December 2023 VA secondary opinion to be inadequate as the examiner failed to address whether the Veteran's claimed recurrent fatigue is second to her service-connected PTSD with GAD. Moreover, no aggravation opinion was provided. 

As the medical opinions of record are inadequate, the Board finds a pre-decisional duty to assist error has occurred and a remand is warranted to obtain addendum medical opinions. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for an examination with an appropriate clinician as to the nature and etiology of recurrent symptoms of fatigue. The examiner must opine as to whether the Veteran's recurring fatigue is at least as likely as not: 

A. Caused by an in-service injury, event, or disease, to include environmental exposures associated with Gulf War service in Southwest Asia?

B. A manifestation of an undiagnosed illness?

C. If the Veteran's fatigue is the manifestation of a diagnosed illness, is the diagnosed illness a medically unexplained chronic multi-symptom illness (MUCMI) that is defined by a cluster of signs or symptoms?

(Continued on the next page)

?

D. Is any diagnosed condition manifesting in fatigue due to the combined synergistic effect of the Veteran's total potential toxic exposure in service?

E. Is the Veteran's fatigue caused or aggravated by a service- connected disability, specifically PTSD with GAD?

 

 

Cynthia M. Bruce

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Russell, Tangela

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.