Citation Nr: A25032334
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240828-469181
DATE: April 8, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to an evaluation in excess of 10 percent for gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from February 1992 to February 1995.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a September 2023 higher-level review decision of a May 2023 rating decision.

In August 2024, the Veteran submitted a VA 10182 and elected the direct review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the May 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review.  If evidence was submitted during the time period after the AOJ issued that decision, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  However, because the Board is remanding the case, any evidence that the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in adjudication of the claim. C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Upon review, the Board finds that a remand is needed to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error.

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in March 2022 during which he was found to have persistently recurrent epigastric distress, dysphagia, regurgitation, reflux, substernal pain, nausea, and sleep disturbance.  However, he did not have symptoms productive of considerable or severe impairment of health; pyrosis; material weight loss; vomiting; hematemesis; or melena with moderate anemia.  Such findings are commensurate with the currently assigned 10 percent evaluation under the version of Diagnostic Code 7346 in effect during the appeal period.

The Veteran subsequently submitted a November 2022 private evaluation report from Dr. C.M.B. (initials used to protect privacy), a physician assistant.  He noted that the Veteran reported having multiple symptoms, including heartburn, acid reflux, regurgitation, a sore throat, difficulty swallowing, upper abdominal pain, frequent coughing, and shoulder, arm, and chest pain.  The Veteran had also indicated that he had sleep impairment, which results in daytime fatigue, trouble thinking, mood changes, low libido and sex drive, irritability, a depressed mood, difficulty enjoying social events and interactions, bouts of clumsiness, difficulty staying on task and concentrating, memory trouble, and trouble controlling his emotions and actions.  Dr. C.M.B. stated that he has physical symptoms and emotional, psychological, and spiritual impacts on behavioral and social functioning.  He concluded that the Veteran has severe GERD symptomatology that is productive of severe impairment of health.  However, the Board notes that Dr. C.M.B. did not address the fact that the Veteran is separately service-connected for an adjustment disorder with depressed mood and insomnia disorder for which he has been assigned staged ratings of 50 percent and 70 percent during the appeal period.  Thus, many of those symptoms and the resulting social and occupational impairment are already contemplated in that separate evaluation.

A December 2022 VA examiner later reviewed the claims file and noted that the Veteran has dysphagia, pyrosis, reflux, regurgitation, substernal pain, sleep disturbance, and nausea.  She also found that there was insufficient evidence to attribute his weight loss of 22 months over the past few months to GERD.  However, she did not provide any explanation.  Nor did she address whether the Veteran has considerable or severe impairment of health, vomiting, or hematemesis or melena with moderate anemia.  Moreover, the examiner indicated that he may require additional evaluation for Barrett's esophagus and gastrointestinal malignancy, but it does not appear that such an evaluation was provided.  Therefore, the Board finds that an additional examination was needed.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

The Veteran should be afforded a VA examination to ascertain the current severity and manifestations of his service-connected GERD.  Any studies, tests, and evaluations deemed necessary by the examiner should be performed.

The examiner is requested to review all pertinent records associated with the claims file.

It should be noted that the Veteran is competent to attest to factual matters of which he has first-hand knowledge, including observable symptomatology.  If there is a medical basis to support or doubt the history provided by the Veteran, the examiner should provide a fully reasoned explanation.

The examiner should report all signs and symptoms necessary for evaluating the Veteran's disability under the rating criteria.  In particular, he or she should indicate whether he has persistently recurrent epigastric distress with dysphagia, pyrosis, and regurgitation, accompanied by substernal pain, productive of considerable impairment of health.  The examiner should also indicate whether he has pain, vomiting, material weight loss and hematemesis or melena with moderate anemia; or other symptom combinations productive of severe impairment of health.

In addition, the examiner should state whether the Veteran has a documented history of recurrent esophageal stricture(s) causing dysphagia which requires dilatation no more than two times per year; a documented history of recurrent or refractory esophageal stricture(s) causing dysphagia which requires at least one of the following (1) dilatation 3 or more times per year, (2) dilatation using steroids at least one time per year, or (3) esophageal stent placement; or a documented history of recurrent or refractory esophageal stricture(s) causing dysphagia with at least one of the symptoms present: (1) aspiration, (2) undernutrition, and/or (3) substantial weight loss as defined by § 4.112(a) and treatment with either surgical correction of esophageal stricture(s) or percutaneous esophago-gastrointestinal tube (PEG tube).

The examiner should identify any other manifestations and symptoms of the Veteran's service-connected GERD, to include any Barrett's esophagus or malignancy.

A clear rationale should be provided for all opinions.

 

 

J.W. ZISSIMOS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Deverter, Rebecca M.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.