Citation Nr: A25032087
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240626-451119
DATE: April 8, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to a 70 percent initial rating for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is granted.

Entitlement to a rating higher than 70 percent for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) for the period on appeal is denied.

Entitlement to an earlier effective date for the grant of eligibility for Dependents' Educational Assistance (DEA) is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACTS

1. The Veteran's PTSD symptoms of suicidal ideation and impaired impulse control raise a reasonable doubt regarding whether an initial 50 percent or 70 percent rating is warranted for the Veteran's PTSD.

2. The Veteran's PTSD most nearly approximated-at most-occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas during the period on appeal. 

3. The Veteran does not have a total (100 percent) service-connected disability rating prior to February 12, 2018.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for an initial 70 percent rating for PTSD have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.7, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411.

2. The criteria for a rating higher than 70 percent for PTSD have not been met at any time during the period on appeal. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.7, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411.

3. The criteria for an effective date earlier than February 12, 2018 for the grant of eligibility for DEA have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 5107, 5110; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.155, 3.400, 3.807(a).

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from August 2000 to August 2006, in the United States Army.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a September 2023 higher level review rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO) that denied an initial rating higher than 50 percent for PTSD, denied a rating higher than 70 percent for PTSD from November 12, 2020, and denied an earlier effective date for eligibility for DEA. The September 2023 decision was issued in response to the Veteran's request for higher level review of a March 2023 rating decision.

In June 2024, the Veteran timely filed a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal, electing the Direct Review docket. Accordingly, the issues listed above are properly before the Board. 

Given this procedural history, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2023 rating decision. See 38?C.F.R. § 20.301. If any evidence was submitted after the March 2023 rating decision, it was not considered. If the Veteran would like any such evidence to be considered, the Veteran may file a supplemental claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.

1. Entitlement to an initial rating higher than 50 percent for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD)

2. Entitlement to a rating higher than 70 percent for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) from November 12, 2020

Service connection for PTSD was granted in a February 2019 rating decision with an initial 30 percent evaluation effective February 12, 2018. This initial evaluation was later increased to 50 percent, effective February 12, 2018, and a 70 percent rating was granted from November 12, 2020. The rating decision on appeal continued the initial 50 percent evaluation and continued the 70 percent evaluation from November 12, 2020. The Veteran contends that higher ratings are warranted for both periods.

Disability ratings are intended to represent the average impairment of earning capacity resulting from disability and are determined by comparing the symptomatology to the criteria set forth in the Schedule for Rating Disabilities. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1. Different ratings may be assigned for different periods of time for the same disorder if the facts show distinct time periods with different levels of disability. Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119 (1999); Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007). If two ratings are potentially applicable, the higher rating will be assigned if the disability more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating; otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.7. Any reasonable doubt regarding the degree of disability will be resolved in favor of the Veteran. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.3.

Pursuant to the General Rating Formula for Rating Mental Disorders (General Rating Formula), a 30 percent rating is warranted when a veteran's mental disability causes occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks (although generally functioning satisfactorily, with routine behavior, self-care, and conversation normal), due to such symptoms as: depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks (weekly or less often), chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss (such as forgetting names, directions, recent events). 38 C.F.R. § 4.130.

A 50 percent rating is warranted when there is occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to such symptoms as: flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short- and long-term memory (e.g. retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships. Id.

A 70 percent rating is warranted when there is occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities, speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation, neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a work-like setting); and the inability to establish and maintain effective relationships. Id.

A maximum 100 percent rating is warranted when there is total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time and place; memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name. Id.

The symptoms listed in the General Rating Formula are not intended to constitute an exhaustive list, but rather serve as examples of the type and degree of symptoms, or effects thereof, justifying a particular rating. Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436, 442 (2002). In adjudicating a claim for an increased rating, the adjudicator must consider all symptoms of a claimant's service-connected mental condition that affect the level of occupational and social impairment. Id. at 443. However, a veteran may only qualify for a given disability rating under 38 C.F.R. § 4.130 by demonstrating the particular symptoms associated with that percentage, or others of similar severity, frequency, and duration. Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 117 (Fed. Cir. 2013). Section 4.130 requires not only the presence of certain symptoms but also that those symptoms have caused occupational and social impairment in most of the referenced areas. Id. at 118.

After review of the record and after resolving all reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Board finds that an initial rating of 70 percent for PTSD is warranted. 

During the initial rating period, a VA examination was obtained in November 2018. The Veteran reported that he had been in his current job as a financial advisor for 18 months and loved it. He reported that he had taken some college classes but had problems focusing. The examination report contains minimal information regarding social functioning, noting only that the Veteran was in the process of divorce from his current wife. The examiner noted that the Veteran was tense and anxious but oriented in all spheres, with logical and goal-oriented thought processes, no hallucinations, and no delusions. The Veteran reported no suicidal ideation. The examiner noted symptoms of depressed mood, chronic sleep impairment, and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships. The examiner opined that the Veteran's PTSD caused occupational and social impairment due to mild or transient symptoms which decrease work efficiency and ability to perform occupational tasks only during periods of significant stress, or symptoms controlled by medication. 

The record also contains a retrospective February 2023 private PTSD evaluation from clinical psychologist Dr. L.C. The examiner opined that the Veteran's PTSD has resulted in occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas since at least February 2018. The examiner opined that the Veteran's symptoms during this period have included depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss, flattened affect, impaired judgment, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances including work or a work-like setting, suicidal ideation, impaired impulse control, and intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living. 

With respect to the Veteran's social functioning, the evidence generally shows symptoms consistent with difficulty establishing and maintaining effective social relationships. The Veteran and his wife divorced during the initial rating period, and the Veteran attributes the relationship breakup to his PTSD symptoms of anger, difficulties with social situations, and insomnia. In a February 2018 statement, the Veteran's wife at the time reported that he had intense social anxiety in public, no patience with her, and that he was forgetful and unable to remember conversations from one day to the next. A May 2018 VA treatment record noted the Veteran's report that his "short fuse" and memory problems were creating problems in his marriage. However, regarding social functioning, the Veteran also reported during this period that he was able to reach out to friends as needed and that he began online dating during this period. See November 2018 VA treatment record. Overall, while the evidence shows that the Veteran's condition results in some social isolation and mood disturbances, it also indicates that he was able to establish and maintain social relationships during the period on appeal. 

With respect to occupational functioning, the evidence generally shows symptoms consistent with occupational impairment with reduced reliability and productivity. During the earlier part of the initial rating period, the Veteran worked "almost" full-time as a financial advisor, then worked as a door-to-door salesman, and during the later part of the initial rating period the Veteran worked "about 50 hours per week" as an internet sales manager for a car dealership. The Veteran noted that his work as a door-to-door salesman was very difficult for him due to the level of contact with the public. The Veteran has also noted low motivation for work and difficulties with focusing. (The Veteran has also reported being let go from prior employment due to not being a "social member of the team" and has reported that he threatened a prior supervisor (see May 2018 VA treatment record), but the record indicates that these occurrences were prior to the period on appeal; at his November 2018 VA examination, the Veteran reported that he had been at his current job for the last 18 months, which covers the initial portion of the period on appeal here.) Overall, while the record shows reduced reliability and productivity, it also shows that the Veteran was able to seek out and maintain gainful employment for the majority of the initial period on appeal.

While the record does not show occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas during the initial rating period, such as is contemplated by a 70 percent rating, the Board notes that the record on appeal does show suicidal ideation and impaired impulse control, two symptoms contemplated by a 70 percent rating. 

In a September 2020 statement, the Veteran reported that when his wife left him in July 2018, he started having suicidal ideation more than once a week. This statement is corroborated by a July 2018 VA treatment record noting suicidal ideation and that the Veteran felt that the world would be better off without him. Treatment records from later in 2018 are negative for suicidal ideation. See August 2018 and November 2018 VA treatment records.

Regarding impaired impulse control, the Veteran reports a physically aggressive incident involving his then-wife in July 2018. See September 2020 Veteran statement and July 2018 VA treatment record. The Veteran also reports prior aggression and verbal abuse towards his ex-wife. 

When this evidence is considered together, in the light most favorable to the Veteran, the Board finds that it raises a reasonable doubt regarding whether a 50 percent or 70 percent rating is warranted for the initial rating period. Accordingly, upon resolving all doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Board finds that an initial 70 percent rating for PTSD is warranted. See 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102. 

Regarding the entire period on appeal, the Board finds that a rating higher than 70 percent is not warranted. The Veteran's PTSD was not productive of symptoms and impairment that most nearly approximated total social and occupational impairment such as would warrant a 100 percent disability rating.

Subsequent to the initial rating period, the Veteran underwent a VA PTSD examination in March 2021. The examiner noted symptoms of depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks more than once a week, chronic sleep impairment, flattened affect, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances including work or a work-like setting, and impaired impulse control. The Veteran reported no infractions or difficulties in his work as an internet manager at a car dealership. Regarding his social functioning, the Veteran reported that he had remarried in 2020. The examiner noted that the Veteran was appropriately dressed with good hygiene. The examiner noted that the Veteran was fully oriented, with relevant thought content, and with no evidence of psychosis. The examiner opined that the Veteran's PTSD was productive of occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas.

Regarding the private February 2023 examination, as noted above, the February 2023 examiner also opined that the Veteran's PTSD was productive of occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas. The Board notes that the February 2023 examiner reported that the "Veteran described significant difficulties with completing activities of daily living in the past, dating back to at least February 2018." Specifically, the Veteran reported "low motivation to care for himself physically, resulting in not eating and difficulty completing housework." However, the fact that the Veteran maintained regular employment for most of the period on appeal also indicates that whatever difficulties the Veteran had with completing activities of daily living, these difficulties did not cause significant occupational impairment, let alone the level of impairment (total) contemplated by a 100 percent rating. 

The February 2023 examiner also discussed the Veteran's memory loss, noting the Veteran's report that he finds it difficult to attend to small things at work and home, such as taking out the trash and cleaning the litter box. He reported that he often has to take copious notes and set several reminders in order to complete tasks at work. The Board finds that such memory impairment (impairment of short and long-term memory) is contemplated by the Veteran's current 70 percent rating and that there is no evidence of the level of memory impairment (memory loss for names of close relatives/own occupation/or own name) contemplated by a 100 percent rating.  

Like the examinations from the period on appeal, the Veteran's treatment records from the period on appeal are negative for symptoms productive of total occupational and social impairment such as gross impairment in thought processes or communication, persistent delusions or hallucinations, grossly inappropriate behavior, persistent danger of hurting self or others, disorientation to time or place, or memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name.

In sum, the weight of the evidence of record is against assigning a rating higher than 70 percent for PTSD for the period on appeal as the severity, frequency and duration of the Veteran's symptoms indicated-at most-occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas. As there is not an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence, the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine is not applicable and the claim for a rating higher than 70 percent is denied. See 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102. 

3. Entitlement to an effective date earlier than November 12, 2020 for the grant of eligibility for Dependents' Educational Assistance (DEA) benefits

At the time the Veteran filed his VA Form 10182, his effective date for eligibility to DEA benefits was November 12, 2020. The Veteran appealed for an earlier effective date.

Basic eligibility for DEA benefits exists if a veteran-who was discharged from service under conditions other than dishonorable-has a permanent total service-connected disability. 38 C.F.R. § 3.807(a). A total disability rating may be assigned when a veteran's service-connected disability or disabilities are rated 100 percent disabling under the rating schedule, or when a veteran is unemployable due to a service-connected disability or disabilities. 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.340, 3.341.

(Continued on the next page)

?

Subsequent to the filing of the Veteran's appeal, in an April 2024 Board decision, the Veteran was granted a higher rating for right lower extremity radiculopathy from February 12, 2018, which resulted in the Veteran having a combined 100 percent disability rating from February 12, 2018. In the subsequent April 2024 rating decision, the RO accordingly awarded the Veteran an earlier effective date of February 12, 2018 for eligibility to DEA benefits. 

Prior to February 12, 2018, the Veteran had no total service-connected disability or disabilities; accordingly, an effective date earlier than February 12, 2018 for DEA benefits is not warranted. As there is not an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence, the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine is not applicable and an effective date earlier than February 12, 2018 for DEA benefits is denied. See 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

 

 

Danette Mincey

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	M. Jesteadt

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.