Citation Nr: A25032096
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240612-451115
DATE: April 8, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an initial disability rating of 20 percent, but no higher, for left lower extremity radiculopathy is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran's left lower extremity sciatic nerve radiculopathy is manifested by moderate incomplete paralysis.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for a disability rating of 20 percent for left lower extremity radiculopathy have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.321, 4.1, 4.2, 4.7, 4.120, 4.124a, Diagnostic Code (DC) 8520.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served in the United States Marine Corps from August 2007 to July 2008. 

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a January 2024 rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In September 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, and requested an increase of the initial rating for left lower extremity radiculopathy, most recently addressed in a September 2023 rating decision. In January 2024, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the supplemental claim decision on appeal, which found that new and relevant evidence had been received and denied the claim based on the evidence of record at the time of that decision.  

In the June 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the January 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) supplemental claim decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted after the AOJ issued the supplemental claim decision on appeal, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Entitlement to an initial disability rating of 20 percent for left lower extremity radiculopathy.

The Veteran contends that she is entitled to an increased initial rating for her left lower extremity radiculopathy.

Disability ratings are determined by evaluating the extent to which a veteran's service-connected disability adversely affects his or her ability to function under the ordinary conditions of daily life, including employment, by comparing his or her symptomatology with the criteria set forth in the Schedule for Rating Disabilities. See 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1. 

Where there is a question as to which of two evaluations shall be applied, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating. Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7 (2017). Any reasonable doubt regarding the degree of disability is resolved in favor of the Veteran. 38 C.F.R. § 4.3 (2017). 

Where the appeal arises from the original assignment of a disability evaluation following an award of service connection, the severity of the disability at issue is to be considered during the entire period from the initial assignment of the disability rating to the present time. Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119, 126 (1999). 

In determining the present level of a disability for any increased rating claim, the Board must consider the application of staged ratings. Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007). In other words, where the evidence contains factual findings that demonstrate distinct time periods in which the service-connected disability exhibited diverse symptoms meeting the criteria for different ratings during the course of the appeal, the assignment of staged ratings is necessary. 

The Veteran is currently assigned a 10 percent rating for left lower extremity radiculopathy of the sciatic nerve under 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, DC 8520. A September 2023 rating decision granted service connection for the condition and assigned an initial 10 percent rating with an effective date of May 25, 2023, the date that the VA received the Veteran's intent to file a claim. 

Paralysis of the sciatic nerve is evaluated in accordance with the criteria set forth in 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, DC 8520. Under these criteria, mild incomplete paralysis is rated as 10 percent disabling. Moderate incomplete paralysis is rated as 20 percent disabling. Moderately severe incomplete paralysis is rated as 40 percent disabling. Severe incomplete paralysis, with marked muscular atrophy, is rated as 60 percent disabling. Complete paralysis, with the foot dangles and drops, no active movement possible of muscles below the knee, flexion of knee weakened or (very rarely) lost is rated as 80 percent disabling.

In rating peripheral nerve injuries and their residuals, attention should be given to the site and character of the injury, the relative impairment in motor function, trophic changes, or sensory disturbances. 38 C.F.R. § 4.120.

When the involvement is wholly sensory, the rating should be for the mild, or at most, the moderate degree.  38 C.F.R. § 4.124a.

The terms "moderate" and "moderately severe" are not defined in the VA Schedule for Rating Disabilities, and the use of such terms by VA examiners and others, although an element of evidence to be considered by the Board, is not dispositive of the level of paralysis present. All evidence must be evaluated in arriving at a decision regarding an increased rating.

Turning to the evidence, the Veteran has undergone two VA medical examinations for her radiculopathy and separately rated thoracolumbar spine disability. The first examination took place in September 2023. The Veteran was examined in person, and a review of the VA e-folder was noted. The Veteran was diagnosed with degenerative disc disease and left lower extremity radiculopathy. The Veteran complained of pain radiating to the left lower extremities, as well as numbness and tingling of the left lower extremities. The Veteran reported that her symptoms affected her ability to sit, walk, and stand for long periods of time. The Veteran had normal strength (5/5) in all muscle areas and did not have muscle atrophy. The reflex examination was normal. For the sensory examination that tests sensation to light touch, the examiner marked decreased sensation for the Veteran's left foot/toes (L5); all other sensory testing was normal. The straight leg raising test was positive for the left leg, indicating likely radiculopathy. The examiner assessed the Veteran as experiencing mild intermittent pain, moderate paresthesias and/or dysesthesias, and moderate numbness of the left lower extremity. No other signs or symptoms of radiculopathy were recorded.  The examiner reported that the involved nerve roots were limited to the sciatic nerve roots (L4/L5/S1/S2/S3). 

The Veteran underwent a second VA examination in October 2023. The Veteran was examined in person, and a review of the VA e-folder was noted. The Veteran complained of low back pain and sharp shooting pain down both legs to the feet, as well as a pulsating pain behind the knee and calf. She reported that the pain affects her ability to sit, stand, and walk, and that it interferes with her work and makes her other musculoskeletal conditions more difficult to endure. At the time of the exam, the Veteran was experiencing severe back pain and was not fully weight bearing on her left hip due to recent surgery. Nevertheless, the examiner performed muscle strength testing. The Veteran had normal muscle strength (5/5) in her ankle dorsiflexion, active movement against some resistance (4/5) in her ankle plantar flexion and great toe extension, active movement against gravity (3/5) in her knee extension, and no muscle movement (0/5) in her hip flexion. The examiner stated that these results were not indicative of muscle atrophy. The reflex examination was normal. For the sensory examination, all sensory testing was normal. The examiner was unable to perform a straight leg raising test due to the aforementioned back pain and hip recovery. Perhaps as a result, the examiner indicated that the Veteran did not have radicular pain or signs of radiculopathy and did not complete the Radiculopathy section of the questionnaire, despite diagnosing the Veteran with radiculopathy in the "Diagnosis" section. The examiner also remarked that, "for the VA established diagnosis of lower extremity radiculopathy, left the diagnosis is changed and it is a progression of the previous diagnosis. worse pain, more pain and heat sensation in the left leg, numbness in the great toe."

The claims file does not contain any further pertinent medical or lay evidence addressing the issue of lower left extremity radiculopathy. 

Having considered the evidence of record, the Board finds that the symptoms of the Veteran's left lower extremity warrant an initial rating of 20 percent, but no higher, for the entire period on appeal. 

The symptoms consistently reported by the Veteran and observed by VA examiners during the appeal period more nearly approximate moderate incomplete paralysis. In particular, while the September 2023 examination noted only mild intermittent pain, moderate paresthesias or dysesthesias and moderate numbness were also noted. The examination also showed some objective sensory symptoms, such as decreased sensation in the left foot or toes. Additionally, the October 2023 examiner indicated that the Veteran's radiculopathy pain was "worse," suggesting that the Veteran's pain was potentially moderate, rather than mild, and also suggested that it was more frequent. The Veteran also stated that the functional impact of the pain affected her ability to sit, stand, walk, and perform her job. Accordingly, the Board finds that a 20 percent rating for left lower extremity radiculopathy is warranted. 

However, a rating greater than 20 percent is not warranted. First, 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a provides that generally when radiculopathy symptoms are wholly sensory, the rating assigned should be for mild incomplete, or, at most, moderate incomplete paralysis. Here, the Veteran's symptoms of numbness, tingling, pain, paresthesias and/or dysesthesias, and decreased sensitivity are wholly sensory. Throughout the appeal period, the Veteran's reflex examinations were normal, and no muscle atrophy was indicated. The September 2023 examination showed normal strength in all muscle areas, and the muscle testing for the October 2023 examination was performed while the Veteran was still recovering from surgery on her left hip and was, by her own admission, not fully weight bearing on her left side. Further, the examiner noted that the results of the muscle testing were not indicative of decreased muscle strength due to radiculopathy. Therefore, the Board finds that the Veteran's radiculopathy has only manifested as sensory symptoms, and a rating of incomplete paralysis of a moderate degree is the highest advised pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a. Additionally, beyond the limitations proposed by 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, neither the September 2023 nor the October 2023 support an assessment of "moderately severe" incomplete paralysis. The most severe symptoms endorsed by either examiner are moderate paresthesias or dysesthesias and moderate numbness, and neither examiner endorses any severe symptoms. Accordingly, the Board finds that a rating in excess of 20 percent is not warranted. 

The Board has also considered whether staged ratings would be appropriate, given the October 2023 examiner's remarks, which suggest a potential progression of the Veteran's condition. However, for the reasons stated above, even if the Veteran's symptoms did worsen from September 2023 to October 2023, the results of the October 2023 examination still do not support an assessment of "moderately severe" incomplete paralysis. Accordingly, the Board declines to apply staged ratings based on the October 2023 examination. Instead, the Board finds that the evidence warrants uniform 20 percent ratings.

Because the Veteran filed her supplemental claim for increased rating within one year of the initial September 2023 rating decision, the Board finds that this claim has been continuously pursued. The Veteran is therefore awarded an initial rating of 20 percent for left lower extremity radiculopathy. 

The Board notes that the Veteran's June 2024 VA Form 10182 asserted disagreement with the effective date for service connection for this condition. For direct service connection, if the claim is not received within one year after separation from service, the effective date is the date that the VA receives the claim, or the date that the entitlement arose, whichever is later. 38 C.F.R §3.400(b)(2)(i). In this case, the Veteran's claim was received more than one year after her separation from service. The VA received the Veteran's intent to file a claim on May 25, 2023. Therefore, the AOJ correctly identified the effective date of service connection as May 25, 2023. 

Accordingly, the Veteran's claim for an initial disability rating of 20 percent, but no higher, for left lower extremity radiculopathy is granted, with an effective date of May 25, 2023. 

 

JONATHAN B. KRAMER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Utter, Margaret M.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.