Citation Nr: A25032175
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240501-437714
DATE: April 8, 2025

ORDER

Service connection for a low back disability is denied.

Service connection for bilateral lower extremity neuropathy with right foot drop is denied.

Service connection for multiple sclerosis is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that a low back disability began during active service or is otherwise related to an in-service injury or disease.

2. The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that bilateral lower extremity neuropathy with right foot drop began during active service or is otherwise related to an in-service injury or disease.

3. The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that multiple sclerosis began during active service or is otherwise related to an in-service injury or disease.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for service connection for a back condition are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

2. The criteria for service connection for bilateral lower extremity neuropathy, with right foot drop are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

3. The criteria for service connection for multiple sclerosis are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from August 2002 to July 2006.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an April 2024 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office.

In the May 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the April 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Service Connection

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303. The three-element test for service connection requires evidence of: (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166 -67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

1. Service connection for a low back disability

The Veteran seeks service connection for a low back disability, asserting that such was incurred during active duty.

As an initial matter, the Board notes that the Veteran has also asserted his back disability worsened because of military service. See February 2021 VA Form 21-526EZ. However, a low back disability was not noted on service entrance. A veteran is presumed to have been in sound condition when examined, accepted, and enrolled for service, except 1) as to defects, infirmities, or disorders noted at the time of the entrance examination, or 2) where clear and unmistakable evidence demonstrates that the injury or disease existed before service and was not aggravated by service. 38 U.S.C. § 1111; 38 C.F.R. § 3.304(b). As no back condition was noted on the Veteran's entrance examination, he is presumed sound with respect to a back condition.

In the April 2024 rating decision, the AOJ favorably found that the Veteran has been diagnosed with lumbar spondylosis and lower lumbar degenerative disease, and a September 2023 VA treatment record documents back pain and weakness and tingling of the extremities. The Board is bound by the AOJ's favorable findings. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c). Accordingly, the first element of service connection is established.

With respect to the second element of service connection, the Veteran's service treatment records (STRs) are silent for complaints, treatment, or diagnosis of a low back disabilities or congruent symptoms. During a January 2003 post-deployment health assessment, the Veteran reported that his health was very good. During annual preventative health assessments (PHA), he reported that his health was "very good" and "excellent." See September 2004 PHA and January 2006 PHA. On his April 2006 report of medical history for separation, he denied recurrent back pain or any back problems. On the accompanying April 2006 report of medical assessment, the Veteran denied experiencing any injury or illness while on active duty for which he did not seek medical care. Based on the foregoing, an in-service incurrence is not shown.

There is also no credible evidence of continuity of symptomatology since the Veteran's time in service. In this regard, the Board notes that the first reports of a low back disability and/or symptoms congruent with such in the record is in January 2021, when the Veteran reported lumbar spine pain since April 2020. Consistent with this, in April 2023, the Veteran reported that he has experienced chronic pain in his back for the past three years. See April 2023 VA treatment record.

At this juncture, the Board acknowledges that the Veteran has not been afforded a VA examination to determine the etiology of his disability. Under McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006), in initial service connection claims, VA must provide a VA medical examination when there is (1) competent evidence of a current disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability; (2) evidence establishing that an event, injury, or disease occurred in service; (3) an indication that the disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability may be associated with the veteran's service; and (4) insufficient competent medical evidence on file for VA to make a decision on the claim. 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(d); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(4).

As indicated above, the Veteran has been diagnosed with lumbar spondylosis and lower lumbar degenerative disease. The first McLendon element has therefore been met.  With respect to the second factor, as noted above, there is no evidence establishing that an event, injury, or disease occurred in service.

With respect to the third factor, the Court has stated that this element establishes a low threshold and requires only that the evidence 'indicates' that there 'may' be a nexus between the current disability or symptoms and the Veteran's service. The types of evidence that 'indicate' that a current disability 'may be associated' with military service include, but are not limited to, medical evidence that suggests a nexus but is too equivocal or lacking in specificity to support a decision on the merits, or credible evidence of continuity of symptomatology such as pain or other symptoms capable of lay observation. See McLendon, supra.

In that regard, the evidence of record does not demonstrate an association between the Veteran's service and his diagnosed lumbar spondylosis and lower lumbar degenerative disease. The Board has carefully considered the Court's language in McLendon that the threshold for showing this association is a low one. However, the Court's language makes it clear that there is, in fact, a threshold. Here, the Veteran's STRs do not include a diagnosis or treatment for a low back disability and the record is also lacking any evidence of a nexus aside from the Veteran's own statements in this regard.

Only the Veteran's contentions provide any suggestion of such association between his back condition and service, and Board does not find the Veteran's contentions to rise to the level of the 'indication of an association' referred to in 38 U.S.C. § 5103A or in McLendon. Although lay statements may be sufficient to establish an indication that the disability or symptoms may be related to service, there are some instances in which the lay evidence falls short of satisfying this standard. See Colantonio v. Shinseki, 606 F.3d 1378 (2010).  

In this case, the Board finds that the Veteran's statements linking his back condition to service do not satisfy the 'indication of an association' element. These statements are entitled to no probative value.

If a Veteran's mere contention, standing alone, that his claimed disability is related to his service or to a service-connected disability is enough to satisfy the 'indication of an association,' then that element of 38 U.S.C. § 5103A is meaningless. In Waters v. Shinseki, 601 F.3d 1274, 1278 (2010), the Federal Circuit noted that a conclusory generalized statement is insufficient to trigger this element as it would eliminate the carefully drafted statutory standards and require the Secretary to provide examinations in virtually every disability case. Therefore, a VA examination and/or opinion need not be obtained with respect to the back condition in this case.

Based on the above, the Board finds that the evidence does not establish an in-service incurrence. Necessarily, the nexus element cannot be met. As a result, service connection for a low back condition is denied.

2. Service connection for bilateral lower extremity neuropathy with right foot drop

The Veteran seeks service connection for bilateral lower extremity neuropathy, with right foot drop, which he has generally asserted is related to his period of military service.

In the April 2024 rating decision, the AOJ favorably found that the Veteran has been diagnosed with neurological abnormalities of the right and left lower extremities and right foot drop, and an April 2024 VA treatment record documents that the Veteran requested assistance with his foot drop. Accordingly, the first element of service connection is established. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).

With respect to the second element of service connection, the Veteran's STRs are silent for complaints, treatment, or diagnosis of a lower extremity condition. He reported being in very good and excellent health on various examinations during service. On his April 2006 report of medical history for separation, he denied numbness or tingling, foot trouble, and impaired use of legs or feet. On the accompanying April 2006 report of medical assessment, he denied any injury or illness while on active duty for which he did not seek medical care. Based on the foregoing, an in-service incurrence is not shown.

There is also no credible evidence of continuity of symptomatology since the Veteran's time in service. In this regard, the Board notes that the Veteran underwent a foot conditions examination in November 2018, which showed that he did not have a dropped forefoot at that time. The first report of a lower extremity condition in the record is in January 2021, when the Veteran reported weakness in the right leg and foot and occasional mild weakness in the left leg, and motor exam showed right foot drop. In October 2022, the Veteran reported that he noticed weakness and numbness in his right foot and ankle region around 2019, approximately 13 years post service, and he eventually developed a foot drop. See October 2022 VA treatment record.

The Board notes that the Veteran was not afforded a VA examination regarding his bilateral lower extremity neuropathy with right foot drop; however, there is no credible lay evidence of continued lower extremity neuropathy symptoms since service or competent lay or medical evidence of record suggesting that the current bilateral lower extremity neuropathy, with right foot drop disability may be related to the Veteran's military service. Therefore, a VA examination and/or opinion need not be obtained with respect to the bilateral lower extremity neuropathy, with right foot drop in this case. See 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(d); 3.159(c)(4); McLendon, supra.

Based on the above, the Board finds that the evidence does not establish an in-service incurrence. Necessarily, the nexus element cannot be met. As a result, service connection for bilateral lower extremity neuropathy, with right foot drop is denied.

3. Service connection for multiple sclerosis

The Veteran seeks service connection for multiple sclerosis, which he has generally asserted is related to his period of military service.

The Board acknowledges that the Veteran has also asserted his multiple sclerosis worsened because of military service. See February 2021 VA Form 21-526EZ. However, multiple sclerosis was not noted on service entrance. 38 U.S.C. § 1111; 38 C.F.R. § 3.304(b) As such, he is presumed sound with respect to a multiple sclerosis disability.

In the April 2024 rating decision, the AOJ favorably found that the Veteran has been diagnosed with multiple sclerosis, and a November 2023 VA treatment record documents reports of multiple sclerosis pain. Accordingly, the first element of service connection is established. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).

With respect to the second element of service connection, the Veteran's service STRs are silent for complaints, treatment, or diagnosis of multiple sclerosis. He reported being in very good and excellent health on various examinations during service. On his April 2006 report of medical history for separation, he reported no current medical problems and denied experiencing any injury or illness while on active duty for which he did not seek medical care. Based on the foregoing, an in-service incurrence is not shown.

There is also no credible evidence of continuity of symptomatology or chronicity since the Veteran's time in service. In this regard, the Board notes that the Veteran was not diagnosed with multiple sclerosis until January 2021, approximately 15 years post service. 

The Board notes that the Veteran was not afforded a VA examination regarding his multiple sclerosis; however, there is no credible lay evidence of continued multiple sclerosis symptoms since service or competent lay or medical evidence of record suggesting that the current multiple sclerosis disability may be related to the Veteran's military service. Therefore, a VA examination and/or opinion need not be obtained with respect to the multiple sclerosis disability in this case. See 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(d); 3.159(c)(4); McLendon, supra

Based on the above, the Board finds that the evidence does not establish an in-service incurrence. Necessarily, the nexus element cannot be met. As a result, service connection for multiple sclerosis is denied.

 

 

Scott W. Dale

Acting Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	D. Aston, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.