Citation Nr: A25032530
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240620-451475
DATE: April 8, 2025

ISSUES

Entitlement to service connection for allergies.

Entitlement to service connection for gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD).

Entitlement to service connection for right knee strain.

Entitlement to service connection for anosmia.

Entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for allergies is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for GERD is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for right knee strain is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for anosmia is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served in the National Guard, including an active-duty service period from August 2020 to August 2021.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from three separate rating decisions by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) regional office (RO). The dates and corresponding issues for each decision will be discussed below, however, the Veteran timely appealed each rating decision by submitting a June 20, 2024 VA Form 10182 and requested the Direct Review docket. 

The issues of entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea and anosmia are on appeal from a May 6, 2024 rating decision. Therefore, for the analysis of these issues, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the May 6, 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal, the Board did not consider it in its decision on these issues. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

The issues of entitlement to service connection for GERD and right knee sprain are on appeal from a June 5, 2024 rating decision. Therefore, for the analysis of these issues, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the June 5, 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal, the Board did not consider it in its decision on these issues. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

Lastly, the issue of entitlement to service connection for allergies is on appeal from a June 18, 2024 rating decision. Therefore, for the analysis of this issue, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the June 18, 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal, the Board did not consider it in its decision on this issue. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

Because the Board is remanding the claims on appeal, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

As an initial matter, the Board notes it has considered that generally the Board may not decide an appeal before one year has elapsed since the date of the rating decision on appeal, or 60 days from when the Board receives the notice of disagreement, whichever is later. See Williams v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 305 (2024). The Board notes that here, one year has not yet passed from the date of any of the rating decisions on appeal. However, the Veteran was sent a Board docketing letter notification on July 12, 2024 which included instructions on how to request a docket switch if desired. See July 12, 2024 BVA Docketing Letter. The Board notes that the Veteran has not submitted any notification that they wish to switch dockets in the approximately nine months since the Board sent the BVA docketing letter which included instructions on how to request a docket switch. Furthermore, because the issues on appeal are being remanded for the reasons set forth below, the Board notes that a formal decision is not being reached on the claim, and therefore the Veteran is not being denied any due process rights pursuant to Williams. To the contrary, by virtue of this remand, the Board is correcting a procedural duty to assist error in substantiating the claim. Thus, the Board will proceed with the remand of the issues as delineated below.

1. Entitlement to service connection for allergies is remanded.

The Veteran contends he is entitled to service connection for allergies. Specifically, he asserts that "excessive exposure to aircraft fuel caused an allergic reaction." See December 2023 VA 21-526EZ. 

During development of the claim, the RO found that the Veteran's allergies pre-existed service. See June 2024 rating decision. A Veteran is presumed to have been sound upon entry into the military, except as to conditions noted at the time of the acceptance, examination, or enrollment, or where clear and unmistakable evidence demonstrates that the condition existed before acceptance and enrollment and was not aggravated by such service. 38 U.S.C. § 1111. "Clear and unmistakable evidence" means that which cannot be misunderstood or misinterpreted; it is that which is undebatable. Vanerson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 254 (1999). In other words, where the presumption of soundness applies, as it does here, the burden of proof falls on VA to rebut the presumption with clear and unmistakable evidence. 

A pre-existing injury or disease will be considered to have been aggravated by active military service where there is an increase in disability during such service, unless there is a specific finding that the increase in disability is due to the natural progress of the disease. Where pre-service disability underwent an increase in severity in service, there is a presumption of aggravation which requires clear and unmistakable evidence to rebut. 38 U.S.C. § 1153; 38 C.F.R. § 3.306. The Court has held that temporary or intermittent flare-ups of a pre-existing condition during service are not sufficient to be considered "aggravation in service" unless the underlying condition, as opposed to its symptoms, has worsened. See Hunt v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 292 (1991).

The Veteran was afforded a June 2024 VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of his claimed allergies. Regarding the Veteran's allergies, the examiner was asked only to answer whether the Veteran's claimed allergies are at least as likely as not incurred in or caused by runny, itchy nose, or sneezing during service. See June 2024 C&P Exam. The examiner confirmed a diagnosis of allergic rhinitis, but opined that the Veteran's condition was less likely than not due to his service because his allergic rhinitis existed prior to service because he was seen for this during an inactive period. Id. 

The Veteran was next afforded a later June 2024 VA medical opinion to determine specifically whether his allergic rhinitis was aggravated by his service. The examiner was asked to answer whether the Veteran's allergies, now described as clearly and unmistakably pre-existing service, were aggravated beyond their natural progression during service. See June 2024 C&P Exam. The examiner opined that the Veteran's allergic rhinitis was less likely than not aggravated by his service. Id. The examiner ultimately reasoned that while temporary aggravation is plausible, there is no evidence of permanent aggravation of the pre-existing allergies. Id. 

The Board finds these examinations to be inadequate for several reasons. First, it is not clear whether the correct "clear and unmistakable" standard of review was applied in determining both whether the Veteran's claimed disability pre-existed service and whether it was aggravated by active service. The initial June 2024 examiner was not asked to determine the existence of a pre-existing condition, but simply stated "the condition existed prior to service as he was seen for this during an inactive period" their rationale for their direct opinion. June 2024 C&P Exam. There is no indication this was determined to the standard of clear and unmistakable. Next, the second June 2024 aggravation opinion used the incorrect standard of proof in this case. If the Veteran's allergies pre-existed service, there is evidence that they underwent an increase in severity during service as evidenced by May 2021 service treatment records showing treatment for a rash and lightheadedness due to exposure to fuel. See STR received February 2024 (May 27, 2021 treatment record). As this is markedly more severe than the seasonal allergies the Veteran was treated for in the March 2019 inactive period, the presumption of aggravation applies. Therefore, the correct standard to rebut the presumption is "clear and unmistakable" not "less likely than not". Lastly, neither opinion addresses the Veteran's statements including his reported date of onset, his report of the in-service allergic reaction to fuel exposure, or the reported worsening of his condition. Therefore, the June 2024 VA examination and opinions are inadequate for the reasons stated above.

The inadequacy of the June 2024 VA examination and opinions constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error. As the claim cannot be otherwise granted in full based on the remaining evidence of record, remand is required to obtain a new examination and medical opinion and correct the duty to assist error. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).    

2. Entitlement to service connection for GERD is remanded.

3. Entitlement to service connection for right knee strain is remanded.

The Veteran contends he is entitled to service connection for his claimed GERD and right knee strain conditions. Specifically, regarding GERD, he asserts the food and water he consumed while deployed overseas caused digestive issues such as chronic constipation and nausea. See December 2023 VA 21-526EZ; June 2024 VA 21-526EZ. Regarding his right knee strain, he asserts it is due to a sprained knee during a ruck march as well as a torn ACL during sprint, drag, carry training. See December 2023 VA 21-526EZ; June 2024 VA 21-526EZ.

The Veteran was afforded a June 2024 VA examination and opinions to determine the nature and etiology of the claimed conditions. The examiner provided negative nexus opinions for both the Veteran's GERD and right knee strain. See June 2024 C&P Exam. However, the examiner's rationale for both opinions relied exclusively on a lack of active-duty complaints or treatment records for either condition. Id. The absence of medical records corroborating an injury or symptoms alone is insufficient rationale to conclude that no relationship exists between a veteran's military service and their current disability. See Dalton v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 23 (2007). Furthermore, at least as to the GERD opinion, pre-deployment and post-deployment health screenings clearly indicate the Veteran complained of gastrointestinal issues post-deployment which he did not have prior to his active duty deployment period. See STR received February 2024 (September 16, 2020 pre-deployment screening, June 29, 2021 post-deployment screening). The examiner did not explain how these in-service complaints, which appear to contradict their rationale, factored into their analysis. Therefore, for the reasons expressed above, the June 2024 VA examination and opinions are inadequate.

The inadequacy of the June 2024 VA opinions regarding the Veteran's GERD and right knee strain constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error. As the claims cannot be otherwise granted in full based on the remaining evidence of record, remand is required to obtain new medical opinions and correct the duty to assist error. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

4. Entitlement to service connection for anosmia is remanded.

5. Entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea is remanded.

The Veteran contends he is entitled to service connection for anosmia and sleep apnea. Specifically, the Veteran asserts that he lost his sense of smell after he received the Covid-19 vaccination during service. See December 2023 VA 21-526EZ; June 2024 VA 21-526EZ. As for his sleep apnea, the Veteran asserts his claimed sleep apnea is the result of experiencing sleep deprivation, sleep apnea symptoms, and insomnia while he was deployed without proper treatment. See December 2023 VA 21-526EZ; June 2024 VA 21-526EZ.

The Veteran was not provided a VA examination in association with these claims. VA's duty to assist includes providing a medical examination when it is necessary to make a decision on a claim. 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(d); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159. Such development is necessary if the information and evidence of record does not contain sufficient competent medical evidence to decide the claim, but: (1) contains competent evidence of a diagnosed disability or symptoms of a disability; (2) establishes that the Veteran suffered an event, injury or disease in service, or has a presumptive disease during the pertinent presumptive period, and; (3) indicates that the claimed disability may be associated with the in-service event, injury, or disease, or with another service-connected disability. 38 U.S.C. § 5103A; McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 81 (2006). The threshold for determining whether the evidence "indicates" that there "may" be a nexus between a current disability and an in-service event, injury, or disease is a low one. Id. at 83.

Regarding the first McLendon element, though there is no evidence of a formal diagnosis of either claimed disability, there is competent evidence of symptoms of both anosmia and sleep apnea. The Veteran is competent to report symptoms as observed, and he clearly described being unable to smell in both the December 2023 and June 2024 VA 21-526EZ's. Regarding anosmia specifically, the Board is uncertain as to what more proof of a loss of sense of smell the Veteran could provide other than reporting that he cannot smell. Regarding the Veteran's claimed sleep apnea, the Veteran referenced trouble sleeping in his separation report of medical history at the end of his active-duty service period, as well as indicating he was feeling tired or having low energy on his post-deployment screening. See STR received February 2021 (June 29, 2021 report of medical history; June 29, 2021 post-deployment health assessment). As there are competent reports of symptoms for both claimed disabilities, the first McLendon element is met.

Next, the evidence of record clearly identifies in-service events or injuries related to the Veteran's claimed conditions. For his anosmia, the Veteran asserts this started after he received a Covid-19 vaccination while in service. See December 2023 VA 21-526EZ; June 2024 VA 21-526EZ. This is also supported by his service treatment records which identify receipt of a Covid-19 vaccine in April 2021. See STR received February 2024. Regarding his claimed sleep apnea, the Veteran reports experiencing sleep deprivation and sleep apnea symptoms on deployment and that he was not given proper treatment. See December 2023 VA 21-526EZ; June 2024 VA 21-526EZ. His statement is a credible report of his opinion of the quality of treatment received, and his report of sleep-related symptoms are consistent with his service treatment records which document complaints of trouble sleeping, and instruction regarding inadequate sleep hygiene. See STR received February 2024. Therefore, the Board finds that the second McLendon element is met for both claimed conditions. 

Regarding the last McLendon element, evidence suggesting a nexus between the Veteran's disability and his service, the Board finds that the low threshold for this requirement is met. It appears at least possible that a nexus between the Veteran's claimed anosmia and the in-service receipt of the Covid-19 vaccine could exist. Similarly, it appears at least possible that he may have a sleep apnea disability, which could be causally related to his service as evidenced by the documented sleep issues the Veteran experienced during deployment. Considering the low threshold for this requirement, and resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Board finds that the third McLendon element is met.

As all McLendon elements are met, the failure to provide the Veteran with a VA examination regarding his anosmia and sleep apnea claims constitutes a duty to assist error. Therefore, remand is required to obtain VA examinations and medical opinions to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's claimed anosmia and sleep apnea disabilities. See 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for a new examination and obtain a new medical opinion from an appropriate clinician to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's claimed allergies.

The examiner must review pertinent documents in the Veteran's claims file. This must be noted in the medical opinion.

Following the examination and review of the complete claims file, including this remand decision, the examiner is asked to answer the following:

(a.) Identify any allergy related disorder present, including consideration of the reported reaction to exposure to fuels during active service.

(b.) For any such disorder noted above, is it clear and unmistakable (obvious, manifest, and undebatable) that any allergy disorder pre-existed active service.

(c.) If so, is it clear and unmistakable (obvious, manifest, and undebatable) that any such allergy disorder found to have pre-existed service WAS NOT aggravated (i.e. permanently worsened) during the Veteran's active service or is it clear and unmistakable (obvious, manifest, and undebatable) that any such increase was due to the natural progress of the disorder. 

(d.) For any disorder diagnosed above that did not clearly and unmistakably pre-exist active service and was not aggravated by service, is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that any currently diagnosed allergy disorder is related to the Veteran's active-duty service.

(e.) For any disorder diagnosed above that did not clearly and unmistakably pre-exist active service and was not aggravated by service, is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's condition is related to or otherwise caused by toxic exposure risk activity (TERA)?

The examiner is advised that aggravation means any incremental increase in disability in nonservice-connected disabilities (i.e., any additional impairment of earning capacity) resulting from service-connected conditions.

In arriving at the requested opinions, the examiner must specifically consider the claimant's lay statements in their rationale, including his report that his condition has worsened over time, as well as any service treatment records that reference complaints and treatment for allergic reactions. See June 2024 C&P Exam. 

2. Obtain a new VA medical opinion from an appropriate clinician to determine the etiology of the Veteran's GERD. An examination is not required unless deemed necessary by the examiner to render the requested opinions.

The examiner must review pertinent documents in the Veteran's claims file. This must be noted in the medical opinion.

Following the examination and review of the complete claims file, including this remand decision, the examiner is asked to answer the following:

(a.) Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's GERD had its onset in or was incurred in active service?

(b.) Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's GERD is related to or otherwise caused by toxic exposure risk activity (TERA)?

In arriving at this requested opinion, the examiner must specifically consider all service treatment records related to the Veteran's GERD, including his pre and post deployment health screening identifying stomach issues post-deployment that did not exist prior to deployment. See STR received February 2024 (September 16, 2020 pre-deployment screening, June 29, 2021 post-deployment screening).

3. Obtain a new VA medical opinion from an appropriate clinician to determine the etiology of the Veteran's right knee strain. An examination is not required unless deemed necessary by the examiner to render the requested opinions.

The examiner must review pertinent documents in the Veteran's claims file. This must be noted in the medical opinion.

Following the examination and review of the complete claims file, including this remand decision, the examiner is asked to answer the following:

(a.) Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's right knee strain had its onset in or was incurred in active service?

4. Schedule the Veteran for a new examination and obtain a new medical opinion from an appropriate clinician to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's claimed anosmia. 

The examiner must review pertinent documents in the Veteran's claims file. This must be noted in the medical opinion.

Following the examination and review of the complete claims file, including this remand decision, the examiner is asked to answer the following:

(a.) Identify any current diagnosis that reasonably relates to the Veteran's claimed anosmia condition.

(b.) For any diagnosis noted above, is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's condition had its onset in or was incurred in active service?

(c.) For any diagnosis noted above, is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's condition is related to or otherwise caused by toxic exposure risk activity (TERA)?

5. Schedule the Veteran for a new examination and obtain a new medical opinion from an appropriate clinician to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's claimed sleep apnea.

The examiner must review pertinent documents in the Veteran's claims file. This must be noted in the medical opinion.

Following the examination and review of the complete claims file, including this remand decision, the examiner is asked to answer the following:

(a.) Identify any current diagnosis that reasonably relates to the Veteran's claimed sleep apnea condition.

(b.) For any diagnosis noted above, is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's condition had its onset in or was incurred in active service?

(c.) For any diagnosis noted above, is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's condition is related to or otherwise caused by toxic exposure risk activity (TERA)?

The examiner(s) is advised that the lack of treatment records, either in-service or after, with reports of relevant symptoms alone is insufficient rationale for a negative medical nexus opinion.

The examiner(s) is further advised that the Veteran is competent to report observable symptoms. Any such reports as to the onset and nature of symptoms must be taken into account, along with the other evidence of record, in formulating the requested opinion. 

(Examiner instruction request continued on next page.)

A complete rationale must be provided for any opinion(s) expressed. If any requested opinion cannot be provided without resorting to speculation, then the clinician must explain why this is so.

 

 

Michael A. Pappas

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	E. J.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.