Citation Nr: A25032851
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240930-480215
DATE: April 9, 2025

ORDER

1. Entitlement to service connection for a right wrist disability, to include arthritis and chronic pain syndrome, is denied.

REMANDED

2. Entitlement to service connection for a left wrist disability, to include arthritis and chronic pain syndrome, is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran's arthritis of the right wrist did not manifest in service or within one year of separation from active duty and is not otherwise related to service.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to service connection for arthritis of the right wrist have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 1110, 1112, 1113, 1137, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.307, 3.309(a).

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from July 1994 to August 1994, from March 2003 to July 2003, and from June 2004 to August 2006.

This matter comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a February 2024 rating decision wherein the AOJ denied service connection for arthritis of the left and right wrists.  The AOJ additionally made favorable findings that are discussed further herein by which the Board is bound.  38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).  

In August 2024, the Veteran timely appealed the decision to the Board by submitting a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) (NOD) and requesting a "Direct Review" of the evidence by a Veterans Law Judge.  In an Appeals Modernization Act (AMA) Direct Review appeal where the rating decision on appeal is a higher-level review, the Board considers the evidence of record at the time of the April 2024 rating decision. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301.

In the NOD, the Veteran also notes that he is also appealing a May 4, 2023 rating decision that in pertinent part, denied service connection for degenerative arthritis.  The record reflects that VA notified the Veteran of the denial in a May 5, 2023 letter.  Because it has been more than a year since the Veteran was notified of the decision, the May 2023 rating decision is now final.  Therefore, the decision is not subject to appeal. 

Because the Board is remanding the claim for entitlement to service connection for arthritis of the left wrist, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of that claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

1. Entitlement to service connection for a right wrist disability.

The Veteran contends that service connection for a right wrist disability is warranted as related to service.  Specifically, in his December 2023 claim application, the Veteran asserts that he developed arthritis in his right wrist due to doing push-ups during physical training.  He states that flare-ups are frequent and very painful.  

Service Connection

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from a disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by service.  See 38 U.S.C. §1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a).  The three-element test to establish service connection requires evidence of: (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service.  Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166-1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004).  Disorders diagnosed after discharge will still be service connected if all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).

Additionally, where a veteran served 90 days or more of active service, and certain chronic diseases, such as arthritis, become manifest to a degree of 10 percent or more within one year after the date of separation from such service, such disease shall be presumed to have been incurred in service, even though there is no evidence of such disease during the period of service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 1110, 1112, 1113; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307, 3.309(a).

The Board has carefully reviewed the evidence of record and finds that the persuasive weight of the evidence is against the claim for service connection for arthritis of the right wrist.  The reasons follow.

The Board notes that a March 2017 VA treatment record notes that an x-ray of the Veteran's right wrist revealed mild arthritic changes.  The Veteran was diagnosed with mild degenerative arthropathy of the radiocarpal, scaphotrapezium and first carpometacarpal joints.  In a July 2023 VA treatment record, the provider further documented that the Veteran had chronic pain syndrome of the wrists.  Additionally, in the February 2024 rating decision on appeal, the AOJ conceded that the Veteran participated in a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA) based upon exposure to environmental hazards during service in Southwest Asia.  The Board is bound by this favorable finding.  38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).  As such, the second element is met only to the extent of the Veteran having been exposed to a TERA. While the AOJ conceded in-service left wrist pain, which the service treatment records support, it did not do the same for the right wrist. 

Here, the Veteran's service treatment records do not document complaints or treatment for a right wrist disability or symptoms of a right wrist disability.  Instead, the service treatment records show that when the Veteran returned from Southwest Asia, he completed a Post-Deployment Health Assessment, where he was asked if he had any of these symptoms or developed them during his deployment, which included swollen, stiff, or painful joints, and the Veteran responded, "No." He also completed a Report of Medical Assessment at that time, and, when asked if he had any injury or illness while on active duty for which he did not seek medical care, he responded, "No." The Veteran was seen in June 2006 for left wrist pain, and the treatment record is clearly documenting that the Veteran's pain is in the left wrist, which he described was worse with doing push-ups, which is consistent with what he documented in his application for compensation benefits. The Board finds that had the Veteran experienced right wrist pain at that time, he would have reported it. However, he reported only left wrist pain. Thus, the Board finds that the Veteran was not experiencing right wrist pain at that time. Therefore, while VA has conceded the Veteran participated a TERA during service, it has not conceded an in-service disease or injury related to the right wrist. To this extent, the in-service disease or injury element is not met. 

The Board also finds that the evidence persuasively weighs against a nexus between the Veteran's right wrist disability and his service.  The first record of a right wrist disability is within a July 2009 VA treatment record that notes mild arthritis of the bilateral wrists under past medical history.  This is nearly three years following the Veteran's separation from service in 2006, which is evidence against a finding that the Veteran's current right wrist disability is related to service.  For these same reasons, service connection is not warranted on a presumptive basis for a chronic disease because the Veteran's right wrist disability did not manifest to a compensable degree within one year of separation from active duty, which would have been in 2007. Additionally, there is no competent evidence that the Veteran has a right wrist disability that is related to service. 

The Board notes that VA has conceded that the Veteran participated in a TERA by conceding he had service in Southwest Asia.  See April 2023 TERA memorandum.  Under 38 U.S.C. § 1168(a)(1), it provides that the Secretary of VA shall provide a veteran with a medical examination and obtain a medical opinion "if a veteran submits to the Secretary a claim for compensation for a service-connected disability [] with evidence of a disability and evidence of participation in a toxic exposure risk activity during" service.  This requirement does not apply if the Secretary determines there is no indication of an association between the disability claimed by the veteran and the toxic exposure risk activity for which the veteran submitted evidence.  38 U.S.C. § 1168(c).  The Secretary has determined that claims based on physical trauma have no positive association with a TERA.  Here, the Veteran's claimed right wrist disability is based upon physical trauma.  Thus, a TERA examination and medical opinion are not required in connection with the Veteran's claim for service connection for a right wrist disability. 

The Board also finds that the Veteran is not entitled to a standard VA examination and medical opinion in connection with his service-connection claim.  VA must provide a medical examination when there is (1) competent evidence of a current disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability, (2) evidence establishing that an event, injury, or disease occurred in service, or establishing certain diseases manifesting during an applicable presumptive period for which the claimant qualifies, and (3) an indication that the disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability may be associated with the veteran's service, but (4) there is insufficient competent medical evidence on file for the Secretary to make a decision on the claim.  McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006).

In this case, the Veteran has not established that an event, injury, or disease occurred in service or that the claimed disability may be related to service.  As previously discussed, although VA has conceded that the Veteran participated in a TERA based upon his Southwest Asia service, VA has determined that claims based upon physical trauma have no positive association with a TERA.  Thus, at least one of the criteria is not met, and, as such, an examination and/or medical opinion was not required.

For the reasons laid out above, the Board finds the evidence persuasively weighs against the claim for service connection for a right wrist disability, and the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine is not for application, and the claim is denied. Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc) (only when the evidence persuasively favors one side or another is the benefit of the doubt doctrine not for application). See 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

REASONS FOR REMAND

2. Entitlement to service connection for a left wrist disability, to include arthritis and chronic pain syndrome, is remanded.

The Veteran contends that service connection for a left wrist disability is warranted as related to service.  In his December 2023 claim application, the Veteran asserts that he developed arthritis in his left wrist due to doing push-ups during physical training.  He states that flare-ups are frequent and very painful.  

In the February 2024 rating decision on appeal, the AOJ found that June 2006 service treatment records documented that the Veteran complained of left wrist pain.  The AOJ also conceded that the Veteran participated in a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA) based upon exposure to environmental hazards during service in Southwest Asia.  The Board is bound by these favorable findings.  38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).  The AOJ then stated that the Veteran failed to report to a scheduled VA examination in connection with his service-connection claim.  However, a review of the record does not show that the Veteran was notified of the scheduled examination following a December 26, 2023 examination request, as there is no letter in the file.  The AOJ's failure to ensure that the Veteran was notified of the scheduled examination constitutes a pre-decisional duty error for which remand is warranted.      

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

"	Schedule the Veteran for an examination by an appropriate medical professional regarding whether he has a left wrist disability, to include arthritis and chronic pain syndrome, that is related to his in-service treatment for left wrist pain.  The examiner is asked to provide an opinion on whether the Veteran has a left wrist disability that is related to his periods of active duty, which were from July 1994 to August 1994, March 2003 to July 2003, and from June 2004 to August 2006.  The examiner should have access to the claims file.  Please state upon what facts, medical principles, and/or medical literature support the opinion.

"	Although the AOJ has conceded that the Veteran participated in a TERA based upon service in Southwest Asia, a TERA examination and medical opinion are not warranted because the Secretary has determined that claims based on physical trauma have no positive association with a TERA.  

All opinions are to be accompanied by a rationale consistent with the evidence of record.  A discussion of the pertinent evidence, relevant medical treatises, and generally accepted medical principles is requested.  If the examiner cannot provide an opinion without resorting to speculation, he or she shall provide complete explanations stating why this is so.  In so doing, the examiner shall explain whether any inability to provide a more definitive opinion is the result of a need for additional information, or that he or she has exhausted the limits of current medical knowledge in providing an answer to that particular question(s). 

 

 

A. P. SIMPSON

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	P.C.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.