Citation Nr: A25032149
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240411-431533
DATE: April 8, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an effective date earlier than September 14, 2022 for the award of service connection for chronic bronchitis is denied.

Entitlement to a 30 percent disability rating for migraines is granted. 

Entitlement to a compensable disability rating for chronic bronchitis is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for type II diabetes mellitus is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea to include as secondary to service-connected disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for s/p hernia surgery scar is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for s/p left shoulder surgery scar is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. On September 14, 2022, VA received the Veteran's claim of service connection for "respiratory complaints" which was subsequently granted as chronic bronchitis; no communications were received by VA prior to that time that may be construed as a claim for chronic bronchitis.

2. Throughout the period under consideration, the Veteran's migraines are characterized by prostrating attacks occurring on an average of at least once a month over the last several months that required the use of medication and rest; the migraines are not productive of severe economic inadaptability. 

3. The Veteran's FEV-1/FVC most accurately reflects the severity of his chronic bronchitis.  The FEV-1/FVC is greater than 80 percent.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for an effective date prior to September 14, 2022 for the grant of service connection for chronic bronchitis have not been met.  38?U.S.C. §?5110; 38?C.F.R. §?3.400. 

2. The criteria for a 30 percent disability rating for migraines have been met.  38?U.S.C. §?1155; 38?C.F.R. §?4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8100. 

3. The criteria for a disability rating in excess of 0 percent for chronic bronchitis have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.7, 4.97, Diagnostic Code 6600.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Marine Corps from July 1998 to July 2003.? 

These matters come before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from February 2024 and March 2024 rating decisions of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).? 

In the April 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal, the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.? As the Veteran has selected the Direct Review Docket, the Board may only consider the evidence of record before the AOJ at the time of its decision on the issue on appeal.? See 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300(a), 301.? The Board will not consider evidence received after the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision unless the claimant files a timely request for a Board hearing or an opportunity to submit additional evidence on the NOD (VA Form 10182).? 38 C.F.R. § 20.301.? The Veteran has not filed such a request.???

Earlier Effective Date

Chronic bronchitis

Effective March 24, 2015, VA amended its regulations to require that all claims governed by VA's adjudication regulations be filed on a standard form.  The amendments also, inter alia, eliminate the constructive receipt of VA reports of hospitalization or examination and other medical records as informal claims to reopen.  See 79 Fed. Reg. 57,660 (Sept. 25, 2014), codified as amended at 38?C.F.R. §§?3.151, 3.155.  The amended regulations, however, apply only to claims filed on or after March 24, 2015.  Because the Veteran's claim was received by VA after that date, the current regulations apply. 

Unless specifically provided otherwise, the effective date of an award based on an original claim, a claim reopened after final adjudication, or a claim for increase, of compensation, dependency and indemnity compensation, or pension, shall be fixed in accordance with the facts found, but shall not be earlier than the date of receipt of application therefor.  38?U.S.C. §?5110(a).  The Board notes that there have been significant changes to the language of 38?U.S.C. §?5110.  However, whether the issue is viewed as an initial claim, an original claim, a claim to reopen or a supplemental claim, the result is the same in this case.  The effective date in this case is no earlier than the date of receipt of claim for the chronic bronchitis. 

A claim is defined as a communication in writing requesting a determination of entitlement, or evidencing a belief in entitlement, to a benefit.  38?C.F.R. §?3.1(p) (2023). 

In the February 2024 rating decision, the AOJ granted service connection for chronic bronchitis effective September 14, 2022.  The Veteran contends that an earlier effective date is warranted for the award of service connection for this disability.  Although the Veteran contends that an earlier effective date is warranted, the Board finds that there is no basis for assignment of an effective date for such award at any time prior to September 14, 2022 for the chronic bronchitis.  Simply stated, there was no pending claim filed prior to September 14, 2022 for the chronic bronchitis pursuant to which the benefit awarded could have been granted. 

The record is completely negative for any communication or action prior to September 14, 2022 for chronic bronchitis indicating an intent to apply for service connection from the Veteran, his representative, or some person acting as his next friend which identifies that benefit as the one sought.  Inasmuch as no claim for service connection for chronic bronchitis was received prior to September 14, 2022, the governing legal authority makes clear that, under these circumstances, the effective date can be no earlier than the date of the claim for that benefit.  See 38?U.S.C. §?5110. 

On September 14, 2022, the AOJ received the Veteran's claim for service connection for "respiratory complaints" which was subsequently granted as chronic bronchitis.  In this regard, the Board notes that, while the VA does have a duty to assist a claimant in developing facts pertinent to a claim, it is the claimant who must bear the responsibility for coming forth with the submission of a claim for benefits under the laws administered by the VA.  The Board finds that the facts of this case clearly demonstrate that the VA was not put on notice that service connection for the awarded chronic bronchitis was sought at any time prior to September 14, 2022.  Because the Board can find no earlier date of claim, an earlier effective date is not warranted. 

Increased Ratings

Pertinent legal criteria

Disability evaluations are determined by the application of a schedule of ratings, which is based on the average impairment of earning capacity.  Separate diagnostic codes identify the various disabilities.  Each disability must be viewed in relation to its history, with an emphasis on the limitation of activity imposed by the disabling condition.  Medical reports must be interpreted in light of the whole recorded history, and each disability must be considered from the point of view of the veteran working or seeking work.  Where there is a question as to which of two disability evaluations shall be applied, the higher evaluation is to be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating.  Otherwise, the lower rating is to be assigned.  See 38?U.S.C. §?1155 (2012); 38?C.F.R. §§?4.1, 4.2, 4.7 (2023). 

The United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) has held that in determining the present level of a disability for any evaluation claim, the Board must consider the application of staged ratings.  See Fenderson v. West, 12?Vet. App.?119 (1999); Hart v. Mansfield, 21?Vet. App.?505 (2007).  In other words, where the evidence contains factual findings that demonstrate distinct time periods in which the service-connected disability exhibited diverse symptoms meeting the criteria for different ratings during the course of the appeal, the assignment of staged ratings would be necessary. 

Migraines

The Veteran's migraines have been evaluated by the RO as noncompensable under 38?C.F.R. §?4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8100.  Under Diagnostic Code 8100, migraine headaches resulting in characteristic prostrating attacks averaging one in two months over the last several months warrant a 10 percent rating.  Migraine headaches resulting in characteristic prostrating attacks occurring on an average once a month over the last several months warrant a 30 percent rating.  Migraines with very frequent completely prostrating and prolonged attacks productive of severe economic inadaptability warrant a 50 percent rating.  38?C.F.R. §?4.124a. 

The rating criteria do not define "prostrating;" nor has the Court.  By way of reference, the Board notes that according to WEBSTER'S NEW WORLD DICTIONARY OF AMERICAN ENGLISH, THIRD COLLEGE EDITION (1986), p. 1080, "prostration" is defined as "utter physical exhaustion or helplessness."  A very similar definition is found in DORLAND'S ILLUSTRATED MEDICAL DICTIONARY 1367 (28th Ed. 1994), in which "prostration" is defined as "extreme exhaustion or powerlessness." 

In weighing the evidence of record, the Board finds that the Veteran's migraines more closely approximate the criteria for a 30 percent rating under Diagnostic Code 8100 during the period under consideration.  Significantly, the evidence shows that the Veteran's migraines average more than once a month throughout the appeal period and were prostrating.  At a January 2024 VA examination, he reported episodes of daily, throbbing, bitemporal headache that radiates to the entire occipital region.  The symptoms included dizziness, blurred vision, nausea, and photophobia.  The headaches occurred daily and each episode lasted between 10 seconds and 4 to 5 hours.  He used medication for treatment.  Notably, VA treatment records also document the Veteran's reported constant headaches and need for medication.  See, e.g., a VA treatment record dated August 2023.  As such, the Board finds that the foregoing credible medical and lay evidence supports a finding that the Veteran's migraines are characteristically prostrating in nature.  Given that the AOJ has rated the headaches as migraine headaches, and by resolving reasonable doubt in favor of the Veteran, the Board finds that the symptomatology of his service-connected headaches more nearly approximates the criteria of characteristic prostrating attacks occurring on an average of once a month over the last several months.  Accordingly, the Veteran is entitled to a 30 percent rating under Diagnostic Code 8100. 

The evidence fails to show, however, that the Veteran's migraines are completely prostrating and productive of severe economic inadaptability, such as would warrant a 50 percent evaluation at any time during the period under consideration.  While the Veteran's migraines undoubtedly result in substantial discomfort, no evidence shows that they resulted in the degree of impairment contemplated for a 50 percent evaluation under Diagnostic Code 8100, in particular severe economic inadaptability.  Indeed, the January 2024 VA examination report documents the Veteran's migraines do not affect employment and there is no objective evidence to the contrary.  Indeed, the Board finds that there has been no objective evidence submitted that his migraines impaired his employment beyond that contemplated by the 30 percent rating.  Thus, although the frequency of his migraines may be more than once a month, his migraines are not productive of severe economic inadaptability.  As such, the Board finds that a disability rating in excess of 30 percent is not warranted for the Veteran's migraines at any time during the period under consideration. 

In summary, for the reasons and bases set forth above, the Board concludes that a 30 percent rating is warranted for the Veteran's migraines for the entire period under consideration.

Chronic bronchitis

The Veteran's chronic bronchitis is rated as noncompensable pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 4.97, Diagnostic Code 6600.  The Veteran contends that a higher rating is warranted.  

Respiratory disorders are evaluated under 38 C.F.R. § 4.97, Diagnostic Codes 6600 to 6847.  

Under Diagnostic Code 6600 for chronic bronchitis, a 10 percent disability rating is warranted for FEV-1 or FEV-1/FVC of 71 to 80 percent, or DLCO (SB) 66- to 80-percent predicted.  A 30 percent disability rating is warranted for FEV-1 or FEV-1/FVC of 56 to 70 percent, or DLCO (SB) 56- to 65-percent predicted.  A 60 percent disability rating is warranted for FEV-1, FEV-1/FVC, or DLCO (SB) of 40- to 55-percent predicted, or maximum oxygen consumption of 15 to 20 ml/kg/min (with cardiorespiratory limit).  A maximum schedular 100 percent disability rating is warranted for FEV-1, the ratio of (FEV-1/FVC), or DLCO (SB) less than 40 percent predicted, or maximum exercise capacity less than 15 ml/kg/min oxygen consumption (with cardiac or respiratory limitation), cor pulmonale (right heart failure), right ventricular hypertrophy, pulmonary hypertension (shown by Echo or cardiac catheterization), episode(s) of acute respiratory failure, or requires outpatient oxygen therapy.  38 C.F.R. § 4.97, Diagnostic Code 6600.

When evaluating based on pulmonary function tests, post-bronchodilator results are to be used unless the post-bronchodilator results were poorer than the pre-bronchodilator results, in which case, the pre-bronchodilator results are used for rating purposes.  38 C.F.R. § 4.96(d)(5).  When there is a disparity between the results of different PFTs, so that the level of evaluation would differ depending on which test result is used, the test result that the examiner states most accurately reflect the level of disability is utilized.  38 C.F.R. § 4.96(d)(6).

The Veteran was provided a VA examination for his chronic bronchitis in January 2024.  He reported daily dry cough, shortness of breath at rest and exertion, and intermittent wheezing and tightness in the chest.  He used medication for treatment.  The examiner reported that the Veteran's chronic bronchitis did not require the use of oral or parenteral corticosteroid medication nor did it require the use of inhaled medication.  The disability also did not require the use of oral bronchodilators, antibiotics, outpatient oxygen therapy.  PFT testing showed pre-bronchodilator FVC of 43.2 percent, FEV-1 of 39.7 percent, and FEV-1/FVC of 85.19 percent as well as post-bronchodilator FVC of 42.5 percent, FEV-1 of 49.7 percent, and FEV-1/FVC of 85.19 percent.  DLCO was not tested.  The examiner reported that the FEV-1/FVC most accurately reflected the Veteran's level of disability.  The Veteran's chronic bronchitis did not affect his ability to work.  

The Board finds the Veteran's chronic bronchitis is best contemplated by the noncompensable percent criteria for the entire appeal period.  The January 2024 VA examination shows the Veteran's post-bronchodilator results revealed a FEV-1 of 50 percent and a FEV-1/FVC of 85 percent.  While the Board acknowledges the FEV-1 of 50 percent which would warrant a 60 percent rating under Diagnostic Code 6600, the FEV-1/FVC of 85 percent is not congruent with the criteria required for a higher 10 percent rating.  Crucially, the VA examiner sufficiently indicated that the FEV-1/FVC PFT results most accurately reflect the severity of the Veteran's chronic bronchitis.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.96(d)(6).  There is no objective evidence to the contrary as to an indication that the criteria for a higher rating have been met under Diagnostic Code 6600.  

In sum, the Board finds that the evidence does not support a rating more than noncompensable for the Veteran's chronic bronchitis any time during the entire appeal period.  The benefit sought on appeal is denied.

REASONS FOR REMAND

Service connection for type II diabetes mellitus, sleep apnea, s/p hernia surgery scar, and s/p left shoulder surgery scar

With regard to the Veteran's claim of service connection for type II diabetes mellitus, the Veteran contends that he has type II diabetes mellitus that is related to service, in particular as due to exposure to hazardous materials during his service in Southwest Asia.  Notably, the Veteran's service personnel records document his service in Southwest Asia and exposure to environmental hazards.

The Veteran was scheduled for a VA examination in March 2024 to determine the etiology of his type II diabetes mellitus.  However, there is an indication in the claims folder that the examination was cancelled because he was "unavailable."  Nevertheless, on review, there is no documentation showing that the Veteran received notification of the date and time of the scheduled examination.  The Board is mindful of the provisions of 38?C.F.R. §?3.655 regarding action to be taken when a Veteran fails to report for a scheduled VA examination "when entitlement to a benefit cannot be established" without the scheduled examination.  38?C.F.R. §?3.655(a), (b).  In this case, however, it is unclear whether the Veteran was properly notified, and there is no published guidance establishing the presumption of regularity in such a situation.  See Kyhn v. Shinseki, 716 F.3d 572 (Fed. Cir. 2013).  In light of the foregoing, the Board finds that the Veteran should again be scheduled for a VA examination to determine the etiology of his type II diabetes mellitus and the AOJ not doing such was a predecisional duty to assist error.  

With respect to the Veteran's claim of service connection for sleep apnea, the Veteran contends that this disability is related to service to include as due to exposure to environmental hazards during service in Southwest Asia or is alternatively secondary to his service-connected posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD).  In connection with the Veteran's claim, he was provided a VA examination in February 2024 to determine the etiology of his sleep apnea.  After examination of the Veteran and consideration of his medical history, VA opinions were issued that noted it is less likely than not that the Veteran's sleep apnea was incurred in or caused by service to include exposure to environmental hazards and that the sleep apnea was not proximately due to or caused by the service-connected PTSD.  However, no opinion was rendered as to whether the sleep apnea is aggravated by the PTSD.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.310.  There is no medical opinion of record that addresses such.  Thus, the Board finds that remand is warranted for an opinion as to whether the Veteran's sleep apnea is aggravated by the PTSD and the AOJ not obtaining such opinion was a predecisional duty to assist error. 

Finally, with regard to the Veteran's claims of service connection for s/p hernia surgery scar and s/p left shoulder surgery scar, the Veteran contends that these disabilities are related to surgeries caused by service to include exposure to environmental hazards during service in Southwest Asia.  In connection with the Veteran's claims, he was provided a VA scars examination in January 2024 at which time he was diagnosed with peri-umbilical surgical scars from a 2009 surgery and left shoulder surgical scars from a 2018 surgery.  The VA examiner thereafter concluded that it is less likely than not that these scars were caused by exposure to environmental hazards during service in Southwest Asia.  However, in rendering their opinion, the examiner only noted the Veteran's military occupational specialty (MOS) as aircraft mechanic, service in Southwest Asia, and the aforementioned surgeries.  Indeed, no rationale was provided by the VA examiner as to why the Veteran's scars related to the hernia and left shoulder surgeries are not related to service and there is no other medical opinion of record as to the etiology of these disabilities.  In light of the foregoing, the Board finds that opinions should be obtained on remand as to the etiologies of the Veteran's s/p hernia surgery scar and s/p left shoulder surgery scar and the AOJ not obtaining sch opinions was a predecisional duty to assist error.  

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for an examination to determine the etiology of his type II diabetes mellitus.  The claims folder must be made available to the examiner.  The examiner is requested to review all pertinent records associated with the claims file. 

The examiner must provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) the Veteran has type II diabetes mellitus that is etiologically related active service, to include as due to exposure to environmental hazards during service in Southwest Asia.   

The examiner must provide a rationale for his or her opinion.

2. Forward the Veteran's claims folder to a medical professional with the appropriate level of expertise for an opinion as to the etiology of the Veteran's s/p hernia surgery scar and s/p left shoulder surgery scar.  The claims folder must be made available to the examiner.  The examiner is requested to review all pertinent records associated with the claims file.

If the examiner determines that an opinion cannot be provided without examination of the Veteran, then an examination should be scheduled.  

The examiner must provide an opinion as to the following:

a.	Whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) the Veteran's s/p hernia surgery scar is etiologically related active service, to include as due to exposure to environmental hazards during service in Southwest Asia.

b.	Whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) the Veteran's s/p left shoulder surgery scar is etiologically related active service, to include as due to exposure to environmental hazards during service in Southwest Asia.   

The examiner must provide a rationale for his or her opinion.

3. Forward the Veteran's claims folder to a medical professional with the appropriate level of expertise for an opinion as to the etiology of the Veteran's sleep apnea.  The claims folder must be made available to the examiner.  The examiner is requested to review all pertinent records associated with the claims file.

If the examiner determines that an opinion cannot be provided without examination of the Veteran, then an examination should be scheduled.  

4. The examiner must provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) the Veteran's sleep apnea is (1) caused by or (2) aggravated by the service-connected PTSD.  If the examiner finds that sleep apnea is aggravated by the PTSD, then the examiner should quantify the degree of aggravation.

(Continued on the next page)

?

The examiner must provide a rationale for his or her opinion.

 

 

T. Raymond

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Arif Syed, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.