Citation Nr: A25032617
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240821-468686
DATE: April 9, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD), also claimed as eosinophilic esophagitis, is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty for training (ACDUTRA) from May 1999 to October 1999 and on active duty from August 2001 to April 2003. 

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a rating decision issued in November 2023 by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office under the modernized appeals system known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA).  In August 2024, the Veteran timely appealed such rating decision by submitting a Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) (VA Form 10182) and requested direct review of the evidence considered by the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the November 2023 AOJ decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  However, as the Board is remanding the instant claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of such claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

As a final initial matter, the Board observes that, in his August 2024 VA Form 10182, the Veteran also attempted to appeal the denial of service connection for a lung disorder; however, such claim was most recently denied in a December 2020 rating decision. Thus, as the Veteran did not file a request for an extension of time to submit his notice of disagreement based on good cause in a timely manner, and his notice of disagreement was received more than one year after the issuance of the December 2020 rating decision, it is untimely. 38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.104, 20.201, 20.202, 20.203. Further, the AOJ has not waived the requirement to timely file a notice of disagreement, and the Board declines to do so. Hall v. McDonough, 34 Vet. App. 329, 332 (2022); Ferko v. McDonough 37 Vet. App. 262 (en banc); Percy v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 37, 45 (2009). Thus, such matter is not properly before the Board and will not be addressed herein.

Entitlement to service connection for GERD, also claimed as eosinophilic esophagitis.

The Veteran contends that his currently diagnosed GERD and eosinophilic esophagitis had their onset in, or are otherwise related to, his military service, to include as a result of stress, poor eating habits and/or exposure to environmental hazards, to include burn pits, jet fuel, diesel fuel, and exhaust, coincident with his service in Southwest Asia in Saudi Arabia from October 2002 to December 2002. While his service treatment records (STRs) are negative for any complaints, treatment, or diagnosis referable to GERD, such reflect that, in April 2004, he had insignificant exposure to lead and various solvents during lubricating/cleaning weapons and while brush painting the ready/firing lines on a weapons range. Additionally, the Veteran's post-service VA treatment records reflect diagnoses of GERD and eosinophilic esophagitis and, in September 2022, he reported that he experienced relevant symptoms for over 20 years, which were worse in his 20's.

In light of the foregoing, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination in October 2023, which revealed diagnoses of GERD and eosinophilic esophagitis. At such time, he reported that he began experiencing severe acid reflux, pain in his chest, and vomiting after eating certain foods during service, which continued to the present time. The Veteran further indicated that he had taken Omeprazole since 2008. However, the examiner opined that such disorder, which was a diagnosable chronic multi-system illness with a partially explained etiology, was less likely than not caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activities (TERAs), which were noted to be exposure to environmental hazards coincident with his service in Southwest Asia, after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all TERAs of the Veteran. In support thereof, she reviewed his STRs, post-service VA treatment records, and relevant medical literature, and noted that he was claiming service connection for GERD and eosinophilic esophagitis based on exposure to burn pits, sand, and exhaust fumes while deployed to Southwest Asia However, she noted that esophagitis is defined as inflammation of the lining of the esophagus, which is often caused by back flow of the stomach fluid into the esophagus causing irritation and inflammation, which is called GERD. She further indicated that eosinophilic esophagitis is an autoimmune disorder that can also cause GERD, and people with atopic dermatitis, asthma, and food or environmental allergies have a greater chance of developing such condition. 

However, the Board finds that such opinion is inadequate to decide the instant claim as the examiner did not provide an adequate rationale that contemplates the specific facts of the Veteran's case as there is no indication that he experiences any such disorders she identified as resulting in a greater incidence of eosinophilic esophagitis, with resulting GERD. Furthermore, the examiner did not address whether such disorders are directly related to his military service, to include as a result of stress, poor eating habits and/or exposure to lead and solvents. The Board finds that a remand is necessary in order to cure such a pre-decisional duty to assist error by obtaining an addendum opinion addressing such matter.  

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Forward the record, to include a copy of this remand, to an appropriate VA examiner in order to obtain an addendum opinion addressing the etiology of the Veteran's GERD and eosinophilic esophagitis. 

Following a review of the record, the examiner should offer an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's GERD and eosinophilic esophagitis had their onset in, or are otherwise related to, his military service, to include as a result of stress, poor eating habits, and/or exposure to environmental hazards, to include burn pits, jet fuel, diesel fuel, and exhaust, coincident with his service in Southwest Asia, and/or lead and various solvents during lubricating/cleaning weapons and while brush painting the ready/firing lines on a weapons range.

In offering such opinion, the examiner should consider the Veteran's report that he began experiencing severe acid reflux, pain in his chest, and vomiting after eating certain foods during service, which continued to the present time, and the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all TERAs of the Veteran.

The examiner is advised that the sole basis of a negative opinion cannot be the fact that the Veteran's STRs are silent as to GERD and/or eosinophilic esophagitis or complaints thereof, or the lack of post-service treatment records demonstrating a continuity of care.

		A rationale for any opinion offered should be provided.

 

 

A. JAEGER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Pettit, Andrew M.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.