Citation Nr: A25032627
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240910-473069
DATE: April 9, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

Resolving any reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, his obstructive sleep apnea is aggravated by his service-connected MDD with anxious distress.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for service connection for obstructive sleep apnea have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1111, 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.310.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the Marine Corps from August 1997 to August 2001, and he also had service in the Reserves.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal of an August 2024 rating decision by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO) that denied service connection for obstructive sleep apnea.

By way of background, a June 2023 rating decision initially denied service connection for the matter, and the Veteran requested the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) conduct a higher-level review (HLR).  During the December 2023 HLR, the AOJ determined that a duty to assist error occurred and transferred the matter to the supplemental claim process for additional development.  See June 2023 HLR Rating Decision.  Thereafter, the August 2024 rating decision on appeal was issued.

The Veteran timely appealed the August 2024 rating decision and elected the Direct Review docket.  See September 2024 Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), VA Form 10182.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the rating decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.

Of note, remand to the agency of AOJ is only warranted to correct pre-decisional duty to assist errors (including when the AOJ failed to make reasonable efforts to obtain VA treatment records or relevant federal or private treatment records, failed to obtain a VA examination, or obtained an inadequate VA examination or opinion).  38 C.F.R. § 20.802 (a).  In addition, the Board is bound by favorable findings made by the AOJ, absent clear and unmistakable error.  38 C.F.R. § 3.104 (c).

If evidence was added to the claims file during a period of time when new evidence was not allowed, the Board has not considered it in this decision.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  The Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim and submit or identify this evidence.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

As a final preliminary matter, the Board notes that the Veteran's complete service treatment records (STR(s)) are not of record.  When STRs are unavailable, VA has a heightened duty to consider the application of the benefit-of-the-doubt rule.  See O'Hare v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 365, 367 (1991).  However, this obligation does not establish a heightened benefit-of-the-doubt rule or lower the legal standard for proving a claim of service connection; rather, it increases the Board's obligation to evaluate and discuss in its decision all the evidence that may be favorable to the Veteran.  Therefore, the following analysis has been undertaken with this heightened duty in mind.

Service Connection

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service.  38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.

Establishing service connection generally requires (1) medical evidence of a current disability; (2) medical or, in certain circumstances, lay evidence of in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) medical evidence of a nexus between the claimed in-service disease or injury and the present disability.  Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

Service connection may also be granted for any injury or disease diagnosed after discharge when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease or injury was incurred in service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (d).

Service connection may be granted on a secondary basis for a disability which is proximately due to or the result of a service-connected disease or injury under 38 C.F.R. § 3.310.  Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439 (1995); Ward v. Wilkie, 21 Vet. App. 233 (2019).  To establish service connection on a secondary basis, there must be (1) evidence of a current disability; (2) evidence of a service-connected disability; and (3) medical evidence establishing a link between the service-connected disability and the current disability.  See Wallin v. West, 11 Vet. App. 509, 512 (1998).

When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, the Secretary is required to give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant.  38 U.S.C. § 5107.

Facts and Analysis

The Veteran seeks service connection for sleep apnea as secondary to his service connected major depressive disorder (MDD) with anxious distress.

In this case, the AOJ made the following favorable findings that are binding on the Board: 1) the Veteran has a current diagnosis of sleep apnea; and 2) he is service-connected for the MDD with anxious distress.  See August 2024 Rating Decision.  The Board is bound by the favorable findings.  38 C.F.R. § 3.104 (c).  Thus, the first and second Wallin elements of secondary service connection are met, and the dispositive issue is whether a nexus between them exists.

In November 2022, the Veteran submitted private medical opinions from both his psychiatrist and physician.   See October 2022 Medical Opinion Statement of Dr. H.J., Vitlink Psychiatric Service PLLC; see also October 2022 Physician Statement of Dr. R.T. 

The Veteran's psychiatrist, Dr. H.J., opined in the October 2022 medical statement that the Veteran's sleep apnea is at least as likely as not aggravated by depression, anxiety and insomnia.  As rationale, the psychiatrist detailed the Veteran's MDD with anxious distress and sleep apnea symptoms, respectively, and cited to medical literature to explain how impaired sleep related to the psychiatric disability worsened his sleep apnea by causing non-compliance with wearing the c-pap mask.  Specifically, the Veteran was noted to be sensitive to the noise from his c-pap machine due to his psychiatric disability and remove the device during the night, which further hindered his ability to obtain restorative sleep and increased daytime sleepiness and irritability.  The Board finds this opinion adequate and highly probative for the matter on appeal, as it contains clear conclusions, supporting data, and reasoned medical explanation connecting the two.  See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008) (most of the probative value of a medical opinion comes from its reasoning); see also Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 124 (2007) (holding that a medical opinion must be supported by an analysis that the Board can consider and weigh against contrary opinions).

The Veteran's physician Dr. R.J, also provided a favorable medical statement in October 2022, opining that in the absence of risk factors, such as unhealthy weight, it is as likely as not that MDD contributes or aggravates the Veteran's sleep apnea.  Although the physician provided a medical study as support for the opinion on secondary service connection, there was no rationale to explain how the study related to the opinions.  Id.  Thus, the Board finds the opinion is inadequate for adjudication and assigns no probative weight.  

A November 2022 VA examiner reviewed the evidentiary record and provided a negative nexus opinion for secondary service connection.  Specifically, the examiner explained that because there is no direct objective medical or scientific evidence that MDD with anxious distress and obstructive sleep apnea are anatomically or pathophysiologically related, it is less likely than not that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea is proximately due to or the result of his service-connected MDD.  However, as the examiner did not address whether the service-connected MDD with anxious distress aggravated the Veteran's OSA, the Board finds the medical opinion is inadequate for adjudication and assigns it little, to no, probative weight.  See El-Amin v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 136, 140 (2013) (an opinion regarding secondary service connection is inadequate if it does not address both causation and aggravation). 

Notably, a January 2024 VA medical opinion was obtained but the examiner limited the opinion to toxic exposures and did not provide an opinion on whether sleep apnea was secondary to service-connection MDD with anxious distress.   

Resolving any reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Board finds the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea is aggravated by his service-connected MDD with anxious distress.  Importantly, in Spicer v. McDonough, the Federal Circuit Court clarified that secondary service connection is warranted where a nonservice-connected disability would have been less severe but-for a service-connected disability, either because there is an etiological link (to include worsening of functionality) between the two, or because the service-connected disability resulted in the inability to treat the nonservice-connected disability.  Spicer v. McDonough, 61 F. 4th 1360 (Fed. Cir. 2023).  This holding is particularly instructive considering the Veteran's private psychiatrist Dr. H.J. indicated that the Veteran's MDD with anxious distress results in the inability to fully treat his sleep apnea with the c-pap machine, inhibiting efficient sleep and increasing daytime fatigue and irritability.  

Considering the above, and as there is no probative evidence to the contrary, the Board finds that the evidence persuasively weighs in favor of finding that the Veteran's sleep apnea is secondary to his service-connected MDD with anxious distress.  As such, the claim of entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea is granted.  See 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.310.

Notably, as the Board has granted secondary service connection, it need not address direct service connection, or any other theories for service connection, in this matter.

 

 

MICHAEL LANE

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Gipson, Natalie E.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.