Citation Nr: A25032421
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240711-454633
DATE: April 8, 2025

REMANDED

Service connection for left lower extremity nerve pain, to include as secondary to service-connected thoracolumbar strain, is remanded. 

Service connection for right lower extremity nerve pain, to include as secondary to service-connected thoracolumbar strain, is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from September 2010 to May 2013.

This matter is before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a January 2024 rating decision issued by a Regional Office (RO). 

In a July 2024 Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran selected the direct review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the January 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of bilateral lower extremity nerve pain, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

The Board initially notes that in his July 2024 argument, the Veteran asserted entitlement to a change in DC for his service-connected lumbar spine disability. Prior to the rating decision on appeal, the Veteran requested an update to his service-connected low back disability to reflect disc herniation and protrusion but clarified that he was not requesting a higher rating for his back disability. A supplemental claim is the appropriate remedy for recharacterization of the Veteran's lumbar spine disability. 

Bilateral Lower Extremity Nerve Pain

The Veteran contends that he is entitled to service connection for bilateral lower extremity nerve pain as secondary to his service-connected lumbar spine disability.  The Board has considered the Veteran's disc herniation and protrusion as part of his service-connected lumbar spine disability for this appeal. 

The Veteran has not been afforded a VA examination for bilateral lower extremity nerve pain. A VA examination is required when there is (1) competent evidence of a current disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability, (2) evidence establishing that an event, injury, or disease occurred in service, or establishing certain diseases manifesting during an applicable presumptive period for which the claimant qualifies, and (3) an indication that the disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability may be associated with the Veteran's service or with another service-connected disability, but (4) there is insufficient competent medical evidence on file for the Secretary to make a decision on the claim. See McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006). 

The Veteran's July 2022 lumbar spine examination indicated that the Veteran's pain did not radiate to his legs, and he had no radicular pain or signs or symptoms due to radiculopathy. However, a May 2023 MRI revealed vertebral disc herniation and slight impingement one of the transverse nerves exiting the spinal card, resulting in placement of a pain management consultation. Subsequently, the Veteran submitted an August 2023 claim stating that he was experiencing bilateral lower extremity nerve pain secondary to his service-connected back disability. Therefore, there is competent evidence of a current disability or recurrent symptoms of a disability. 

Further, there is a clear indication that the Veteran's symptoms may be associated with the Veteran's service-connected lumbar spine disability; however, there is insufficient competent medical evidence on file for the Secretary to decide on the claim. Therefore, as all McLendon factors are satisfied, VA was obligated to obtain a VA examination for the Veteran's claim. The AOJ failed to obtain an examination before issuing the rating decision on appeal. As such, there was a pre-decisional duty to assist error, and a remand is necessary to correct this error. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following actions:

Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination for bilateral lower extremity nerve pain.  The examiner must review the claims file. If a diagnosis cannot be provided but the Veteran's condition manifests in symptoms that cause functional impairment, then the examiner should consider them a "disability" for the purpose of providing the requested opinions below. 

The examiner is asked to provide a response to the following: 

Is lower extremity nerve pain at least as likely as not related to service, including having an onset during service? 

Is lower extremity nerve pain at least as likely as not due to the Veteran's service-connected lumbar spine disability? 

Is lower extremity nerve pain at least as likely as not aggravated by the service-connected lumbar spine disability? 

In providing the requested opinions, consider the Veteran's description of the in-service injury and symptoms as well as post-service symptoms. If there is any medical reason to accept or reject the proposition that the Veteran's reported injury and symptoms in service and thereafter represented the onset of the current disability, this should be noted.  Stated another way, do the Veteran's reports about the symptoms align with how the currently diagnosed disability is known to develop or are the Veteran's reports generally inconsistent with medical knowledge or implausible?

Provide a rationale to support the opinions.   

 

JOHN Z. JONES

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	L. Resor, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.