Citation Nr: A25032869
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240712-454974
DATE: April 9, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to a compensable evaluation for left ear hearing loss is remanded.  

Entitlement to service connection for a disorder manifested by dizziness as secondary to the service-connected left ear hearing loss is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the U.S. Marine Corps from December 1990 to September 1991.  

This matter comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a February 2024 rating decision by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ), which denied a higher rating for the service-connected left ear hearing loss.  See February 2024 Rating Decision.  See also January 2024 Application for Disability Compensation (VA Form 21-526EZ) (asserting entitlement to an increased evaluation for the service-connected left ear hearing loss); October 2023 VA Notification Letter (notifying the Veteran of receipt of his intent to file a claim for compensation on October 5, 2023, and further stating that, if a "completed application is received within one year from the date that [the[ intent to file was received and [VA] decide[s] that [he is] entitled to VA benefits, [VA] may be able to compensate [him] from the date [VA] received [his] intent to file").

In July 2024, the Veteran appealed this decision to the Board, electing the Direct Review docket.  See July 2024 Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) (VA Form 10182).  See also 38 C.F.R. § 19.2(d).  

Under direct review, no development may be undertaken; the Board considers the same record as the RO in rendering a decision, and there is no evidence submission or a hearing request.  Accordingly, the evidentiary record is limited to the evidence of record at the time of the February 2024 AOJ decision.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  

If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the February 2024 decision, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.  However, because the Board is remanding the appeal, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

The Board also notes that, as discussed in detail below, a claim for secondary service connection for a disorder manifested by dizziness as secondary to the service-connected auditory pathology has been raised and is within the scope of the Veteran's claim for a higher rating for the left ear hearing loss.  See Bailey v. Wilkie, 33 Vet. App. 188, 191 (2021) (when entitlement to compensation for complications of a service-connected disability is reasonably raised during the course of a claim for an increased rating for that disability, the claimant need not file a separate claim).  The Board has thus added the issue to the appeal.

1. Entitlement to a compensable evaluation for left ear hearing loss is remanded.

Unfortunately, the claim must be remanded to correct duty to assist errors that occurred prior to the February 2024 AOJ decision on appeal.  See 38 C.F.R. § 20.802.

In this regard, as alluded to above, the February 2024 rating decision denied an increased evaluation for the Veteran's service-connected left ear hearing loss based upon the audiometric test results obtained at a February 2024 VA audiological examination.  See February 2024 Rating Decision; February 2024 VA Hearing Loss and Tinnitus Disability Benefits Questionnaire (DBQ).  See also 38 C.F.R. § 4.85, Diagnostic Code 6100; Lendenmann v. Principi, 3 Vet. App. 345 (1992) (reflecting that disability ratings for hearing loss are derived from a mechanical application of the rating schedule to the numeric designations resulting from audiometric testing).

However, the Veteran's VA treatment records contain notations of additional audiological evaluation conducted in October 2023.  See VA Audiology Vestibular Testing Consultation Note dated October 18, 2023 (reflecting that audiometric testing was conducted, including speech recognition testing and an audiogram, which showed "severe sensorineural hearing loss in the left ear"); VA Audiology Comprehensive Evaluation Note dated October 4, 2023 (noting that audiologic evaluation revealed "Moderate to profound [sensorineural hearing loss]" from 250 to 8000Hz in the left ear).  Although the October 2023 VA audiology treatment notes summarizing the Veteran's audiometric evaluations are of record, the complete audiogram results associated with his VA treatment are not.  See id.  As the audiometric data contained in these reports is certainly pertinent to the evaluation of the Veteran's service-connected left ear hearing loss, a remand is required so that these records may be associated with the claims file.  See Bell v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 611, 613 (1992) (holding that where VA treatment records are material to the issue on appeal and are not included within the claims file, a remand is necessary to acquire such VA records, because VA is deemed to have constructive knowledge of certain documents generated by VA agents or employees).  See also 38 C.F.R. § 3.400(o)(2) (reflecting that the effective date of an award of increased compensation shall be the earliest date as of which it is factually ascertainable that an increase in disability had occurred, if the application is received within one year from such date).

Additionally, the Veteran's VA audiology records indicate that he has undergone evaluation and treatment for his auditory pathology from a private provider.  See, e.g., November 2023 VA Physical Medicine Rehabilitation Outpatient Consultation Note (reflecting that the Veteran was undergoing treatment by an Ear, Nose, and Throat (ENT) specialist at Lankenau Hospital); December 2023 VA Primary Care Initial Evaluation Note (noting that the Veteran sees a non-VA primary care physician and an outside ENT specialist).  However, despite this evidence indicating the existence of outstanding, relevant private medical treatment records, the AOJ failed to make any attempt to obtain such records prior to the February 2024 VA audiological examination or the promulgation of the February 2024 decision on appeal.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(b); Ivey v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 320, 323 (1992) (holding that when reference is made to pertinent medical records, VA is on notice of their existence and has a duty to assist the Veteran to attempt to obtain them).  

As such, in light of the foregoing, a remand is required.  See 38 C.F.R. § 20.802 (stating that, "[u]nless the issue or issues can be granted in full, the Board shall remand the appeal to the agency of original jurisdiction for correction of an error on the part of the agency of original jurisdiction to satisfy its duties under 38 U.S.C. 5103A, if the error occurred prior to the date of the agency of original jurisdiction decision on appeal").

2. Entitlement to service connection for a disorder manifested by dizziness as secondary to the service-connected left ear hearing loss is remanded.

Remand is also warranted to correct a duty to assist error that occurred prior to the February 2024 rating decision on appeal regarding the issue of entitlement to service connection for a disorder manifested by dizziness as secondary to the service-connected left ear hearing loss.  

In this regard, the Veteran's VA treatment records reflect that he was evaluated for "[d]izziness - of recent onset, described as vertigo" in October 2023, and a vestibular examination conducted at that time was "suggestive of an uncompensated left vestibulopathy," with associated diagnoses of "asymmetrical hearing loss, left ear worse" and "constant tinnitus in the left ear."  See VA Audiology Vestibular Testing Consultation Note dated October 18, 2023.  However, despite the indication that the Veteran's disequilibrium was potentially related to his service-connected auditory pathology, the February 2024 VA audiological evaluation did not address this potential complication, and the AOJ failed to obtain an additional medical examination or opinion addressing the likelihood that the disability manifested by vertigo was caused or aggravated by the Veteran's service-connected condition prior to promulgation of the February 2024 rating decision on appeal.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a); Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439, 448(1995) (stating that establishing secondary service connection requires evidence showing that a current disability was caused or aggravated by a service-connected disability).

Importantly, as alluded to in the introduction above, the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) held that the Board is required to develop and adjudicate related claims for secondary service connection for disabilities that are reasonably raised during the adjudication of a formally initiated claim for an increased rating for a primary service-connected disability.  See Bailey, 33 Vet. App. at 203.  See also Wilson v. McDonough, 35 Vet. App. 103, 106-7 (2022) (finding that the Board erred in failing to address a claim of peripheral vestibular disease and dizziness as a secondary service connection claim within the scope of the increased rating claim for hearing loss pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 3.155(d), which states that the scope of a claim includes consideration of "entitlement to any additional benefits for complications of the claimed condition").  

Accordingly, the claim for service connection for a disability manifested by dizziness has been bifurcated from the Veteran's increased rating claim for left ear hearing loss and must be remanded for a VA examination and etiological opinion.  See id.  See also McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 81-83 (2006) (reflecting that VA will provide a medical examination or obtain a medical opinion if the evidence indicates the existence of a current disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability that may be associated with an event, injury, or disease in service or with another service-connected disability, but the record does not contain sufficient medical evidence to decide the claim; and further finding that the threshold for determining whether the evidence indicates the current disability may be related service or another service-connected disability is a low one); 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(d)(2); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(4).

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Make arrangements to obtain and associate with the claims file the October 2023 VA audiograms.  As noted, VA audiology treatment notes indicate that the Veteran underwent audiometric testing on October 4, 2023, and October 18, 2023.  However, the actual results of the audiogram are not included in the treatment records and must be obtained.

If these records are not available, a negative reply is required.

2. Contact the Veteran and request that he identify any relevant outstanding private treatment records, to include records from his primary care physician, Dr. M., and his Ear, Nose, and Throat specialist, Dr. S.  He should be invited to submit this evidence himself or to request VA to obtain it on his behalf.  Authorized release forms (VA Form 21-4142) should be provided for this purpose.

3. Schedule the Veteran for an appropriate VA examination to assist in determining the nature and etiology of the Veteran's claimed disability manifested by dizziness.  The examination may be conducted via telehealth or similar service if deemed necessary.

The entire claims file and a copy of this REMAND must be made available to the examiner prior to the examination.  The examiner must note in the examination report that the evidence in the claims file has been reviewed.  The examiner should elicit a full history from the Veteran and document the Veteran's reports regarding his history in the examination report.  The examination should include any necessary diagnostic testing or evaluation.

After eliciting a full history from the Veteran, conducting a complete review of the claims file (including all available VA examination reports, medical treatment records, and any available lay statements), performing an examination of the Veteran, and completing any clinically indicated diagnostic testing, the examiner should identify and describe in detail all current disorders manifested by dizziness found to be present.  

As to EACH disorder manifested by dizziness, identified on examination or diagnosed during the pendency of the claim, to include left vestibulopathy, the examiner must provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the condition was either (i) caused by, or (ii) aggravated by a service-connected disability (including specifically his service-connected left ear hearing loss).

NOTE:  With respect to the question concerning aggravation, the examiner is advised that aggravation does not require that there be "permanent worsening" of the nonservice-connected disability.  Ward v. Wilkie, 31 Vet. App. 233 (2019).  Additionally, the examiner is reminded that causation and aggravation are separate concepts that each require their own rationale.

In providing these requested opinions, the examiner should note that that the Veteran is competent to report the onset, nature, and duration of his symptoms as well as his medical history.  Accordingly, the examiner must consider all lay assertions.  Additionally, the examiner should consider and address, where necessary, the VA treatment records, discussed in the body of the remand above, indicating that the Veteran's disequilibrium was potentially related to his service-connected auditory pathology.  

The examiner must provide a comprehensive report including complete rationales for all opinions and conclusions reached, citing the objective medical findings leading to the conclusions.  In this regard, the Board emphasizes that the Veteran is competent to report his symptoms and history, and such statements by the Veteran regarding symptomatology and medical history must be specifically acknowledged and considered in formulating any opinions concerning the onset and severity of any identified disability.  If the Veteran's reports regarding his history of symptoms of and treatment for any diagnosed disability are rejected, the examiner must provide a reason for doing so.

All examination findings, along with the complete explanation for all opinions expressed, must be set forth in the examination report.  If any examiner is unable to answer any question without a resort to speculation, then he or she should so indicate and provide a rationale for why an answer could not be provided.

 

 

JENNIFER HWA

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	L. McCabe, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.