Citation Nr: A25032812
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240906-471543
DATE: April 9, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for left shoulder condition is denied. 

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for tension headache is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

The persuasive weight of the evidence is against finding the Veteran's pre-existing left shoulder condition was permanently aggravated beyond its natural progression by military service.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to service connection for left shoulder condition have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.304.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from December 2022 to May 2023. This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a March 8, 2024, rating decision for tension headaches and a March 23, 2024, rating decision for left shoulder condition. The rating decision were issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO). 

The rating decision on appeal constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies. The Veteran timely appealed the rating decision by filing a September 2024 Decision Review Request. The Veteran elected Direct Review of his claim by a Veterans Law Judge. Therefore, only the evidence associated with the record at the time of the March 2024 rating decision will be considered on appeal.

1. Entitlement to service connection for left shoulder condition.

The Veteran contends that he developed a left shoulder condition due to his military service. On an October 2023 Statement, the Veteran wrote he had a left shoulder condition to include dislocation. During service, he injured his left shoulder while participating in the confidence course. When he climbed up a 10-foot wall, he slipped on ice and fell backward causing his shoulder to dislocate. A month later, he dislocated the same shoulder while competing in "combative". He went to the medical unit and his shoulder was popped back in place. He was referred to an orthopedic doctor and therapy. 

Regulations

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303. The three-element test for service connection requires evidence of: (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166-67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

A veteran will be considered to have been in sound condition when examined, accepted and enrolled for service, except as to defects, infirmities, or disorders noted at entrance into service, or where clear and unmistakable (obvious or manifest) evidence demonstrates that an injury or disease existed prior thereto and was not aggravated by such service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.304(b). Only such conditions as are recorded in examination reports are to be considered as noted. Id. History of preservice existence of conditions recorded at the time of examination does not constitute a notation of such conditions but will be considered together with all other material evidence in determinations as to inception. 38 C.F.R. § 3.304(b)(1).

Under the Appeals Management Act, the Board is bound by favorable findings by the agency of jurisdiction in the absence of evidence of clear and unmistakable error. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104 (c).

Evidence/Analysis

The March 23, 2024, rating decision favorably found the Veteran had a current diagnosis of a shoulder strain pursuant to the November 2023 VA examination. Service connection was denied because there was no evidence of aggravation of the Veteran's pre-existing condition. 

A September 2022 readiness documentation indicated the Veteran left shoulder dislocation previously as a child. On a January 2023 emergency department service treatment record, it was noted the Veteran reported a history of "shoulder dislocation approximately one and a half years ago with surgical repair of labrum."  The Board notes that this places the date of surgery as being prior to entrance to service.  The January 2023 service treatment record further notes that he again dislocated the shoulder in training.  A service treatment record dated a week later in January 2023 notes that the Veteran said he no longer had pain and it had gotten better.  An orthopedic surgery note dated in February 2023 notes that the Veteran said that he could do all activities without any difficulties.  He had a full range of motion.  A March 2023 service treatment record contains an account of another dislocation during training.

The Veteran was evaluated during a VA examination in November 2023. During the examination, the Veteran reported that he torn his labrum prior to enlistment. It was also noted that he had surgery for labrum repair before enlistment in Marchh 2021.  He had wear and tear injury with two episodes of dislocation during basic training. The examiner noted the Veteran had a shoulder strain. In the medical opinion, the examiner listed several notations found in the record indicating the Veteran's left shoulder condition pre-existed service to include the September 2022 readiness documentation. The examiner opined the claimed condition, which clearly and unmistakably existed prior to service, was clearly and unmistakably not aggravated beyond its natural progression during service. The examiner provided the following rationale:

"The veteran is diagnosed with left shoulder strain. A shoulder strain happens when an injury to the shoulder overstretches a tendon or muscle. The shoulder muscles include the 4 muscles of the rotator cuff (infraspinatus, subscapularis, supraspinatus, teres minor) and the deltoid, rhomboid, and trapezius muscles. The veteran's clinical findings and current symptom history for shoulder dislocation are consistent with chronic shoulder instability. Kavaja et al. (2018) described, "...by chronic post-traumatic instability we mean recurrent dislocation(s), subluxations or other symptoms of instability occurring after a first-time traumatic shoulder dislocation." Hayes et al. (2002) described, "Instability is usually defined as a clinical syndrome that occurs when shoulder laxity produces symptoms." The clinical documentation reflects the claimant has experienced 3 recurrent dislocations after the first-time dislocation in December 2020, before enlisting in military service:

"	12/2020, initially dislocated left shoulder in Dec 2020 at his job, and later had left shoulder arthroscopic surgery (Bankart procedure) in March 2021 for a torn labrum.

"	1/13/2023, left shoulder dislocation occurred after fall during confidence course.

"	3/4/2023, left shoulder dislocation occurred during combat training, pugil sticks.

"	By history, left shoulder dislocation had occurred 1 month prior to the Shoulder DBQ examination.

This history of the claimant is consistent with the described course of shoulder dislocation recurrence. Hayes et al. (2002) also described, "An important complication of primary dislocation is subsequent recurrent dislocations. Based on a study by Rowe, about 70% of those who have already dislocated can expect to dislocate again within 2 years of the initial injury. The veteran had the first recurrence 25 months after the initial dislocation (December 2020 - January 2023). Also, "Dislocation has been reported to recur in 66% to 100% of people aged 20 years or under, 13% to 63% of people aged between 20 and 40 years, and in 0% to 16% of people aged 40 years or older...Multiple recurrent dislocations, as the claimant has experienced (that is, while in the military, and reportedly after military service), are common (up to 63%) in this age group (20-40 years of age). The claimant's symptoms are consistent with the clinical syndrome of chronic post-traumatic instability. The objective findings by the DBQ examiner elicited pain similar to his lay statement descriptions, and yet, no current residuals of recurrent dislocation (subluxation) of the glenohumeral joint were observed on examination. The claimant's clinical history of multiple dislocations matches the expected and commonly experienced course of recurrences, especially in this age group, and no current residuals of recurrent dislocation were documented as observed on DBQ examination. Therefore, there is no medical or scientific evidence to support aggravation of the claimant's left shoulder condition beyond its natural progression. Therefore, the claimed condition, which clearly and which clearly and unmistakably existed prior to service, was clearly and unmistakably not aggravated beyond its natural progression during service by an in-service injury, event, or illness."

The Board acknowledges the Veteran's contentions that his current left shoulder condition was related to his injuries in service. Reporting the symptom of pain is within realm of knowledge a lay person can report and it be sufficient for the purpose of service connection. However, this report is not sufficient to establish a nexus between the current reports of pain and an in-service note about pain. As doing so to requires medical knowledge and expertise the Veteran has not been shown to possess. See Kahana v. Shinkseki, 24?Vet. App.?428 (2011); Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1376-77 (Fed. Cir. 2007). However, the objective medical evidence of record answered this question. The evidence showed the Veteran had a pre-existing shoulder condition to include dislocation. The notations in the service treatment records of the pre-existing condition overcome the presumption of soundness. 38 C.F.R. § 3.304(b). It is clear and unmistakable the Veteran injured his shoulder prior to service, and he had reoccurring injuries in service. The VA medical opinion provided a detailed list of notations in the record that support this conclusion. Citing to medical literature, the examiner provided a thorough and well supported rationale for the conclusion reached. The examiner opined that the Veteran's in-service injuries did not aggravate his pre-existing shoulder condition. His multiple dislocations matched the expected and commonly experienced course of recurrences. There are no other medical opinions included in the file to contradict this finding. 

Accordingly, the criteria for entitlement to service connection for left shoulder condition have not been established, either through medical or lay evidence. In arriving at the decision to deny the claim, the Board has considered the applicability of the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine. However, as the persuasive weight of the evidence is against the claim of entitlement to service connection for left shoulder condition, that doctrine is not applicable. 38?U.S.C. §?5107(b); 38?C.F.R. §?3.102; Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1?Vet. App.?49, 53-56 (1990).

REASONS FOR REMAND

2. Entitlement to service connection for tension headache.

The Veteran contends that he developed tension headaches due to his military service. On an October 2023 Statement, the Veteran wrote that he began experiencing frequent and severe headaches while working as a military policeman (MP) in service. As an MP, he completed physical training, intense environments, lack of sleep, and working long days. He went to the medical unit for his headaches, and he was prescribed medication. He continued to have headaches since service. 

The March 8, 2024, rating decision favorably found the Veteran had a current diagnosis of tension headaches pursuant to the November 2023 VA examination. There was also evidence of headaches in the service treatment records. Service connection was denied because the evidence did not show permanent residual or a chronic disability. 

The Veteran underwent VA headaches examination. A copy of this examination report is associated with the claims file. The rating decision makes a conclusion that the Veteran does not have permanent residual or a chronic disability, but the rating does not include notations of a medical opinion in relation to the examination. If an opinion was prepared in connection with the examination, a copy of the opinion is not available for review in the claim file. Therefore, on remand, any missing opinion must be obtained. See Bell v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 611, 612-13 (1992). If no medical opinion was actually obtained prior to the denial of the issue, this is also a pre-decisional duty to assist error that requires correction upon remand. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

This matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Obtain a copy of the missing VA medical opinion in response to the November 2023 VA examination for tension headaches and associate the opinion with the claims file.

If such opinion does not exist, obtain an opinion to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's tension headaches. The need for a new examination is left to the examiner's discretion. A complete copy of the claims file must be provided to the examiner for review. The examiner is asked to review the claims file in its entirety and indicate in the record that he or she has done so. After reviewing the claims file, the examiner is asked to determine whether it is at least as likely as not the Veteran's tension headache incurred in or was caused by his military service. 

(Continued on the next page)

?

A complete rationale must be provided for any opinion rendered. If an opinion cannot be provided without resorting to mere speculation, the examiner must indicate why this is so and identify any information that must be provided to render such a non-speculative opinion.

 

 

MICHAEL MARTIN

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	T. Harris

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.