Citation Nr: A25032188
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 230406-337131
DATE: April 8, 2025

ORDER

Service connection for a neck disability (claimed as rheumatoid arthritis of the neck) is denied.

Service connection for shoulders disability (claimed as rheumatoid arthritis of shoulders) is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The claimed neck disability did not manifest in service or within one year of separation from service and is not otherwise related to service.

2. The claimed shoulders disability did not manifest in service or within one year of separation from service and is not otherwise related to service.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for service connection for a neck disability have not been met.  38 U.S.C. § 1110, 1131, 5107 (2012); 38 C.F.R. § 3.303, 3.307, 3.309 (2023).

2. The criteria for service connection for shoulders disability have not been met.  38 U.S.C. § 1110, 1131, 5107 (2012); 38 C.F.R. § 3.303, 3.307, 3.309 (2023).

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from August 1972 to January 1973.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal of a January 2023 rating decision issued by a Regional Office (RO) of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA), an agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ).

In the April 2023 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran's representative elected the Direct Review docket.  Under the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the AOJ rating decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.

If evidence was associated with the claims file during a period of time when additional evidence was not allowed, the Board has not considered it in its decision on the claims.  38 C.F.R. § 20.300.  If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was added to the claims file that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.

If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims for entitlement to service connection for a neck disability and shoulders disability, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

Service Connection

In general, establishing service connection requires medical evidence or, in certain circumstances, lay evidence of the following: (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a relevant disease or an injury; and (3) a correlation (or "nexus") between the disease or injury in service and the present disability.  Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163 (Fed. Cir. 2004). See also 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.

In addition, certain chronic diseases, to include arthritis, will be presumed to have been incurred in service, absent an intervening ("intercurrent") cause, if they were shown as chronic in service or if they manifested to a compensable degree within a year following separation from service, or if they were noted in service (or within the presumptive period) with continuity of symptomatology since service that is attributable to the chronic disease.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 1112, 1113, 1137; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307, 3.309(a). Walker v. Shinseki, 708 F.3d 1331, 1338 (Fed. Cir. 2013).

1. Service connection for a neck disability

The Veteran seeks service connection for rheumatoid arthritis of the neck.

In its January 2023 rating decision, the AOJ favorable found that the Veteran had been diagnosed with a disability as private treatment records document a diagnosis of neck pain.  Under the AMA, the Board is bound by such favorable findings by the AOJ.  38 C.F.R. § 3.104 (c).  As such, the first element of service connection set forth under Shedden, current disability, has been satisfied.

With regard to an in-service incurrence, the Veteran's service treatment records do not contain any complaints of, or treatment related to, a neck condition, to include pain or arthritis.  Rather, Medical Board examination, dated December 7, 1972, reflected evaluation of the Veteran's neck, spine, and neurological systems were "Normal."

Post-service VA treatment records reflect that the Veteran complained of neck pain in 2008 and was found to have limited neck range-of-motion on exam.  Private treatment records dated September in 2010 noted the Veteran's musculoskeletal history included "neck pain/problems."  VA treatment records reflect an x-ray of the Veteran's entire spine in January 2018 showed osteoarthritis (OA) of the L-, T- and C-spine.  Private treatment records in November 2019 noted the Veteran's chronic medical conditions included neck pain.  Private treatment records in December 2021 noted the Veteran complained of neck pain constantly present.

Based on the foregoing, the evidence of record does not reflect that the Veteran's neck condition manifested in service or within one year of service.  Rather, post-service treatment records indicate that the Veteran first complained of neck pain in 2008, which was over 30 years after discharge.  Next, while post-service treatment records note the Veteran's neck pain complaints, and reflect ongoing treatment since 2008, they do not address the etiology of his neck pain.  Moreover, apart from submitting a claim seeking service connection for a neck condition, the Veteran has not indicated what event, disease, or injury in-service resulted in his current neck disability. As such, the second element of service connection set forth under Shedden, in-service incurrence or aggravation, has not been satisfied.

Further, the Veteran has not indicated that any medical provider has linked any complained of neck pain to his service.  In this regard, the Board acknowledges that the Veteran has not been afforded a VA examination in connection with his claim for service connection for a neck condition.  In accordance with the duty-to-assist provisions codified at 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(d) and by regulation found at 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(4), a medical opinion or examination is required if the information and evidence of record does not contain sufficiently competent medical evidence to decide the claim, but there is (1) competent evidence of a current disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability; and (2) evidence establishing that an event, injury, or disease occurred in service or establishing certain diseases manifesting during an applicable presumptive period for which the claimant qualifies; and (3) an indication that the disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability may be associated with the veteran's service or with another service-connected disability.  See McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 81 (2006).  Because the Board finds that there is no competent evidence establishing an event, injury, or disease occurred in service relating to a neck condition, or that the Veteran's neck arthritis manifested to a compensable degree within a year following his separation from service, or that a link exists between his complained of neck pain and his military service, VA's duty to provide him with a medical examination in this case was not triggered.  As discussed above, while the Veteran has been diagnosed with a current disability, he has not asserted any event, injury, or disease resulted in his complained of neck pain.  The Veteran has also not indicated that any medical professional has attributed his complained of neck pain in any way to the Veteran's service.  Given this, the Board cannot conclude that there was any duty to provide the Veteran a VA medical examination.

Considering the evidence outlined above, the Board finds no basis upon which to conclude the Veteran has a current neck disability that is in any way attributable to service, as the competent and credible evidence of record fails to establish an in-service incurrence, or a link between any complained of neck pain and his service.  While the Veteran is competent to report symptomatology such as neck pain, as a lay person he does not have the education, training, and experience to diagnose or opine as to the etiology of his condition.  See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 (Fed. Cir. 2007).

Based on the foregoing, the evidence weighs persuasively against the claim for service connection for a neck disability.  The benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine is therefore not for application, and the claim must be denied.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49 (1990).

2. Service connection for shoulders disability

The Veteran seeks service connection for rheumatoid arthritis of the shoulders.

In its January 2023 rating decision, the AOJ favorable found that the Veteran had been diagnosed with a disability as private treatment records document a diagnosis of bilateral shoulder pain.  Under the AMA, the Board is bound by such favorable findings by the AOJ.  38 C.F.R. § 3.104 (c).  As such, the first element of service connection set forth under Shedden, current disability, has been satisfied.

With regard to an in-service incurrence, the Veteran's service treatment records do not contain any complaints of, or treatment related to, a shoulder condition, to include pain or arthritis.  Rather, Medical Board examination, dated December 7, 1972, reflected evaluation of the Veteran's neck, spine, upper extremities, and neurological systems were "Normal."

Post-service VA treatment records reflect the Veteran complained of left shoulder pain in January 2010 (for 3-4 weeks) when he stepped out of his truck and onto ice, held onto his steering wheel with his left arm and it pulled extremely hard.  He endorsed trying pain medication without relief.  The Veteran was referred to and participated in occupational therapy (OT) for his diagnosed left shoulder pain.  Several years later in August 2016, the Veteran presented to primary care for follow-up and concern for possible melanoma on his right arm.  Physical examination indicated his right shoulder had good range-of-motion and strength.  He was assessed with "shoulder pain" and "likely OA," with noted x-ray and OT received.  Shoulder x-ray revealed mild acromioclavicular joint degradation.  Private treatment records dated December 2021 noted the Veteran's complaint of neck pain and shoulder pain on each side, with the pain constantly present.  The Veteran reported in November 2022 that his neck and bilateral shoulder pain was intensifying.  In December 2022, he complained of severe "neck shoulders" pain, alongside low back and hips pain. 

Based on the foregoing, the evidence of record does not reflect that the Veteran's shoulders condition manifested in service or within one year of service.  Rather, post-service treatment records indicate the Veteran first complained of left shoulder pain in 2010, nearly 40 years after discharge.  Next, post-service treatment records note the Veteran's left shoulder pain complaints/treatment in 2010 resulted from an accident/injury, but they do not address the etiology of his bilateral shoulders pain complaints made many years later.  Moreover, apart from submitting a claim seeking service connection for shoulders disability, the Veteran has not indicated what event, disease, or injury in-service resulted in his current shoulders disability. As such, the second element of service connection set forth under Shedden, in-service incurrence or aggravation, has not been satisfied.

Further, the Veteran has not indicated that any medical provider has linked any complained of shoulder pain to his service.  In this regard, the Board acknowledges that the Veteran has not been afforded a VA examination in connection with his claim for service connection for a shoulder condition.  In accordance with the duty-to-assist provisions codified at 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(d) and by regulation found at 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(4), a medical opinion or examination is required if the information and evidence of record does not contain sufficiently competent medical evidence to decide the claim, but there is (1) competent evidence of a current disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability; and (2) evidence establishing that an event, injury, or disease occurred in service or establishing certain diseases manifesting during an applicable presumptive period for which the claimant qualifies; and (3) an indication that the disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability may be associated with the veteran's service or with another service-connected disability.  See McLendon, 20 Vet. App. at 79.  Because the Board finds that there is no competent evidence establishing an event, injury, or disease occurred in service relating to a shoulder condition, or that the Veteran's shoulder arthritis manifested to a compensable degree within a year following his separation from service, or that a link exists between his complained of shoulders pain and his military service, VA's duty to provide him with a medical examination in this case was not triggered.  As discussed above, while the Veteran has been diagnosed with a current disability, he has not asserted any event, injury, or disease resulted in his complained of shoulders pain.  The Veteran has also not indicated that any medical professional has attributed his complained of shoulders pain in any way to the Veteran's service.  Given this, the Board cannot conclude that there was any duty to provide the Veteran a VA medical examination.

Considering the evidence outlined above, the Board finds no basis upon which to conclude the Veteran has a current shoulders disability that is in any way attributable to service, as the competent and credible evidence of record fails to establish an in-service incurrence, or a link between any complained of shoulder pain and his service.  While the Veteran is competent to report symptomatology such as shoulder pain, as a lay person he does not have the education, training, and experience to diagnose or opine as to the etiology of his condition.  See Jandreau, 492 F.3d at 1376-77.

(continued on next page)

?

Based on the foregoing, the evidence weighs persuasively against the claim for service connection for shoulders disability.  The benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine is therefore not for application, and the claim must be denied.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Gilbert, 1 Vet. App. at 49.

 

 

B. D. WATSON

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	M. Picard

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.