Citation Nr: A25032222
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 250130-512630
DATE: April 8, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), major depressive disorder, alcohol use disorder, and cannabis use disorder, is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran had active service from September 1999 to August 2003.

This matter comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a January 2025 rating decision from a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ).

Thereafter, in January 2025, the Veteran filed a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) and elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the January 2025 decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. However, because the Board is remanding the claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

As shown above, the Board has recharacterized the Veteran's various claims of entitlement to service connection for depression, anxiety, mood swings, insomnia, anger management, panic attacks, and PTSD, to a claim of entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include PTSD, major depressive disorder, alcohol use disorder, and cannabis use disorder, based on the evidence of record. Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1, 5 (2009).

The Board notes the Veteran, through his representative, has waived the remaining time to modify his Notice of Disagreement and change Board dockets. See January 2025 argument; see also Williams v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 305 (2024). As such, the Board will proceed in its consideration of the instant matter.

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include PTSD, major depressive disorder, alcohol use disorder, and cannabis use disorder, is remanded.

The Veteran contends that his claimed acquired psychiatric disorder is due to his service as a surgical technician. Specifically, he contends that his claimed condition is due to "traumatic events while performing surgical technician duties during combat related surgeries, plastic reconstructive surgeries and neurosurgery" that led to "debilitating aftereffects such as traumatic memories and flashbacks resulting in night terrors, nightmares, insomnia, panic attacks, anxiety, mood swings and depression." See October 2022 correspondence; see also February 2023 VA examination. 

Preliminarily, the Veteran, through his representative, has indicated that he would like to waive consideration and correction of pre-decisional AOJ errors in fulfilling VA's duty-to-assist (DTA). See January 2025 argument. Citing to Janssen v. Principi, the Veteran's representative argues that the Veteran "can waive consideration of VA's DTA." 15 Vet. App. 370, 374 (2001). Notwithstanding, as the Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims, has more recently noted, the rights of a claimant and the duties of VA are distinct legal concepts, and "it does not necessarily follow that a claimant's voluntary relinquishment of a right categorically forbids VA's performance of a related but separately imposed duty. Clark v. McDonough, 35 Vet. App. 317, 321-2 n.2 (2022). Although the Board acknowledges the Veteran's desire to adjudicate his appeal based on the evidence of record, the Board finds that remand is necessary to correct pre-decisional duty-to-assist errors prior to adjudication. 

A review of the record reveals that the Veteran's service personnel and treatment records are incomplete. Although VA has noted it attempted to obtain the Veteran's service records from the VA Records Management Center, Health Artifact and Image Management Solution (HAIMS), and the National Personnel Records Center, there is no indication that VA attempted to obtain the Veteran's records from alternative sources. See February 2023 VA 21-3101 Request for Information; see also May 2023 notification letter. In this case, as the Veteran reported he was discharged following a repeat offense while he was assigned to the Naval School of Health Sciences (NSHS) in San Diego, which was also the site of the Veteran's reported in-service stressors, VA should have attempted to obtain the Veteran's service records from the Navy, as some of the Veteran's service records may also be maintained by Navy Personnel Command or may have been transferred to the Medical Education and Training Campus (METC) following closure of the (NSHS). As such, upon remand, VA should take steps to attempt to obtain the Veteran's service records from additional Navy sources, such as the Navy Discharge Review Board (NDRB) and Board of Correction of Naval Records (BCNR) or, if not available, to document such a determination. 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(c); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(3).

Additionally, upon review of the Veteran's VA treatment records, it appears there are outstanding VA and VA-authorized treatment records. Specifically, the Veteran's treatment records for his treatment at the Las Vegas VA Residential Recovery and Renewal Center (LVR3) do not appear to extend the entire span of his treatment stays in 2021, 2022 and 2023. In addition, the Veteran's VA treatment records show the Veteran has received VA-authorized treatment, including inpatient behavioral health treatment on multiple occasions prior to 2021 at various facilities such as Desert Hope, Desert Parkway, and West Care. Additionally, an August 2024 VA treatment record reflects the Veteran was authorized to undergo mental health care from Ohanapsych but no further records appear in the Veteran's claims file. Finally, it appears the Veteran obtained care at Tripler Army Medical Center (TAMC), for which records may appear in Joint Longitudinal Viewer (JLV) but do not appear in the Veteran's claims file. As such, upon remand, VA should associate the Veteran's outstanding VA and VA-authorized treatment records, including records available through JLV, with his claims file. 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(c)(1)(B); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(3).

Moreover, the Board notes that VA attempted to obtain a new examination for the Veteran's claimed condition. See January 2025 exam request. However, it appears the request was canceled as the Veteran did not appear for his examination. In addition, the Board notes that following the Veteran's report of treatment at Spring Valley Medical Center, VA attempted to obtain the Veteran's authorization to obtain those records but received no response from the Veteran. While the Board acknowledges the Veteran's mental health treatment at various points throughout the appeal period, it does not appear the Veteran was unable to attend his scheduled examination nor has he provided good cause. The Board emphasizes that the Veteran bears the burden to substantiate each element of his claim. Fagan v. Shinseki, 573 F.3d 1282, 1287 (Fed. Cir. 2009). Moreover, although the Board has noted that the Veteran's service records are incomplete, no presumption, either in favor of the Veteran or against VA arises when there are lost or missing service records. See Cromer v. Nicholson, 19 Vet. App. at 217-18 (2005). 

The matter is REMANDED for the following actions:

1. Attempt to obtain the Veteran's outstanding service personnel and treatment records from appropriate sources, such as the Navy Discharge Review Board (NDRB) and Board of Correction of Naval Records (BCNR) and associate them with the Veteran's claims file. In this regard, specific attention should be given to obtain the Veteran's records for the period from July 2001 until his separation. As the Veteran's records during his assignment at the Naval School of Health Sciences (NSHS) may have been transferred upon its closure, a specific request should be made for his NSHS records. Efforts to obtain these records must continue until it is determined that they do not exist or that further attempts to obtain them would be futile. Any non-existence or unavailability of the Veteran's service treatment records must be verified, and the Veteran and his representative must be duly notified. All actions must be documented and associated with the Veteran's claims file.

2. Associate the Veteran's outstanding VA and VA-authorized treatment records with his claims file, with attention to records of the Veteran's treatment from 2020 to 2024, include treatment at Las Vegas VA Residential Recovery and Renewal Center, Desert Hope, Desert Parkway, and West Care, Tripler Army Medical Center, and Ohanapsych, as well as any records available in JLV or a VA database. Document all searches and associate them with the Veteran's claims file.

 

 

L. CHU

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	D. Shorafa

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.