Citation Nr: A25032535
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240414-433023
DATE: April 8, 2025

ORDER

From April 21, 2022 to September 14, 2022, a 30 percent rating is granted for insomnia.

Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 30 percent for insomnia is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

For the entire appeal period, the Veteran's insomnia has been manifested by occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 

1. From April 21, 2022 to September 14, 2022, the criteria for a 30 percent rating for insomnia are met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.130, Diagnostic Code (DC) 9413.

2. The criteria for an initial rating in excess of 30 percent for insomnia are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.130, DC 9413.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Air Force from November 1981 to September 1986.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an October 2023 rating decision issued by an Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA).

In the April 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the October 2023 rating decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301.

1. From April 21, 2022 to September 14, 2022, a 30 percent rating is granted for insomnia.

2. Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 30 percent for insomnia is denied.

The Veteran asserts that his insomnia symptoms are more severe than as contemplated by the current assigned rating, and that he is entitled to a higher initial rating. As the Veteran has continuously pursued the claim since the initial award of service connection for insomnia, the current appeal period before the Board begins on April 21, 2022, the effective date of service connection.  See August 2022 rating decision; August 2022 VA Form 20-0995; December 2022 rating decision; January 2023 VA Form 20-0995; 38 C.F.R. § 3.2500(c).

Disability ratings are determined by applying the criteria set forth in VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities, which is based on the average impairment of earning capacity. Individual disabilities are assigned separate diagnostic codes. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1. The basis of disability ratings is the ability of the body as a whole, or of the psyche, or of a system or organ of the body, to function under the ordinary conditions of daily life, including employment. 38 C.F.R. § 4.10.

When there is a question as to which of two ratings shall be applied, the higher rating will be assigned if the disability more closely approximates the criteria required for that particular rating. Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7. When a reasonable doubt arises regarding the degree of a disability, that reasonable doubt will be resolved in favor of the Veteran. 38 C.F.R. § 4.3.

The Veteran's service-connected insomnia was initially rated at 10 percent disabling by analogy to DC 9413 (anxiety disorder), effective April 21, 2022. This rating was increased to 30 percent, effective September 14, 2022.

The AOJ's choice to rate the Veteran's insomnia by analogy to anxiety disorder is not erroneous, as all mental disorders are rated under the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders.  Under the General Rating Formula, a 30 percent evaluation is warranted if the evidence establishes there is occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks (although generally functioning satisfactorily, with routine behavior, self-care, and normal conversation) due to such symptoms as depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks (weekly or less often), chronic sleep impairment, or mild memory loss (such as forgetting names, directions, or recent events). 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, DC 9413.

A 50 percent evaluation is warranted if the evidence establishes there is occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to such symptoms as: flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short- and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships. Id.

A 70 percent evaluation is warranted if the evidence establishes there is occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a worklike setting); and/or inability to establish and maintain effective relationships. Id.

A 100 percent rating (total occupational and social impairment) is warranted due to symptoms such as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name. Id.

When determining the appropriate disability evaluation to assign, the Board's primary consideration is the Veteran's symptoms, but it must also make findings as to how those symptoms impact a Veteran's occupational and social impairment. Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112 (Fed. Cir. 2013). The use of the term "such as" in the rating criteria demonstrates that the symptoms after that phrase are not intended to constitute an exhaustive list, but rather are to serve as examples of the type and degree of the symptoms, or their effects, that would justify a particular rating. Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436 (2002). Thus, the Board need not find the presence of all, most, or even some, of the enumerated symptoms to award a specific rating. Id at 442. Nevertheless, all ratings in the general rating formula are also associated with objectively observable symptomatology and the plain language of the regulation makes it clear that the Veteran's impairment must be "due to" those symptoms; a Veteran may only qualify for a given disability rating by demonstrating the particular symptoms associated with that percentage, or others of similar severity, frequency, and duration. Vazquez-Claudio, 713 F.3d at 118. 

When it is not possible to separate the effects of a service-connected disability and a non-service-connected disability, reasonable doubt must be resolved in the appellant's favor and the symptoms in question must be attributed to the service-connected disability. Mittleider v. West, 11 Vet. App. 181 (1998).

Upon review of the totality of the record, the Board finds that a 30 percent rating is warranted from April 21, 2022 to September 14, 2022, and a rating in excess of 30 percent is not warranted for the Veteran's insomnia at any point during the appeal period. Instead, the record reflects that the disability has been manifested by occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks due to symptoms such as depression, anxiety, chronic sleep impairment, and mild memory loss. 

In an April 2022 lay statement, the Veteran reported that he is withdrawn, does not enjoy hobbies the way he used to, that he feels sad and unmotivated, and that his sleep is compromised.  He reports frustration and irritability, and occasional family issues.  See April 2022 VA form 21-4138.

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in May 2022 to determine the nature and etiology of his insomnia. The examiner concluded that the Veteran's insomnia resulted in occupational and social impairment due to mild or transient symptoms which decrease work efficiency and ability to perform occupational tasks only during periods of significant stress.  The only endorsed symptom at that time was chronic sleep impairment; however, the examiner noted he was down and unmotivated and was becoming more irritable with others. The Veteran was fully oriented and dressed appropriately at his VA examinations, affect was appropriate, though process was logical and organized, with no delusional thought content and no evidence of responding to internal stimuli.  Speech and motor activity was normal, and memory, attention, and concentration was intact.

The Veteran was afforded another VA examination in September 2022. The examiner providing a similar opinion, concluded that the Veteran's insomnia resulted in occupational and social impairment due to mild or transient symptoms which decrease work efficiency and ability to perform occupational tasks only during periods of significant stress. The only endorsed symptom at that time was chronic sleep impairment. The Veteran was pleasant and cooperative during the clinical interview, mood and affect were within normal limits, as was appearance, and no suicidal plan or intent was reported.

In a January 2023 lay statement, the Veteran reported difficultly focusing at work, difficulty remembering things like completing tasks, chronic sleep impairment, and isolative behaviors.  See January 2023 VA Form 21-4138.

The Veteran was afforded his most recent VA examination in May 2023. The examiner concluded that the Veteran's insomnia resulted in occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks.  The examiner endorsed symptoms of depressed mood, anxiety, chronic sleep impairment, and mild memory loss. The Veteran presented as casually dressed and appropriately groomed, he was alert and fully oriented, and his speech was logical and coherent with no evidence of thought disorganization. While he displayed somewhat flat affect and few spontaneous verbalizations, he presented in no acute emotional distress.  

In terms of social impairment, the Veteran has reported that he has two sons, with whom he maintains good relationships, lives with his nephew, is close with his brother and sister, and has been in a romantic relationship for over five years, noting that they "get along well but she has expressed concern about his irritability and moodiness." The Veteran's hobbies include group activities such as playing softball. See May 2022 VA examination. The Veteran also reports that he is friendly with his co-workers whom he occasionally sees outside of work. See September 2022 VA examination. Most recently, the Veteran reports that he now lives with his romantic partner, and that he still maintains good relationships with his two sons and family members. See May 2023 VA examination. 

In terms of occupational impairment, the Veteran has been gainfully employed since his discharge from service. He worked as a correctional officer for six years, at a shipyard, and at a paper mill as a control room operator for most of the past twenty-five years. The Veteran reported no complaints about his job performance. See May 2022 VA examination. Most recently, the Veteran reported that his work evaluations ranged from average to excellent and that he was promoted two years ago. The Veteran denied calling out of work due to poor sleep, or any negative evaluations or counseling related to his performance. See May 2023 VA examination. 

The Board notes that the Ve1teran has submitted Independent Mental Health VA Rating Evaluations from a certified physician assistant C.M.B., which indicated that the Veteran's insomnia symptoms warrant a higher disability rating. In an August 2022 opinion, the physician noted review of the Veteran's April 2022 lay statement opined that the Veteran's insomnia warrants a 50 percent disability rating, noting additional symptoms such as disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, impaired impulse control, reduced activity, decreased participation in physical/social activities, social withdrawal, irritability, fatigue, less interest in sex, and relationship problems. See August 2022 Independent Mental Health VA Rating Evaluation. In a January 2023 opinion, the same physician assistant, C.M.B., noted review of the Veteran's January 2023 lay statement and opined that the Veteran's insomnia warrants a 70 percent disability rating, noting further additional symptoms of impairment of short and long term memory (retention of only highly learned material), difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, and cognitive impairment. See January 2023 Independent Mental Health VA Rating Evaluation.

The Board finds the physician assistant's opinion as to the severity of the Veteran's insomnia to be of little probative value for the following reasons. First, the opinions were rendered via a review of two lay statements regarding his insomnia symptoms, with no indication that the physician assistant reviewed the Veteran's claims file or any other pertinent evidence, including the VA examination reports showing much less severe symptomatology. While failure to review the claims file is not fatal to an opinion, consideration of the relevant history is a factor in assessing the probative value of medical opinions. Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008). Second, the physician assistant's opinions were not based on any sort of mental status examination, as opposed to the VA examiners, who conducted thorough examinations of the Veteran.  Third, in basing his opinion solely on isolated lay statements by the Veteran, the physician assistant reaches conclusions that contrast with the other competent evidence of record. For example, the physician opines that the Veteran has difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, when no VA examiner has reached that conclusion, and the record reflects that the Veteran expressly maintains multiple effective work and social relationships.  Thus, the opinion of the physician assistant is less probative than that of the VA examiners as to the Veteran's psychiatric symptoms.  Moreover, while the Veteran is competent to report his psychiatric symptoms such as anxiety, depression, and difficulty sleeping, he is not competent to opine on how those symptoms impact his psychiatric functioning, as this type of determination requires medical expertise.

On review, the Board finds that an initial rating in excess of 30 percent is not warranted. Here, the evidence does not reflect any symptoms of a flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; difficulty in understanding complex commands; long-term memory issues; impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; difficulties establishing and maintaining relationships; or any other symptom of similar severity, frequency, and duration.  Moreover, the evidence does not reflect any symptoms such as suicidal ideation, obsessional rituals, impaired impulse control, spatial disorientation, neglect of personal appearance and hygiene, difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances, delusions, hallucinations, grossly inappropriate behavior, danger of hurting self or others, inability to perform activities of daily living, or any other symptoms of similar severity, frequency, and duration.

Overall, the Veteran's psychiatric symptoms do not equate in severity, frequency, or duration to occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity, nor have the symptoms demonstrated a level of severity in symptomatology that more nearly approximates the symptoms listed for a 50 percent rating or higher. Instead, the Veteran's identified insomnia symptoms are specifically contemplated in the currently assigned 30 percent disability rating. In this regard, while the Board acknowledges the presence of flattened affect in May 2023, this was only one of the examples listed in the criteria for a 50 percent rating; at that time, the Veteran also demonstrated depressed mood, anxiety, chronic sleep impairment, and mild memory loss.  As the majority of his symptoms align with a 30 percent rating, no higher rating is warranted.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7.

As such, the Board finds the severity of the Veteran's insomnia does not warrant a higher disability rating under DC 9413 and the claim must be denied. As noted above, all mental health disorders are rated under the General Rating Formula, so no other DCs will be addressed herein. 

Finally, the Board notes that the Veteran has asserted he has sexual dysfunction secondary to his insomnia.  However, as the record before the Board is absent any evidence indicating that the Veteran's erectile dysfunction and his insomnia had a causal connection other than the Veteran's own lay assertions, VA's duty to obtain a medical opinion in this regard is not triggered.  See Waters v. Shinseki, 601 F.3d 1274, 1276-77 (2010) (VA has no duty to provide an examination when there is no competent evidence of a nexus between a current disability and an in-service injury, disease, or event).

The Board has considered the benefit of the doubt doctrine. However, as the evidence of record weighs persuasively against the claim, it is not for application. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

REASONS FOR REMAND

3. Entitlement to service connection for GERD is remanded.

The Veteran asserts that his GERD is secondary to his service-connected reactive airway disease with obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) or insomnia.

The Veteran is currently service connected for reactive airway disease with OSA and insomnia. As to a current disability, the AOJ favorably found that the Veteran is diagnosed with GERD, and this finding is not clearly and unmistakably erroneous. See January 2022 C&P Exam. Accordingly, a current disability and a primary disability for secondary service connection are demonstrated, and the crux of this appeal centers on whether there is a relationship, or nexus, between the Veteran's GERD and his service-connected reactive airway disease with OSA and insomnia. 

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in January 2022 to determine the nature and etiology of his GERD. The examiner concluded that the Veteran's GERD was less likely than not proximately due to or the result of the Veteran's service-connected conditions. The examiner opined that "the conditions of GERD and reactive airway disease with obstructive sleep apnea are not medically related. The GERD is a separate entity entirely from the reactive airway disease with obstructive sleep apnea and unrelated to it. A thorough review of medical literature failed to demonstrate a causal relationship."

The Veteran was afforded another VA examination in September 2023 to determine the nature and etiology of his GERD. The examiner concluded that the Veteran's GERD was less likely than not aggravated beyond its natural progression by his service-connected conditions.  

The Board finds the January 2022 and September 2023 VA medical examiners' opinions to be inadequate. The January 2022 examiner considered the causation prong of a secondary service connection claim, but did not provide an opinion on aggravation. A medical opinion that addresses only causation and not aggravation is inadequate to adjudicate a claim for service connection on a secondary theory of entitlement based on aggravation. El-Amin v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 136, 140 (2013). Additionally, the September 2023 examiner employs the wrong aggravation standard when discussing the Veteran's GERD. The examiner stated that there was no evidence to "establish baseline of GERD condition during service. . . There is no available objective documentation of baseline symptoms during service." However, the correct analysis should focus on the baseline level of the Veteran's GERD prior to aggravation by his service-connected disabilities, regardless of whether the Veteran's GERD had its onset during service. The examiner also states that "no nexus relationship is established in literature between GERD and insomnia," but her discussion of medical literature in the rationale seems to contradict her conclusion. The examiner notes that "there is a significant association between disturbed sleep and GERD, and this may be bidirectional. This means that either condition may induce symptomatic changes in the other." The Board notes that aggravation means any incremental increase in disability in non-service-connected disabilities (i.e., any additional impairment of earning capacity) resulting from service-connected conditions, which seemingly could be encompassed by the "symptomatic changes" discussed by the examiner.

When VA undertakes to provide an exam, it must be adequate to evaluate the Veteran's condition. Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007). Therefore, remand is required to correct this pre-decisional duty to assist error via an addendum opinion.

The Board notes that, in support of his claim, the Veteran has submitted a private opinion from a physician P.D., APRN, that his GERD is as least as likely as not secondary to, related to, and/or aggravated by his service-connected conditions, to include OSA. The nurse opines that "recent studies have reported that OSA and symptomatic GERD are closely related," and that "among patients with frequent heartburn, the majority reported difficulties initiating sleep or maintaining sleep through the night." The Board notes that this opinion was conducted via a records review, rather than an in-person examination.  Here, the examiner does not adequately discuss the facts or circumstances specific to the Veteran, notably his history of OSA treatment or the onset of his GERD symptoms, instead relying on general medical articles. There is no indication that the physician reviewed the Veteran's claims file or any pertinent evidence. The Board notes that a medical opinion is inadequate where the rationale is based solely on general articles and does not discuss any facts pertaining to the veteran's claimed disability or individual circumstances. Bailey v. O'Rourke, 30 Vet. App. 54, 60 (2018). Further, the nurse's rationale cites to several medical studies that rely on the co-morbidity of GERD and sleep disorders, rather than any proximate causation or aggravation. The Board notes that, even in providing a rationale based on co-morbidity, the medical literature cited by the physician is contradictory. Notably, the articles state: "(in studying a connection between GERD and OSA) OSA was not a likely a causative factor [for GERD]"; "these data do not establish a causal role for sleep disturbances in GERD or vice versa"; "the relationship between OSA and GERD is not clear"; and "(regarding a causal link between GERD and sleep disturbance) few studies have been conducted and these have shown inconsistent results." Accordingly, the Board finds this opinion to be inadequate, and remand is necessary.  

This issue is REMANDED for the following action:

Refer the claims file to an examiner for preparation of an addendum opinion as to the nature and etiology of the Veteran's GERD. No further examination of the Veteran is necessary unless the examiner deems otherwise.

Following review of the claims file, the examiner should pine as to whether it is as least as likely as not (approximately 50 percent probability or nearly 50 percent probability) that the Veteran's GERD:

(a)	is caused by his service-connected reactive airway disease with obstructive sleep apnea or insomnia; or

(b)	has been aggravated (worsened) by his service-connected reactive airway disease with obstructive sleep apnea or insomnia.

A complete rationale for the examiner's opinion should be provided, citing to specific evidence of record, as necessary. If the examiner cannot provide an opinion without resort to speculation, the examiner must state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training).

If the inability to provide an opinion without resorting to speculation is due to a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), the AOJ should develop the claim to the extent it is necessary to cure any such deficiency. If the inability to provide an opinion is due to the examiner's lack of requisite knowledge or training, then the AOJ should obtain an opinion from a medical professional who has the knowledge and training needed to render such an opinion.

 

 

S. BUSH

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Cooper, Jacob A.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.