Citation Nr: A25032268
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 230505-348150
DATE: April 8, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for chronic pain syndrome, to include fibromyalgia and rheumatoid arthritis, is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from January 2017 to March 2018.

This matter comes on appeal from a May 2022 rating decision.  In the May 2023 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the May 2022 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

The Board acknowledges that the Veteran submitted additional evidence with her Notice of Disagreement.  The Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) has held that if a Veteran submits evidence with a VA Form 10182 but selects the Direct Review docket, VA is required to clarify with that Veteran that they intended to proceed with direct review by the Board.  Edwards v. McDonough, 36 Vet. App. 56 (2023).  In January 2025, the Board notified the Veteran if she wanted the Board to consider any additional evidence, she must change the Board appeal request by switching AMA dockets (to Evidence Submission or Hearing).  To date, the Board has not received a response from the Veteran.  

However, because the Board is remanding the claim herein, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of this claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).  The Board acknowledges that in August 2022, the SFC Heath Robinson Honoring Our PACT Act, Pub. L. 117-168, 136 Stat. 1759 ("PACT Act")) was passed.  Under the PACT Act, VA is required to provide a disability examination and medical nexus opinion when there is evidence of a disability and participation in a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA), but the evidence is not sufficient to establish service connection for the disability.  However, developing a claim under the PACT Act, to include obtaining a TERA opinion, is a function of VA's duty to assist, and under the AMA, the Board can only remand for pre-decisional duty to assist errors.  As enactment of the PACT Act was not pre-decisional in this case, the Board cannot remand for development under the PACT Act, to include obtaining a TERA opinion.

Entitlement to service connection for chronic pain syndrome, to include fibromyalgia, is remanded.

The Veteran asserts that her chronic pain symptoms began during service.  Service treatment records document reports of unspecified pain.  Post service treatment records beginning in June 2018 show that the Veteran continued to report pain.  Importantly, a July 2019 private treatment record indicated that the Veteran's chronic pain was related to fibromyalgia.  Recently, in her Notice of Disagreement, the Veteran stated that she has been diagnosed with rheumatoid arthritis.  

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in November 2021.  The examiner diagnosed osteoarthritis of the knees and cervical spine degenerative disc disease.  These disorders were previously denied by the AOJ in another rating decision that was not appealed to the Board.  Nevertheless, the examiner failed to explicitly address whether the Veteran suffered from a disability manifested by chronic pain especially given the post service treatment record indicating a diagnosis of fibromyalgia.  As such, this examination is inadequate for appellate review.  Thus, a remand is necessary to correct this pre-decisional duty to assist error and afford the Veteran with another VA examination with opinion.  The Board finds that an examination is necessary in order to obtain a complete medical history from the Veteran.  

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's claimed chronic joint pain.  The examiner must review the entire claims file.  Based on this review of the record and examination of the Veteran, the examiner must determine whether the Veteran has a chronic disorder manifested by joint pain, to include fibromyalgia or any other claimed disorder.  If the examiner finds that the Veteran does suffer from a chronic pain disorder, opine whether it at least as likely as not began during or is etiologically related to the Veteran's active-duty service, to include the reports of chronic pain. 

The examiner must provide a detailed rationale considering the Veteran's service treatment records and post-service treatment records documenting reports of pain.  The examiner must consider and discuss the Veteran's lay statements regarding the onset and continuity of symptoms.

 

 

L. M. BARNARD

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	J.N. Moats, Counsel 

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.