Citation Nr: A25032280
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240701-452004
DATE: April 8, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a left knee disorder, claimed as residuals of left knee strain is remanded. 

Entitlement to an initial compensable rating for service connected renal cell carcinoma, status post partial nephrectomy, is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran had active duty service in the United States Army from April 1974 to March 1990.

The rating decisions on appeal were issued in November 2023 (renal cell carcinoma) and June 2024 (left knee); therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.  

In October 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: HLR, and requested review of an October 2022 rating decision denying service connection for left knee strain, as well as an October 2023 rating decision awarding service connection for renal cell carcinoma and right partial nephrectomy post operative scar, each with noncompensable ratings.  In November 2023, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the November 2023 HLR decision on appeal, which considered the evidence of record at the time of the prior October 2023 decisions and, in pertinent part, denied an initial compensable rating for renal cell carcinoma status post nephrectomy.  At that time, the Higher-Level Reviewer also determined that there had been a duty to assist error with respect to the Veteran's left knee claim and transferred the claim to the Supplemental Claim decision review option for additional development.

In June 2024, AOJ issued the supplemental claim decision on appeal with respect to the left knee claim, which found that new and relevant evidence had been received and denied the claim based on the evidence of record at the time of that decision.  

In the July 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. This Notice of Disagreement indicated the issues on appeal were entitlement to a compensable initial rating for renal cell carcinoma and service connection for left knee sprain.  Although the Veteran indicated that these issues were most recently addressed in the November 2023 HLR decision, the Board observes entitlement to service connection for left knee sprain was addressed in the June 2024 supplemental decision.  As the June 2024 supplemental decision was issued within one year prior to the submission on the July 2024 Notice of Disagreement, the Board has interpreted the Notice of Disagreement as appealing both the June 2024 supplemental decision denying entitlement to service connection for left knee strain and the November 2023 HLR rating decision assigning a noncompensable initial rating for service connected renal cell carcinoma. 

In the July 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the June 2024 supplemental decision, and the October 2023 rating decision, which was subsequently subjected to HLR. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. However, because the Board is remanding the claims, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

The Board acknowledges that, generally, it may not decide an appeal before the deadline for requesting an AMA docket switch has elapsed. 38 C.F.R. § 20.202 (c)(2) allows claimants to switch AMA dockets by completing and submitting a new Notice of Disagreement (NOD) within one year from the date the AOJ mails notice of the decision on appeal, or 60 days from when the Board receives the NOD, whichever is later; unless a claimant has already submitted evidence or testimony as described in 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.302 and 20.303, or the appellant or their representative has requested a waiver of the right to request to switch dockets during this timeframe. See Williams v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 305 (June 21, 2024). While no waiver of the right to request to switch dockets has been received, the Board finds that a docket switch letter pursuant to Williams is not required as a remand is necessary to correct duty to assist errors that occurred prior to the rating decisions on appeal and the Veteran will have an opportunity to submit additional evidence on remand. Thus, the Board finds no prejudice in proceeding with a remand at this time as such is not considered a final adjudication of the issues on appeal.

Under the?AMA, the Board may only?remand?an issue for the correction of (1) duty to assist errors occurring prior to the date of the AOJ decision on appeal (i.e., pre-decisional duty to assist errors) and (2) AOJ errors in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty, if correction of such error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the appellant's claim. See?38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a). 

Here the Board finds remand is warranted to correct duty to assist errors that occurred prior to the rating decision on appeal. 

1. Entitlement to service connection for a left knee disorder, claimed as residuals of left knee strain.

The Veteran contends he acquired a left knee disorder as a result of active duty service.  Specifically, the Veteran describes progressive pain, popping, weakness and instability of the left knee, beginning in 1980, to which he attributes to wearing boots, carrying heavy rucksacks, and jumping in and out of Bradley infantry fighting vehicles during active service.  December 2023 Knee Conditions Disability Benefits Questionnaire (DBQ). Unfortunately, a remand is necessary before the Board may address the merits of the Veteran's claim.

Initially, the Board observes that a review of the VA Medical Center (VAMC) treatment records that have been associated with the claims file reflects numerous relevant treatment records received from Community Care program and other third-party providers, which have been received by the VA and scanned into "VistA Imaging" but are not associated with the claims file. See VA treatment records received October 31, 2022, and June 3, 2024.  The VAMC records also reflect that the Veteran was approved through the Community Care program for treatment with a private provider (Dr. M.S.L.) and physical therapy at Rollins Brook Community Hospital as early as 2018.  See, e.g., VA treatment records received October 31, 2022, date of service March 29, 2018.

The Board notes that these entries appear to refer to treatment for the Veteran's leg and/or knee.  VA's duty to assist requires it to make as many requests as necessary to secure relevant federal records, to include records from non-VA facilities providing examination or treatment at VA expense, such as through the Community Care program. VA may halt efforts to secure such records only if it concludes that the records do not exist or that further efforts to secure the records would be futile. See?38?U.S.C. §?5103A?(c)(2); 38?C.F.R. §?3.159?(c)(2). As the record does not indicate that the VA has met its duty here, on remand, additional efforts must be taken to obtain the Veteran's complete Community Care records, and records received by the VA and scanned into VistA Imaging, and to associate them with the claims file, or provide proper notification to the Veteran that additional records are not available.

Remand is also necessary for the AOJ to assist the Veteran in obtaining private treatment records, including the records of a private provider for his knee as early as 2015. VA treatment records received October 31, 2022, DOS September 29, 2015.  VA's duty to assist includes making reasonable efforts to obtain relevant private medical records. See 38 U.S.C. § 5103A; 38 C.F.R. § 3.159 (c)(1). 

Lastly, the Board observes that once the VA provides a veteran with an examination in a service connection claim, the examination must be adequate. Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007). An opinion based upon an inaccurate factual premise has no probative value.  See Reonal v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 458, 460-461 (1993); Swann v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 229, 232 (1993). Moreover, VA has a duty to address all arguments put forth by a claimant and/or theories under which entitlement to benefits sought may be awarded.  See Szemraj v. Principi, 357 F.3d 1370, 1371 (Fed. Cir. 2004); Roberson v. Principi, 251 F.3d 1378, 1384 (Fed. Cir. 2001) (explaining that the Board must consider all potential theories of entitlement raised by the evidence.); Buckley v. West, 12 Vet. App. 76, 83 (1998) (noting that where the agency of original jurisdiction and the Board have failed to address an argument reasonably raised by a claimant in support of a claim over which the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (CAVC) has jurisdiction, the CAVC will remand the claim directing the Board to address the argument). 

The Veteran underwent a VA-contracted examination in December 2023.  The examining clinician provided a diagnosis of knee strain from February 1980 and degenerative arthritis from October 2022.  December 2023 Knee and Lower Leg Conditions DBQ.  The examining clinician initially argued that the February 1980 knee strain was not a chronic issue, based on the lack of further treatment noted in the records. In an addendum opinion, the clinician specifically listed the Veteran's job duties during service as well as the February 1980 left knee strain, but argued the November 1982 separation examination and the Veteran's report of medical history were silent as to any chronic knee issues.  The Board finds this rationale is based on inaccurate premises, namely that the left knee strain noted in the service treatment records (STR) occurred in February 1980, and the November 1982 physical was a "separation examination."  In contrast to the clinician's description of the evidence, a thorough review of the STR reveals the November 1982 physical was a periodic examination, after which the Veteran continued to serve on active duty until 1990, and that the Veteran's report of knee pain "for one month" with evidence of tenderness and crepitus was noted in a February 1983 treatment record.  STR received March 29, 1990, DOS February 16, 1983.  As such, the Board finds the clinician's December 2023 and May 2024 opinions to be insufficient to address the Veteran's contentions of progressive pain, popping, weakness and instability of the left knee since such time.  Moreover, to the extent the clinician did not have the benefit of reviewing the missing records of the community care and private providers and relies on the absence of post-service treatment to support a negative nexus between the Veteran's active service and his current left knee disorder, the resulting opinions are not probative evidence.  Thus, remand is warranted for additional development and a new medical opinion.

2. Entitlement to an initial compensable rating for service-connected renal cell carcinoma, status post partial nephrectomy.

The Veteran contends that he is entitled to an initial compensable evaluation for his service-connected renal cell carcinoma based on the severity of his symptoms, which include voiding dysfunction. July 2024 VA Form 10182; October 2023 VA Form 20-0996; October 2023 HLR - Informal Conference.

The Veteran is currently assessed with a noncompensable (zero) percent rating for service connected renal cell carcinoma under Diagnostic Code 7528, malignant neoplasms of the genitourinary system.  October 2023 Rating Decision - Codesheet.

The Veteran underwent a VA-contracted examination in October 2023.  October 2023 Kidney Conditions (nephology) DBQ.  The clinician noted the Veteran suffered from renal cell carcinoma, status post partial nephrectomy, in April 2007, and was currently in remission. The clinician specifically noted that the Veteran did not have renal dysfunction, uretal calculi (urolithiasis), did not have a history of recurrent symptomatic urinary tract or kidney infections. The Veteran was noted to have a malignant neoplasm or metastases that was in remission for which he underwent partial removal of the right kidney. The Veteran was not noted to have any residual conditions or complications due to the neoplasm (including metastases) or its treatment, or any other pertinent physical findings, complications, conditions, signs, or symptoms related to the condition. BUN was noted to be normal and GFR was noted to be greater than 90. The Veteran's partial nephrectomy was noted to have resulted in permanent work restrictions precluding his ability to perform any heavy lifting or strenuous activity which could possibly injure his remaining kidney, including lifting, pulling, pushing, or potential external damaging (jarring, bumping, or bouncing). 

Nevertheless, the Board observes that the October 2023 examining clinician did not specifically address whether the Veteran had residual voiding dysfunction as a result of his service-connected renal cell carcinoma, status post partial nephrectomy. Diagnostic Code 7528 requires malignant neoplasms of the genitourinary system, when there has been no local reoccurrence or metastasis, to be rated based on the residuals of either voiding dysfunction or renal dysfunction, whichever is predominant.  While the October 2023 examining clinician provided information to determine the nature and severity of any renal dysfunction, no such opinion was provided with respect to voiding dysfunction.  See Forshey v. Principi, 284 F.3d 1335, 1358 (Fed. Cir. 2002) (en banc) (cautioning that negative evidence, meaning actual evidence weighing against a party, must not be equated with the absence of substantive evidence). 

The failure to specifically address the nature and severity of any voiding dysfunction constitutes a predecisional duty to assist error. Thus, an examination and opinion specifically addressing whether the Veteran has a voiding dysfunction related to the renal cell carcinoma status post partial nephrectomy, is required.

The matters are REMANDED for the following actions:

1. Attempt to obtain the Veteran's?Community Care?Program treatment records that have been received by the VA and scanned into VistA imaging. 

Arrange for these records to be associated with the claims file and made viewable in VBMS and/or added as separate files. VA may halt efforts to secure such records only if it concludes that the records do not exist or that further efforts to secure the records would be futile. See 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(c)(2); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(2). 

The Board reminds the AOJ that it does not have access to VistA Imaging. 

Provide notification as required by 38 C.F.R. § 3.159 if any such records are unavailable and inform the Veteran and his representative to afford the Veteran an opportunity to submit any copies in his possession. 

2. Ask the Veteran to complete a VA Form 21-4142 for the private care provider with whom he sought medical treatment beginning in September 2015.  See VA treatment records received October 31, 2022, DOS September 29, 2015.  Make two requests for the authorized records, unless it is clear after the first request that a second request would be futile.

3. Thereafter, forward the record and a copy of this Remand to the VA examiner who provided the December 2023 medical opinion, or, if that examiner is unavailable, to another equally qualified clinician, for completion of an addendum medical opinion to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's left knee disorder. If the clinician determines that a new examination is necessary to provide the requested opinion, such examination should be scheduled. The clinician should specifically address the following:

Whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the left knee disorder onset in service or is otherwise related to service. 

The clinician must specifically address the February 1983 treatment record noting left knee pain for one month, with tenderness and crepitus on examination, as well as the Veteran's report of progressive and continuing left knee symptoms including pain, weakness, and instability, he attributes to wearing boots, carrying heavy rucksacks, and jumping in and out of Bradley infantry fighting vehicles. 

4. Forward the record and a copy of this Remand to the VA examiner who provided the October 2023 medical opinion, or, if that examiner is unavailable, to another equally qualified clinician, for completion of an addendum medical opinion to determine the current symptoms, level of severity, and functional impairment associated Veteran's residuals of renal cell carcinoma, status post nephrectomy.  If the clinician determines that a new examination is necessary to provide the requested opinion, such examination should be scheduled.

All pertinent symptomatology and findings must be reported in detail in accordance with DC 7500, removal of one kidney, DC 7528, malignant neoplasms of the genitourinary system, and the criteria for voiding and renal dysfunction under 38 C.F.R. § 4.115a. In particular, the examiner should address whether the Veteran has voiding dysfunction due to status post partial nephrectomy associated with renal cell carcinoma.

A complete rationale should accompany any opinion provided.

 

Tiffany Dawson

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Stamm, Haley S.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.