Citation Nr: A25032476
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 231021-386687
DATE: April 8, 2025

REMANDED

The claim for a waiver of recovery of an overpayment of service-connected benefits in the amount of $5,000.00 (US dollars) is remanded.  

REASONS FOR REMAND

The appellant had active service in the United States Marine Corps from July 2007 to July 2011.  

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals, hereinafter the Board, on appeal from a September 2023 action by the Debt Management Center, of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA), located in St. Paul, Minnesota.  

The record reveals that the VA Debt Management Center sent a letter to the appellant informing him that the amount that he had been receiving for compensation for his service-connected disorders had been miscalculated.  Because of the miscalculation, the appellant was overpaid $5000.00 (US dollars) and that he would be responsible of repaying the amount until the total debt was recouped by VA.  The letter further informed the appellant that if he disagreed with the debt or the amount of the debt, he could dispute it or he could request a waiver of the overpayment.  

Subsequent to the receipt of the September 2023 letter, the appellant submitted a financial status report that listed the reason for the form was for his waiver request.  The appellant further proffered a written statement in which he averred that the repayment of the debt would create a hardship.  Hence, he asked that a waiver be granted.  

A notice of disagreement was submitted by the appellant.  On the notice, the appellant indicated that he was appealing a decision from July 2023 and September 2023.  It is unclear from the electronic file as to whether a determination was made by the AOJ as to whether the debt was properly created and if the Veteran was at fault for creating the debt.  

Because the Veteran has challenged the proper creation of the debt, further appellate review by the Board with regard to the appellant's waiver claim must be deferred pending formal adjudication of his challenge to the validity of the debt.  Schaper v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 430, 437 (1991) ("when a veteran raises the validity of the debt as part of a waiver application . . . it is arbitrary and capricious and an abuse of discretion to adjudicate the waiver application without first deciding the veteran's challenge to the lawfulness of the debt asserted against him or her"); VAOPGCPREC 6-98 (July 24, 1998) (holding that when a veteran challenges the validity of the debt and seeks waiver of the debt, the [RO] must first fully review the debt's validity and, if the office believes the debt to be valid, prepare a written decision fully justifying the validity of the debt before referring the waiver request to the Committee on Waivers and Compromises).  A debtor may dispute the amount or existence of a debt, which is a right that may be exercised separately from a request for waiver or at the same time.  38 C.F.R. § 1.911(c)(1).  Resolution of the creation issue should precede consideration of the waiver issue.

As such, the claim should be remanded to the AOJ for the accomplishment of the following actions:

1.  Readjudicate the appellant's request for waiver of recovery of the overpayment of compensation benefits - in the amount calculated pursuant to the above-described actions - with express consideration of the provisions of 38 C.F.R. §§ 1.962, 1.963, 1.963(a), and 1.965(a), and each element of the of equity and good conscience standard.  In the determination, the Committee should specifically discuss if the appellant received all of the monies negotiated during the period of question and whether the appellant was unjustly enriched for the whole period in question.  If the claim continues to be denied, the AOJ should provide to the appellant and his representative with a copy of the determination.  

The appellant is notified that under the modernized appeal system, remands do not automatically return to the Board for additional adjudication.  Should the AOJ deny the claim in whole or in part after the AOJ has further developed the claim, and the appellant wishes to continue his appeal before the Board, he should file an appropriate notice of disagreement (NOD) (VA Form 10182) within the applicable appeal period after the AOJ's readjudication of the claim.

 

 

MATTHEW W. BLACKWELDER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Patrick J. Costello

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.