Citation Nr: A25032808
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 250214-517149
DATE: April 9, 2025

ORDER

An initial compensable rating prior to January 24, 2022, for service-connected migraine including migraine variants, is denied.

An initial 50 percent rating from January 24, 2022, for service-connected migraine including migraine variants, is granted.  

FINDING OF FACT

For the appeal period prior to January 24, 2022, the Veteran experienced migraines with less frequent attacks, which did not more nearly approximate characteristic prostrating attacks averaging one in 2 months over the last several months; from January 24, 2022, the Veteran experienced migraines with very frequent completely prostrating and prolonged attacks productive of severe economic inadaptability.    

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for an initial compensable rating prior to January 24, 2022, for service-connected migraine including migraine variants, have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.124a, Diagnostic Code (Code) 8100.  

2.  The criteria for an initial 50 percent rating from January 24, 2022, for service-connected migraine including migraine variants, have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.124a, Code 8100.  

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSIONS

The appellant is a Veteran who served on active duty from October 1969 to October 1971.  This case comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a January 2025 rating decision of a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO), which is an agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ); the RO decision denied an earlier effective date for a 50 percent rating for the Veteran's service-connected migraine including migraine variants.  

By way of background, a December 2021 Board decision granted service connection for migraine headaches, and a December 2021 RO rating decision implemented that decision and assigned a noncompensable rating effective August 10, 2020.  Thereafter, the Veteran continuously pursued a claim for a higher rating from the earliest possible date.  Eventually, an August 2024 RO rating decision granted a 50 percent rating for the migraines effective June 9, 2024 (the date of a VA examination), and the Veteran continued to pursue a claim for a higher rating, specifically the maximum 50 percent rating, since August 10, 2020.    

In the February 2025 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement [NOD]), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Thus, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the January 2025 AOJ decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.  (The record does not show that any pertinent evidence has been received since the January 2025 rating decision.)  

On the February 2025 VA Form 10182, the Veteran waived any additional time in which to modify (switch) his chosen Board docket, e.g., from his selected Direct Review docket to either the Evidence Submission docket or the Hearing docket.  See 38 C.F.R. § 20.202(c); Williams v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 305 (2024).  As such, the Board will proceed to consider his appeal.  

Entitlement to an initial compensable rating prior to June 9, 2024, for service-connected migraine including migraine variants

The Veteran is seeking a higher rating, specifically the maximum 50 percent schedular rating, for the entire period from the effective date of service connection on August 10, 2020.  He argues that the level of severity of his headaches has remained the same over the period of the appeal and that the evidence shows the headaches had similar frequency, duration, and limitation as those indicated on the June 9, 2024 VA examination on which the currently assigned 50 percent rating was based, effective June 9, 2024.  Neither the Veteran nor his representative has raised any other issue, including entitlement to a total rating based on individual unemployability due to service-connected disability, nor has any other issue been reasonably raised by the record, in regard to the claim adjudicated herein.  See Doucette v. Shulkin, 28 Vet. App. 366 (2017) (confirming that the Board is not required to address issues unless they are specifically raised by the claimant or reasonably raised by the evidence of record).  Therefore, the Board will proceed to consider an initial higher rating prior to June 9, 2024.  

Disability ratings are determined by applying the criteria set forth in VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities, which is based on the average impairment of earning capacity.  Individual disabilities are assigned separate diagnostic codes.  See 38 U.S.C. §1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1.  Where there is a question as to which of two evaluations shall be applied, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria for that rating.  Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.7.  Any reasonable doubt regarding a degree of disability will be resolved in favor of the veteran.  38 C.F.R. § 4.3.  When the evidence is in approximate balance, the veteran is accorded the benefit of the doubt.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b).

When an appeal arises from the initially assigned disability rating, consideration must be given as to whether staged ratings should be assigned to reflect entitlement to a higher rating at any point during the pendency of the claim.  Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119 (1999).  Moreover, staged ratings are appropriate in any increased-rating claim in which distinct time periods with different ratable symptoms or differing levels of severity can be identified.  Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007).

Migraine headaches are rated pursuant to 38?C.F.R. §?4.124a, Code 8100, for migraine.  Under Code 8100, a noncompensable rating is warranted for migraines with less frequent attacks.  A 10 percent rating is warranted for migraines with characteristic prostrating attacks averaging one in 2 months over the last several months.  A 30 percent rating is warranted for migraines with characteristic prostrating attacks occurring on an average once a month over the last several months.  A (maximum) 50 percent rating is warranted for migraines with very frequent completely prostrating and prolonged attacks productive of severe economic inadaptability.  

The rating criteria of Code 8100 are considered successive, meaning that a claimant cannot fulfill the criteria of the higher rating without fulfilling those of the next lower rating.  Johnson v. Wilkie, 30?Vet. App.?245, 252 (2018).  This renders 38?C.F.R. §§?4.7 and 4.21 inapplicable.  Johnson, 30 Vet. App. at 252.

The phrase "characteristic prostrating attacks" is used in the criteria corresponding to 10 percent and 30 percent ratings under Code 8100 to describe the nature and severity of migraines, but it is not defined in the regulation.  Pursuant to Dorland's Illustrated Medical Dictionary 1531 (32d ed. 2012), prostration is defined as "extreme exhaustion or powerlessness."  Thus, the phrase "characteristic prostrating attacks" is understood to describe migraine attacks that typically produce extreme exhaustion or powerlessness.  

The rating criteria for a 50 percent rating contain several undefined phrases.  The descriptive phrase "very frequent" connotes a frequency at least greater than once a month, as is required by the rating criteria corresponding to a lesser 30 percent rating.  Johnson, 30 Vet. App. at 253.  The phrase "completely prostrating" generally means that the migraines attack must render the veteran entirely powerless.  Id.  The completely prostrating attacks must also be "prolonged," which is defined as "to lengthen in time: extend duration: draw out: continue, protract."  Id. (internal citation omitted).  Lastly, the 50 percent rating criteria requires that the very frequent completely prostrating and prolonged attacks be "productive of severe economic inadaptability."  Productive can be read as having either the meaning of "producing" or "capable of producing," and, with regard to severe economic inadaptability, nothing in Code 8100 requires that the claimant be completely unable to work in order to qualify for a 50 percent rating.  Pierce v. Principi, 18?Vet. App.?440, 445-46 (2004).  

Here, the Board concludes that the evidence persuasively weighs against the assignment of a compensable rating for the service-connected migraines prior to January 24, 2022, but that from January 24, 2022 the evidence shows he more nearly approximates the criteria for a 50 percent rating under Code 8100.  

Period prior to January 24, 2022

Before January 24, 2022, the evidence shows that the Veteran's migraines do not more nearly approximate characteristic prostrating attacks averaging one in 2 months over last several months for a higher rating.  Therefore, a higher 30 percent rating is not warranted under Code 8100.

At the time of a November 2020 VA headache examination, the Veteran indicated that he was recently diagnosed with migraine headache and that he sometimes got migraines with vertigo.  He reported pulsating or throbbing head pain, which was localized to one side of the head.  He also related non-headache symptoms of nausea, vomiting, and sensitivity to light/sound/smell.  Typical head pain lasted less than one day on the right side of the head.  The examiner, however, indicated that the Veteran did not have characteristic prostrating attacks of migraine or non-migraine headache pain.  In other words, there was no evidence his headaches produced a lack of vitality or powerlessness.  Furthermore, the examiner noted that the headache condition would have no impact on the Veteran's ability to work.  

It is notable that the Veteran also underwent a VA ear condition examination in November 2020 by the same examiner, and he received a diagnosis of Meniere's syndrome.  Relative to that condition, he reported a history of dizziness episodes once or twice a week, lasting about 20 to 30 minutes, whereby he had to lay down and rest.  Service connection for Meniere's syndrome has already been established by rating decision in October 2019, and attacks of vertigo, dizziness, and staggering are contemplated in the rating criteria for evaluating Meniere's syndrome, along with bilateral hearing loss and tinnitus (disabilities for which service connection was also in effect).  Therefore, episodes of prostration due to the effects of his Meniere's syndrome may not be considered in the evaluation of his migraine disability because the assignment of a higher disability rating based on Meniere's syndrome-related symptom manifestations would constitute impermissible pyramiding under 38 C.F.R. § 4.14.   

At the time of a February 2021 VA headache examination, the Veteran again reported pulsating or throbbing head pain, which this time he noted was localized to both sides of the head.  He also related non-headache symptoms of nausea and sensitivity to light/sound.  Unlike the November 2020 examiner, the February 2021 examiner indicated that the Veteran did have characteristic prostrating attacks of migraine/non-migraine headache pain but denoted that they averaged less than one in 2 months (as opposed to at least once in two months).  In other words, there was still no evidence his headaches produced a lack of vitality or powerlessness owing to his headache disability as frequent as once in 2 months over the last several months.  As to the functional impact of the headache condition on his ability to work, the examiner stated that during a disabling headache, the Veteran would have difficulty in working in fast-paced work environments that require extensive focus and concentration.  

On an August 2021 VA Headache Disability Benefits Questionnaire (DBQ), the Veteran's treating neurologist, Dr. N.P., indicated in the Veteran's medical history that his headaches occurred 10 times a month, with right temporal pain that was throbbing in character and associated with photophobia and nausea.  The duration of the pain was indicated to be less than 1 day.  He also indicated that the Veteran had characteristic prostrating attacks of migraine headache pain that occurred less than once every 2 months and that he did not have very frequent prostrating and prolonged attacks of either migraine or non-migraine headache pain.  As to the impact of the headache condition on his ability to work, he noted that the headaches along with Meniere's disease, vertigo, PTSD were "limiting factors."  In other words, there was still no evidence - even from the Veteran's own neurologist, with whom he had periodic visits - that his headaches produced a lack of vitality or powerlessness to the frequency required for a compensable rating under Code 8100.    

Remaining VA treatment records prior to January 24, 2022 also do not show that the Veteran had headaches productive of a lack of vitality or powerlessness as frequent as once in 2 months over the last several months.  Rather, VA treatment records merely confirm that he experienced frequent headaches that were accompanied by light/noise sensitivity and at times were associated with vertigo and dizziness.  For example, on a VA neurology consult in September 2020 with his treating physician (Dr. N.P.), it was noted he presented with headaches in the right temporal region, which were pulsating and throbbing in character.  They had a severity of 7 out of 10 (with 10 being the highest/greatest on a pain scale from 1 to 10) and were associated with photophobia and nausea, as well as vertigo on many occasions.  He experienced about 15 headaches per month.  The diagnosis was migraine headaches without aura.  In a November 2020 opinion, Dr. N.P. noted the migraine symptoms interfered with normal activities, but he did not describe the interference in terms of headache frequency, duration, and severity.  In a December 2020 statement, Dr. N.P. asserted that the Veteran's migraine symptoms along with the symptoms of his Meniere's syndrome, hearing loss, and tinnitus all together affected his quality of life and caused anxiety and depression that interfered with his ability to carry out typical activities of daily living.  On a follow-up neurology visit in February 2021, Dr. N.P. indicated the Veteran reported his headaches occurred 10 times a month and had the same character as described before.  On an October 2021 telephone call with Dr. N.P., the Veteran reported he had a severe increase in emotional stress (related to his wife's illness) that was worsening his headaches.  The physician also noted the Veteran's complaints of tinnitus and vertigo, which in addition to a mental health condition were all contributing factors that could worsen migraines.  Nonetheless, these treatment records pertaining to headaches do not describe symptoms that were akin to migraine with characteristic prostrating attacks occurring at least once in two months.  

While the Veteran has competently reported frequent throbbing/pulsating headache pain, accompanied by sensitivity to light/sound and nausea/vomiting, his statements during this time period are not consistent with a lack of vitality or powerlessness during headaches, i.e., characteristic prostrating attacks, occurring at least once in two months.  In this regard, significant probative value is assigned to the November 2020 and February 2021 examiners' findings regarding prostration during headaches, as well as the Veteran's treating neurologist's findings as reported on the August 2021 DBQ as well as in treatment records.  It is acknowledged that on the June 2024 VA examination, the Veteran reported that since the onset of his headache condition (in which he described headaches as occurring 7-10 times a month and causing "incapacity" four to five times a month), it has stayed the same.  However, this statement is not viewed as credible given that during examinations and treatment visits, as previously described, he initially reported experiencing 15 headaches a month, and they were not reported or described as causing incapacitation each month or even as frequent as once every two months.  Further, other lay statements do not evince that his headaches were marked by characteristic prostrating attacks as often as one in two months.  In an August 2020 statement, the Veteran indicated that multiple ailments - and not just his migraine headaches - impeded his ability to perform daily tasks.  In a November 2020 statement, his neighbor indicated he visited the Veteran and saw him lying in bed in a dark room, but he also conceded that the Veteran confided in him that he had multiple health issues including anxiety, depression and Meniere's syndrome.  

In rating headaches or migraines under Code 8100, the Board may not consider the ameliorative effects of medication, as such effects are not explicitly contemplated by the rating criteria.  See Jones v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 56, 63 (2012).  In this case, the Veteran's treating neurologist, Dr. N.P. noted in September 2020 that the Veteran had about 15 headaches a month and had been using ibuprofen as an "abortive" (i.e., as a means to stop headaches once they had already arisen) but had not tried any preventatives, so he prescribed propranolol twice a day and ibuprofen at onset of headaches (not to exceed twice a week).  However, the record does not show, nor has the Veteran contended, that the ibuprofen he had been using (and presumably kept using, as needed) resulted in the ameliorative effect of stopping his headaches once they had begun.  On a follow-up neurology note in November 2020, Dr. N.P. stated that after starting propranolol, the Veteran still had headaches, but they were more "calm" and still of the same character, with the frequency being about 15 times a month.  That is, his new medication did not appear to change the character or frequency of his disability.  Then, on the VA examination that same month in November 2020, the Veteran paradoxically reported that the frequency and intensity of headaches had improved while taking propranolol daily, and VA examination and treatment records dated in February 2021 and thereafter show he continued to take propranolol, as well as ibuprofen as needed.  Indeed, the number of headaches per month were indicated to have declined over time from a high count of 15 a month, but it is not shown that even after beginning to take the new medication of propranolol, that it had ameliorative effects in terms of characteristic prostrating attacks of migraine.  That is, the treatment records in 2020 and VA examination in November 2020 show, at his baseline, he did not have such prostrating attacks either before or once he started the medication.  Later in 2021, when examination reports indicate infrequent (less than once in two months over the last several months) characteristic prostrating attacks, the record does not indicate, and the Veteran has not contended, that his propranolol - a preventative medication - actually resulted in ameliorating number of prostrating attacks he experienced.  In fact, given his baseline of no prostrating attacks before propranolol to having infrequent attacks after its administration, the evidence does not show it to have an ameliorative effect in terms of characteristic prostrating attacks.  In short, the Board's application of Code 8100 does not consider any ameliorative effects of medication in assessing the level of impairment caused by the Veteran's migraine disability, as the record shows that there are none to discount.  

Given the above, the evidence persuasively weighs against assignment of an initial compensable rating for the service-connected migraine including migraine variants before January 24, 2022.  Accordingly, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

Period from January 24, 2022

Beginning January 24, 2022, the evidence shows that the Veteran's migraines more nearly approximate migraines with very frequent completely prostrating attacks productive of severe economic inadaptability, corresponding to a 50 percent rating under Code 8100.   

VA treatment records dated January 24, 2022 show that when the Veteran was evaluated by his neurologist, Dr. N.P., he reported that he "still" had three to four migraines a month that were "debilitating and prostrating."  He took ibuprofen at onset with occasional relief and was compliant with propranolol.  Unlike how the Veteran described his headaches prior to this time, this evidence demonstrates that he related migraines were not only frequent (averaging nearly once a week) but also severe in that they were productive of a lack of vitality or powerlessness.  It is not discernible when his migraines became "debilitating and prostrating" to the frequency of several per month, because he did not describe his headaches in such a manner in October 2021 when he asserted that they were worsening along with his increased emotional stress caused by his wife's illness.  

Further, in May 2022 the Veteran also referenced "disabling" headaches occurring three to four times a month with symptoms lasting most of the day.  On an October 2022 VA eye treatment record, although he did not indicate the frequency of his migraine, the Veteran complained of light sensitivity and migraine, relating that he had to lie down and be in a dark area whenever he got a migraine.  

In a statement dated in December 2022 (and received by VA in May 2023), the Veteran furnished a detailed description of the frequency, duration, and severity of his migraines.  He indicated he experienced a major headache at least once or twice a week, which typically lasted for at least four to six hours but sometimes longer.  He stated that when they occurred, he must lie down in a completely dark and quiet room, and that if he did not rest quickly, his pain would become more severe and possibly lead to dizziness, nausea, and vomiting.  He related that during an episode, he was completely debilitated and unable to eat, sleep, or use the bathroom until the pain subsided.  He stated headaches came on suddenly but felt they developed more quickly during periods of stress.  He stated he was unable to focus or concentrate when he had a headache and became confused, lightheaded, and dizzy.  He noted his prescribed medication had not completely improved his symptoms but had helped to reduce the intensity and pain during an episode, but only to a slight degree.  He stated that due to headaches, he was unable to drive alone anymore.  He stated he was extremely sensitive to light and sounds and experienced blurry vision (had to wear sunglasses outside).  

(Continued on the next page)

?

Thereafter, the Veteran tried additional treatment modalities for his headaches, consisting of "Thermazone" and Botox injections through the VA, but he expressed differing opinions on their efficacy.  In August 2023, he stated his medications were not working while in March 2024 he stated they worked well for him.  In any case, in December 2023 and May 2024, VA neurology notes indicate he continued to have frequent prostrating headaches.  Despite treatment of Botox injections and propranolol, a VA examiner in June 2024 noted that the Veteran described continuing head pain lasting four to six hours and occurring 7-10 times a month, with such headaches causing incapacity four to five times a month.  This description of the severity, frequency, and duration bears some similarity to the Veteran's reports of his headaches on January 24, 2022.  

Given the above and resolving all doubt in favor of the Veteran, there is sufficient evidence to support a maximum 50 percent schedular rating for his migraine disability beginning January 24, 2022, and no earlier.  Accordingly, a higher rating is warranted under Code 8100 from that date, and to this extent, the Veteran's claim is granted.

 

 

L. B. CRYAN

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Breitbeil, Debbie

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.