Citation Nr: A25032262
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 230405-337653
DATE: April 8, 2025

ORDER

The issue of entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disability, to include posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), anxiety, and depression, have been withdrawn and is dismissed.

FINDING OF FACT

On December 10, 2024, following certification of the appeal to the Board and prior to the promulgation of a decision in the appeal, VA received written notification from the Veteran's former attorney requesting to withdraw the appeal for entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disability, to include PTSD, anxiety, and depression.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for withdrawal of the appeal on the issue of entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disability, to include PTSD, anxiety, and depression have been met. 38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. § 20.205.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from September 1969 to September 1971.

This matter originally came to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a January 2023 rating decision issued by the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ), wherein the AOJ denied service connection for an acquired psychiatric disability, to include PTSD, anxiety, and depression. 

In April 2023, the Veteran timely appealed the decision to the Board. In a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Hearing docket under the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), where he requested to have a hearing before a Veterans Law Judge.

The Board may dismiss any appeal which fails to allege specific errors of fact or law in the determination being appealed. 38 U.S.C. § 7105. An appeal may be withdrawn as to any or all issues involved in the appeal at any time before the Board promulgates a decision. 38 C.F.R. § 20.205. Withdrawal may be made by the Veteran or by his or her authorize representative. Id. Appeal withdrawals must include the name of the veteran, the name of the claimant or appellant if other than the veteran, the applicable VA file number, and a statement that the appeal is withdrawn. If the appeal involves multiple issues, the withdrawal must specify that the appeal is withdrawn in its entirety or list the issue(s) withdrawn from the appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.205(b)(1). An appeal withdrawal is effective when received by the Board. 38 C.F.R. § 20.205(b)(3).

In the present case, after receiving notification that the Board received the Veteran's Notice of Disagreement and placed the Veteran's appeal on the Hearing docket, the Veteran's then attorney submitted correspondence that was received by the VA on December 10, 2024, in which the attorney stated that the letter served as formal notification that the Veteran wished to "withdraw the following issue(s):" and listed PTSD, anxiety, and depression as issues to be withdrawn. Additionally, in a correspondence received by VA on December 10, 2024, the attorney requested that the Board hearing scheduled for January 6, 2025, at 1:00 PM EST, be withdrawn.

The Veteran's attorney's December 10, 2024, withdrawal was in writing and contained the Veteran's name, social security number, and a statement indicating that the Veteran wished to withdraw the specific claim on appeal. Additionally, the Veteran's attorney's December 10, 2024, correspondence requested that the associated hearing be withdrawn. Therefore, the requested withdrawal complies with 38 C.F.R. § 20.205(b)(1).

The Board further notes that the Veteran's attorney requested to be removed from the Veteran's case in another correspondence received by VA on December 10, 2024. The request was granted, and the attorney has since been removed.

Based on this information, the Board finds that the issue of entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disability, to include PTSD, anxiety, and depression has been withdrawn. Accordingly, as there are no longer allegations of errors of fact or law for appellate consideration, the Board does not have jurisdiction to review this matter and the appeal is dismissed.

The Board appreciates the Veteran's notice of his intent to withdraw the appeal, as it promotes efficient use of government resources, and of the notification that the hearing request was withdrawn, as it allowed another veteran to be scheduled for that hearing date.

 

 

A. P. SIMPSON

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Louis M. Figueroa

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.