Citation Nr: A25032468
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240723-456708
DATE: April 8, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a left ankle sprain condition, is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a left foot, hammer toe condition, is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a right foot, hammer toe condition, is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral plantar fasciitis (claimed as secondary to hammer toes and left ankle sprain), as secondary to left ankle sprain, is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a low back condition, is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran had honorable active service with the United States Marine Corps. from January 2003 to January 2007.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from March 2024 and July 2024 rating decision by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

The rating decisions on appeal were issued in March and July 2024 and constitute initial decisions; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.

In March 2024, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, and requested readjudication of the issues of entitlement to service connection for left ankle sprain, left foot hammer toe, right foot hammer toe, bilateral plantar fasciitis, and low back pain, then most recently addressed in a June 2022 rating decision. In March and July 2024, the RO issued the supplemental claim decisions on appeal, which found that new and relevant evidence had been received with respect to all claims except for the low back and the ankle. The low back claim was denied on the merits in July 2024, and the ankle condition was denied on the merits despite the RO finding no new and relevant evidence had been received. Deciding the claims on the merits constitutes a favorable finding that new and relevant evidence was received as to the back and ankle claims. The Board is bound by these favorable findings. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).

In the July 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2024 and July 2024 rating decisions on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the RO decisions on appeal may not be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

Nevertheless, because the Board is remanding the claims of service connection for low back, left ankle, left and right foot hammer toe, and bilateral plantar fasciitis, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the RO in the adjudication of these claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

The Board notes the recent decision issued by the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) in the case of Williams v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 305. In Williams v. McDonough, the Court held the Board must refrain from deciding a case until the case proceeds to the point where a docket switch is no longer permitted under the terms of 38 C.F.R. § 20.202(c)(2). In the present case, one of the rating decisions on appeal (regarding the low back claim) was issued on July 18, 2024, and the one-year period following that decision has not yet elapsed. However, the decision below includes a remand of the benefits sought with respect to that claim. Accordingly, there is no prejudice with the Board issuing a remand prior to the expiration of the one-year period, and delaying remand would needlessly delay the processing of the Veteran's claims with no potential benefit. Thus, the Board will proceed as to the claims on appeal as follows below.

The below-bold captioned issues on appeal must be remanded. Although the Board regrets the delay, remand is necessary to ensure that due process is followed and that there is a complete record upon which to decide the Veteran's claim so that he is afforded every possible consideration. 38 U.S.C. § 5103A; 38 C.F.R. § 3.159.

Service connection for left ankle condition

Service connection for bilateral hammer toes

Service connection for bilateral plantar fasciitis

In April 2022, the Veteran filed a new claim for service connection for left ankle, bilateral hammer toe, and plantar fasciitis, conditions, all of which the RO initially denied in June 2022. With respect to these claims, VA medical examinations and/or medical opinions are necessary.

VA's duty to assist includes a duty to provide a medical examination or obtain a medical opinion where it is deemed necessary to decide the claim. 38 U.S.C. 

§ 5103A(d); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(4); McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006). In addition, once VA undertakes the effort to provide an examination when developing a service connection claim, even if not statutorily obligated to do so, it must provide an adequate one or, at a minimum, notify the claimant why one will not or cannot be provided. Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007).

For purposes of adjudication, VA medical examinations based on consideration of the Veteran's prior medical history and examinations that describe the disability at issue in sufficient detail to provide a fully informed picture of the claimed disability, are considered adequate. See Sharp v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 26, 31 (quoting Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 123 (2007)).

Turning to the evidence, in May 2022, the Veteran participated in VA examinations for foot and ankle conditions. VA medical opinions were obtained regarding right and left foot plantar fasciitis and left ankle strain.

With respect to the claimed left ankle condition, the VA examiner noted a diagnosis of left ankle sprain with a 2003 date of diagnosis. The report also noted that the Veteran reported, "2003, fast roping out of helicopter when the condition began: swollen ankle ...." He noted current symptoms of pain and being unable to walk and move the foot for a "very long time". The examiner noted that the Veteran reported having flareups. Despite these notations in the report, the VA medical opinion does not provide sufficient explanation regarding the diagnosed left ankle sprain condition and whether that is in any way related to the in-service injury nor does it reconcile the Veteran's reports.

In May 2022, the Veteran also participated in VA examination for foot conditions. Negative VA medical opinions were provided for the claimed right and left hammer toe conditions and the bilateral plantar fasciitis conditions. Both of these opinions offered conclusions without any explanation or apparent consideration of the Veteran's claims and lay reports.

Upon review, the Board finds the May 2022 VA examinations and opinions for foot and ankle conditions, each to be insufficient for purposes of adjudicating the Veteran's service connection claims for left ankle sprain, right and left hammer toe, and bilateral plantar fasciitis conditions. As to each of these claims, the relevant inquiry is whether any claimed conditions may be related to service and/or aggravated by service, including related to any service-connected disability, not whether each such condition was demonstrated in service or simply existed prior to service. See Hensley v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 155. 160 (1993).

Accordingly, the evidence of record demonstrates pre-decisional duty to assist errors, in not obtaining sufficient VA medical examinations and medical opinions to adjudicate the claims for service connection for left ankle strain, left foot and right foot hammer toe, and bilateral, plantar fasciitis. Based on all the foregoing reasons, remand is warranted.

Service connection for a back condition

As noted above, the Veteran's April 2022 claim included a claim for service connection for a lower back condition, which the RO initially denied in June 2022. The Veteran has maintained that his back pain is otherwise related to his service.

In the July 2024 rating decision on appeal, the RO confirmed and continued the denial-of-service connection for the claimed back condition finding no link between the claimed condition and noting that the evidence did not show an event, disease or injury in service. 

Medical evidence of record includes clinical records dated in June 2008 (see CAPRI records received in February 2019), which indicate a back pain diagnosis. There are also medical treatment records received in April 2024, dated in September 2012, referencing chief complaint of "right side back pain". A review of the evidence of record indicates that the Veteran has never been referred for a VA examination for the claimed back condition. Additionally, the Board acknowledges that the Veteran reported in May 2022 VA examinations regarding ankle and foot conditions that in 2003, "while fast roping out of a helicopter ..." that he suffered injury, and also that when his feet begin to hurt, his back starts to hurt as well.

A VA medical examination is necessary where there is competent evidence of a current disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability; an event, injury, or disease occurred in service or certain diseases manifested during an applicable presumptive period for which the claimant qualifies; indication that the disability or symptoms may be associated with an established event, injury or disease in service or with another service-connected disability; but insufficient medical evidence of record for the claim to be adjudicated. See 38 U.S.C. 

§ 5103A(d)(2) and McLendon, 20 Vet. App. 79.

Here, while the RO did not find evidence of an event or injury occurring in service for this Veteran, or a nexus for any claimed back condition, the evidence of record before the Board demonstrates, at a minimum, that there is a documented back pain diagnosis during the applicable appeal period, demonstrated by the medical evidence referenced above. There are statements by the Veteran constituting lay evidence reporting an in-service injury and/or event.

Here, given that the evidence of record shows that the Veteran was never referred for a VA examination for the claimed back condition on appeal, the evidence of record as it stands is insufficient to adjudicate the claim and/or to establish service connection.

Accordingly, and based on all the foregoing, the evidence of record demonstrates a pre-decisional duty to assist error in not obtaining a VA examination and medical opinion specific to the claimed back condition. Here, the Board finds that the McLendon factors were met prior to the decision on appeal. There is indication of a back condition and claims of in-service event and/or injury. For all the foregoing reasons, remand is warranted.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for VA examination/s with appropriate examiner/s to determine the nature and etiology of his claimed left ankle, right and/or left hammer toe, bilateral plantar fasciitis, and low back conditions. The claims file, to include a complete copy of this remand, must be made available to the individual/s designated to examine the Veteran, to become familiar with the Veteran's pertinent medical history and assertions.

2. Following appropriate VA examination/s of the Veteran, and based on a complete review of the record and examination, the examiner should provide an opinion with detailed rationale that responds to each item below:

With respect to any diagnosis rendered, the examiner should provide an opinion, consistent with sound medical judgment, as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that any such disability (a) had its onset during the Veteran's active service or (b) is secondary to any service connected disability or (c) is otherwise medically related to the Veteran's period of active service.

In rendering the requested opinions, the examiner must consider and discuss all relevant medical and lay evidence and all lay assertions, to include the Veteran's assertions. If lay assertions in any regard are discounted, the examiner/s should clearly so state, and explain why.

Please provide a complete rationale for all findings and conclusions as to any left ankle, bilateral hammer toe, bilateral plantar fasciitis, and low back condition diagnosed, including without limitation, any findings of pain with functional impairment and as to any opinion expressed regarding etiology. 

 

Christopher Seppanen

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Kelly, E. C.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.