Citation Nr: A25032537
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240308-422692
DATE: April 8, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood is granted. 

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for right foot pain is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for back pain is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for left knee pain is remanded.  

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran's adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood is etiologically related to her active service.  

?

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for service connection for adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.304.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran has confirmed dates of active duty in the U.S. Air Force from May 2017 to February 2018 and from February 2018 to November 2019, as well as a period of active duty for training in November 2021, which has been deemed active duty. 

In November 2023, the Regional Office (RO) issued a rating decision denying service connection for the Veteran's claimed back and left knee conditions.  In March 2024 the RO issued a rating decision denying service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder and a right foot condition.  The Veteran timely appealed these decisions to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) in a March 2024 Notice of Disagreement and selected the Direct Review lane.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the November 2023 and March 2024 rating decisions.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after that decision cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  

However, because the Board is remanding the Veteran's right foot disability claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the RO in the readjudication of those claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

?

Legal Criteria - Service Connection 

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting in a disease or injury that is incurred in or aggravated by active military service.  38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.  To establish service connection for the claimed disorder, the following criteria must be met: (1) evidence of a current disability; (2) evidence of an in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) evidence of a nexus between the claimed in-service disease or injury and current disability. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.303; see also Davidson v. Shinseki, 581 F.3d 1313, 1316 (Fed. Cir. 2009); Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166-67 (Fed. Cir. 2004); Hickson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 247, 253 (1999).

In determining whether service connection is warranted for a disability, VA is responsible for determining whether the evidence supports the claim or is in relative equipoise, with the Veteran prevailing in either event, or whether the weight of the evidence is against the claim, in which case the claim is denied.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49 (1990).  

When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination, the benefit of the doubt is afforded to the claimant.  38 C.F.R. § 3.102.  

To deny a claim on its merits, the weight of the evidence must persuasively stand against a finding that the evidence is in "approximate balance" or "nearly equal" to the evidence that supports the claim.  Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

Adjustment Disorder with Mixed Anxiety and Depressed Mood 

The Veteran seeks service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, which she contends is a result of her military training and harassment by a supervisor.  

Initially, the Board notes the scope of a mental health disability claim includes any mental disability that may reasonably be encompassed by the claimant's description of the claim, reported symptoms, and the other information of record. Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1 (2009).  Accordingly, the Board has recharacterized the claim as reflected on the title page.

The Veteran's service treatment records (STRs) do not show treatment for psychiatric disorders in service.  However, her military personnel file confirms she attended medical evacuation training in May 2019.  The Veteran has reported that she participated in military training that caused her great distress in 2019.  Generally, she stated the training was to prepare her mentally for hostile military environments.  Further, the Veteran states she was consistently given "unwanted attention" by a senior Non-Commissioned Officer.  

The Board finds the Veteran both competent and credible in her statements confirming these in-service events.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(a)(2).  

The relevant evidence includes a July 2023 diagnosis of an adjustment disorder with mixed chronic anxiety and a depressed mood.  The VA examiner opined that the stress during and after the Veteran's military training and after significant unwanted attention from her superior caused her psychiatric disorder that persists today.  The examiner found the above-mentioned events at least as likely as not caused the Veteran's psychiatric disorder.  Likewise, a February 2024 examiner concluded the Veteran's current psychiatric disorder was due to "events that happened in service." 

Thus, the Board is satisfied that the elements required for service connection are met.  Therefore, the Veteran is entitled to service connection for her acquired psychiatric disorder.  

REASONS FOR REMAND

Pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 20.802, unless an issue on appeal can be granted in full, the Board shall remand the appeal to the RO for correction of an error on the part of the RO to satisfy its duties under 38 U.S.C. § 5103A, if the error occurred prior to the date of the RO decision on appeal.  The Board may remand for correction of any other error by the RO in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty, if correction of the error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the appellant's claim.

Right Foot

The Veteran contends her right foot disability, to include bunions, was worsened due to wearing boots.  

When the VA undertakes to provide a VA examination or obtain a VA opinion, it must ensure that the examination or opinion is adequate.  Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 312 (2007).  To be considered adequate, medical examination reports must contain not only clear conclusions with supporting data, but also a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two. See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295 (2008).  The failure to provide the above-noted assistance constitutes a due process violation.

The Veteran was afforded two VA foot examinations and opinions.  An August 2023 examiner provided a direct service connection opinion.  He stated the Veteran's right foot disability preexisted service and "recurred due to wearing boots.  Certainly, it has been aggravated however its origin is not in the military service."  The Board finds this opinion inadequate because the examiner did not provide a subsequent aggravation opinion detailing if and how military service aggravated the Veteran's preexisting bunion.  

A February 2024 examiner determined the Veteran's right foot disability was not aggravated beyond its natural progression because, although the Veteran complained of foot pain while in service and several of her examinations, "there is no indication ... that the Veteran had unusual symptoms of the feet or that the right foot conditions were aggravated during the active service."  The examiner did not discuss the Veteran's examinations where she marked she had foot trouble, nor did he provide a rationale detailing what "unusual symptoms" would be required to show aggravation of a bunion.  Therefore, the Board finds this rationale inadequate for adjudication purposes.  

Back Pain

Under 38 C.F.R. § 3.159, VA must provide assistance in developing a veteran's claim.  Under certain circumstances, 38 U.S.C. § 5103A (d) and 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(4) require VA to obtain a VA examination or medical opinion.  The failure to provide the above-noted assistance constitutes a due process violation.

The Board notes that VA must provide a medical examination or obtain a medical opinion when there is (1) competent evidence of a current disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability, (2) evidence establishing that an event, injury, or disease occurred in service, or establishing that certain diseases manifested during an applicable presumptive period for which the claimant qualifies, and (3) an indication the disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability may be associated with the veteran's service or with another service-connected disability, but (4) there is insufficient competent medical evidence on file for the Secretary to make a decision on the claim.  McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006); see also 38 U.S.C. § 5103A (d)(2), 38 C.F.R. § 3.159 (c)(4)(i).

The third prong, which requires that the evidence of record "indicate" the claimed disability or symptoms "may be" associated with the established event, disease or injury is a low threshold.  McLendon, 20 Vet. App. 79 at 83.

The Veteran contends she is entitled to service connection for a back disability.  She claims she injured her back while lifting heavy equipment during service and in a car accident during Unit Training Assembly status.  The Board notes the Veteran did in fact injure her back while on active duty for training in November 2021.  See Supervisor's Mishap Report.  The RO has previously deemed this period as active duty due to a service-connected shoulder disability.  The Board further notes the Veteran noted a 2018 car accident in her service treatment records in 2021.  Although the Veteran's service treatment records are otherwise silent for a vehicle accident and back injury, the Board finds she is competent to report her experiences.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(a)(2).

To date, the RO has not obtained an examination or medical opinions addressing the Veteran's claimed back disability resulting from her active-duty service.  

The Board finds the low threshold required to obtain a VA examination and medical opinion addressing the Veteran's claim has been met.  Based on the foregoing, the Board finds a VA examination and medical opinion is warranted.  This follows, because the Veteran's back injury was recorded by her supervisor and she reported that the car accident in service caused her currently claimed disability; however, there is insufficient competent medical evidence on file to make a decision the claim. 

Left Knee 

The Veteran contends her left knee pain is etiologically related to service.  Specifically, she claims she injured her knee during specialized military training.  

Service treatment records are silent for complaints or treatment of a left knee condition.  The Board further notes the Veteran did not report knee pain on her post deployment examinations or subsequent medical visits.  See October 2020 exit examination and history specifically noting no knee or joint trouble.  Similarly, medical treatment records following the Veteran's service are absent for complaints or treatment for a left knee condition.  

However, the Board finds that the Veteran is competent and credible to attest to current knee pain as well as her contentions as to injury in service despite the lack of collaborating evidence.  Therefore, the Board finds that there was a pre-decisional error not to obtain an examination.  See 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.159 (c); see also McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 84 (2006); Waters v. Shinseki, 601 F.3d 1274, 1278 (Fed. Cir. 2010). 

The matters are REMANDED for the following actions:

1.   Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination by an examiner with sufficient expertise to determine the etiology of the Veteran's right foot disability, to include bunions.  All pertinent evidence of record must be made available to and reviewed by the examiner.

Following a review of the relevant records and lay statements, the examiner should address the following:  

(a.) Is it as least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that any preexisting right foot bunion  increased in severity during such service?

If so, was the increase in severity due to the natural progress of the disease?

(b.) For any other foot disability, is it as least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that it originated during her periods of active service or is otherwise etiologically related to  active service, or

For purposes of these opinions, the examiner should assume that the Veteran is a reliable historian and must not ignore the Veteran's competent reports of in-service injuries, or of symptoms experienced during active service and since.

If the examiner is unable to provide the requested opinions, he or she should explain why.  If the examiner cannot provide an opinion without resorting to mere speculation, he or she shall provide a complete explanation as to why this is so.  If the inability to provide a more definitive opinion is the result of a need for additional information, the examiner should identify the additional information that is needed. 

2.   Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of her claimed back disability. 

After a complete review of the claims file, the examiner is asked to provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that any currently diagnosed back condition had its onset during active-duty service or is otherwise etiologically related to service.  

The examiner must provide a complete rationale for any proffered opinion.  In this regard, the examiner must discuss and consider the Veteran's lay statements, to include the car accident and lifting injury.  If the examiner cannot provide the required opinions without resorting to speculation, he or she shall provide a complete explanation as to why that is the case.

Further, the examiner must state whether the inability to provide the required opinions is based on a personal limitation or on a lack of knowledge among the medical community at large.

3. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of her claimed left knee disability.

(a.) Provide diagnoses for all current left knee disabilities.  The Board notes that pain alone that causes functional impairment can be a disability, even if there is no identified diagnosis. See Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356 (Fed. Cir. 2018).

(b.) After a complete review of the claims file, the examiner is asked to provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that any currently diagnosed left knee disability had its onset during active-duty service or is otherwise etiologically related to service.  

The examiner must provide a complete rationale for any proffered opinion.  In this regard, the examiner must discuss and consider the Veteran's lay statements, to include injuring her knee during specialized military training.  If the examiner cannot provide the required opinions without resorting to speculation, he or she shall provide a complete explanation as to why that is the case.

Further, the examiner must state whether the inability to provide the required opinions is based on a personal limitation or on a lack of knowledge among the medical community at large.

 

 

L. Chu

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	R. Bennett

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.