Citation Nr: A25032970
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240322-426375
DATE: April 9, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to a compensable disability rating for the service-connected eczema is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from November 1998 to November 2002.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a March 2024 Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO) higher-level review of a January 17, 2023, rating decision that granted service connection for eczema and assigned a noncompensable disability rating effective May 1, 2022.  The higher-level review rating decision continued the January 17, 2023, noncompensable disability rating for the service-connected eczema. 

In the same month, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 10182 Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (notice of disagreement or NOD), indicating disagreement with the noncompensable disability rating assigned for the service-connected eczema.  The Veteran selected the Direct Review docket.  See 38 C.F.R. § 20.202.  As the Veteran selected the Direct Review docket, the Board is limited to review of the evidence in the record up to and until the underlying January 17, 2023, rating decision that was the subject of the higher-level review.  See 38 C.F.R. § 20.202 (b). 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the RO in the adjudication of the claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Entitlement to a compensable disability rating for the service-connected eczema

The Veteran is seeking a higher rating for his service-connected eczema.

The appeal must be remanded to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error for a VA examination that did not adequately consider all of the Veteran's symptomology associated with his eczema.  

In this regard, the Veteran's eczema is currently evaluated under 38 C.F.R. § 4.118, Diagnostic Code 7806, which evaluates dermatitis or eczema symptoms pursuant to the General Rating Formula for the Skin.  The General Rating Formula for the Skin evaluates the skin disease based on the percent of the entire body affected, the percent of the exposed areas affected, and the type of treatment, medication, or therapy used to treat such skin disability.   The General Rating Formula for the Skin also provides that disability is to be rated as disfigurement of the head, face, or neck (Diagnostic Code 7800) or scars (Diagnostic Codes 7801, 7802, 7803, 7804, or 7805), depending on the predominant disability.  38 C.F.R. § 4.118, General Rating Formula for the Skin.

In his August 2022 claim for service connection for eczema, the Veteran stated that his dermatologist told him he had stress-induced eczema.  The Veteran stated that in the past two years, he has been breaking out in little red itchy patches behind his knees, in the folds of his arms, and behind his ears.

In September 2022, the Veteran submitted an August 2022 letter from K.R, O.D. who treats the Veteran's skin disorders.  In the letter, the dermatologist opined that the Veteran's atopic dermatitis was likely stress-induced and that it manifested in symptoms of red patches of itchy dry bumpy skin during a flare-up.  However, K.R. did not provide an estimate of the degree of severity during a flare-up or how often the flare ups occur.  The remainder of the letter addresses unrelated skin disorders of pseudofolliculitis barbae and acne keloidalis nuchae affecting the face.  

In a December 2022 VA skin examination, the examiner described the service-connected eczema as being on the face and hands and that the Veteran reported having symptoms for years but just received an official diagnosis by dermatology this year.  The examiner marked there was no medication treatment in the past 12 months, and that the eczema affected 5 percent total body area and 5 percent exposed area, but that there were no current symptoms at the time of the examination.  

The December 2022 VA medical examination and August 2022 private dermatology letter are insufficient to decide the claim.  The VA examiner did not account for the Veteran's description of his eczema flare-ups and the locations on his body outside of his face and hands that are impacted.  The examiner specifically stated that the Veteran did not have any current symptoms on examination and only described the areas affected as the face and hands.  This does not account for the Veteran's claim that his eczema flare-ups also affect the back of his knees and the folds of his arms.

The private letter from K.R. did not account for the frequency, severity or the percentage of affected areas of the body.

Whenever there is a history of remission and recurrence of a condition, the duty to assist encompasses the obligation to evaluate a condition during an active, rather than inactive phase.  See Ardison v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 405, 407-08 (1994).  Skin disorders may be by their very nature subject to remission and recurrence.  Id at 408; see also Colvin v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 171, at 175 (1991); Hatlestad v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 213, at 216 (1992); see also Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007).  Obviously, it may not be possible to schedule an examination during an active phase of the Veteran's service-connected eczema; however, the examiner should nevertheless attempt to determine the level of severity during a flare-up/active phase of the disorder.  See, e.g. Sharp v. Shulkin 29 Vet. App. 26 (2017).

The December 2022 VA examination is inadequate for failure to account for the Veteran's description of his eczema during active flare-ups, and remand is required to obtain a new VA examination.  See Barr, 21 Vet. App. at 311 (when VA undertakes to provide a VA examination or obtain a VA opinion, it must ensure that the examination or opinion is adequate).

This is a pre-decisional duty to assist error, and the Board is required to remand for correction of such errors.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).  Accordingly, if the Veteran is not in a period of flare-up during the examination, the examiner should provide an estimate of any additional percentage of skin affected, based on the Veteran's description of his flare-ups, including elevation of symptoms, duration, and frequency.

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for an examination to determine the current nature and severity of his service-connected eczema.

If the examination is not conducted during an active stage of the Veteran's eczema, the examiner must provide an estimate of the severity of the disability based on the Veteran's reports as to the symptoms, frequency and duration of outbreaks or flare-ups.

The examiner should obtain a full recorded history of the Veteran's eczema, which reportedly manifests as little red itchy patches behind the knees, folds of the arms and behind the ears.  The examiner should identify any other areas of the body that are affected, including, but not limited to, whether the Veteran's eczema affects his hands and face.  The, the examiner should estimate the percentage of the Veteran's total body area and exposed area affected by his service-connected eczema during a flare-up.

In this regard, the examiner is advised that the Veteran is competent to report his symptoms and history, and if the Veteran's reported frequency, duration and severity of his eczema symptoms is discounted, the examiner should explain why.  

 

 

L. B. CRYAN

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Robinson, C. B.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.