Citation Nr: A25032947
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240618-448780
DATE: April 9, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a respiratory disability is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from August 1965 to August 1967, with service in Vietnam.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a May 2024 rating decision by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA).

In the June 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the May 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. However, because the Board is remanding the appeal, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

In the May 2024 rating decision, the AOJ found that new and relevant evidence had been received to readjudicate the claim of service connection for a respiratory disability. This is a favorable finding by the AOJ and the Board will proceed to address the claim on the merits. See 38?U.S.C. § 5104A; 38?C.F.R. § 3.104(c).

The Board interprets the Veteran's statements as reflecting an intent to have this matter reviewed in an expeditious manner, which the Board finds to be an implicit waiver of the requirement that the Board delay issuing a decision until the period to request to switch dockets elapses pursuant to Williams v. McDonough, 37?Vet. App.?305 (2024). Regardless, because the Board is remanding the appeal, there is no prejudice in proceeding with adjudication.

Entitlement to service connection for a respiratory disability.

The Veteran underwent a VA respiratory examination in October 2023, wherein the examiner opined that the Veteran did not have a respiratory disability. However, review of the pulmonary function test (PFT) report reflects that pre-bronchodilator testing was of poor quality and interpretation was not possible. Moreover, post-bronchodilator testing reflected moderate obstruction.

Because the October 2023 VA examiner did not discuss why the Veteran does not have a respiratory disability and the PFT report suggests that the Veteran has moderate obstruction-or, at the least, that testing was of poor quality-the Board finds that remand for a new examination is warranted to resolve any conflicting evidence and determine whether the Veteran has a current disability.

In a November 2017 statement, the Veteran reported that he was in the Air National Guard. There appears to have been no development pertaining to his time in the National Guard. Thus, remand is also warranted for the AOJ to attempt to obtain personnel records and service treatment records from the Veteran's time in the National Guard.

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

1. The AOJ should attempt to obtain personnel records and service treatment records from the Veteran's time in the National Guard, to include contacting any state Adjutant General, if otherwise appropriate.

2. The AOJ should arrange for a VA examination of the Veteran to determine the nature and likely cause of any respiratory disability, with new PFTs. The examiner should provide an opinion with detailed rationale that responds to the following:

(a.) Please identify, by diagnosis, all respiratory disabilities present. If the examiner finds that the Veteran does not have a respiratory disability, the examiner should discuss the October 2023 PFT report reflecting moderate obstruction.

(b.) For each respiratory disability diagnosed, is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that such disability was either incurred in or otherwise related to the Veteran's military service, specifically exposure to herbicide agents in Vietnam? Please explain why. When providing this opinion, the examiner must consider the total potential exposure through all applicable deployments and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran.

 

 

E. I. VELEZ

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	J. Sandler, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.