Citation Nr: A25032322
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240416-436450
DATE: April 8, 2025

ORDER

Because the service member only had active duty for training with the United States Army National Guard, eligibility for a government-furnished memorial product has not been established, and the claim is denied.  

FINDING OF FACT

The appellant served in the United States Army National Guard for a period less than two years and he was not discharged from service due to a service-connected disorder.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to a government-furnished memorial product has not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 101, 2306, 2402, 5303A; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.1, 3.6, 38.620, 38.631.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The service member served in the Army National Guard and the service records indicate that the service member had one year, ten months, and twenty-five days of service.  The appellant is the service member's daughter.  

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a March 2024 letter decision by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) National Cemetery Administration (NCA) [agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ)].  The record indicates that the service member died in February 2019.  Subsequent to his death, the appellant submitted a claim for a VA headstone or grave marker.  The appellant's claim was denied by the AOJ based on the fact that the service member did not have any active-duty service and did not serve the minimum amount of time such that he would have qualified for VA burial benefits.  The appellant was notified, and she has appealed to the Board for review.

This claim has been processed pursuant to the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA).  Here, the appellant selected the direct review docket, meaning that the Board may only consider the evidence of record before the AOJ at the time of its decision on the issue on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.300(a), 302(a).  If additional evidence was submitted after the rating decision on appeal, the Board may not, by operation of law, consider it in conjunction with the adjudication of this appeal.  If the appellant would like VA to consider any evidence that was added to the claims file that the Board could not consider, the appellant may file a supplemental claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a supplemental claim are included with this decision.  See also Cook v. McDonough, 36 Vet. App. 175 (2023).

After the service member died, the appellant, the Veteran's daughter, submitted a claim asking that her father's grave be assigned a VA marker.  The appellant asked for such a marker even though she admitted that her father's gravesite was marked.  The VA reached out to the appellant asking that she provide any information that would show that the service member had completed twenty-four months of continuous active duty or the full period for which he was ordered to active duty.  Such verification was not forthcoming from the appellant; however, the VA obtained from the service department a listing showing that the service member only served in the Army National Guard and did not have two years of active-duty service in the regular Army or another military service.  The AOJ subsequently denied the appellant's request informing her that her father did not have the requisite active duty need to qualify for a government-furnished memorial product.  The appellant was notified of that action, and she appealed.  It is noted that the appellant admitted that her father was not called to active duty and that she wanted a free foot marker to designate her father's service.  

Any person classified as a "veteran" is eligible for burial in a national cemetery and is also eligible to receive a government-furnished memorial product.  38 U.S.C. § 2402(a); 38 C.F.R. § 38.620(a).  The term "veteran" means any person who served in the active military, naval, or air service, and who was discharged or released therefrom under conditions other than dishonorable.  38 U.S.C. § 101(2); 38 C.F.R. § 3.1(d).  The individual must serve for a period of twenty-four months of active-duty service pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 3.12a(a)(1)(i).  "Active military, naval, or air service" includes active duty, and "any period of [active duty for training (ACDUTRA)] during which the individual concerned was disabled or died from a disease or injury incurred or aggravated in line of duty, and any period of [inactive duty for training (INACDUTRA)] during which the individual concerned was disabled or died from an injury incurred or aggravated in line of duty or from an acute myocardial infarction, a cardiac arrest, or a cerebrovascular accident occurring during such training."  38 U.S.C. § 101(24); 38 C.F.R. § 3.6(a).

Eligibility is also available to any member of a Reserve component of the Armed Forces, and any member of the Army National Guard or the Air National Guard, whose death occurs while such member is hospitalized or undergoing treatment at the expense of the United States for an injury or disease contracted or incurred under honorable conditions while performing ACDUTRA, INACDUTRA, or undergoing such hospitalization or treatment.  38 U.S.C. § 2402(b); 38 C.F.R. § 38.620(b).

Only official service department records can establish if and when an individual was serving on active duty, ACDUTRA, or INACDUTRA.  Cahall v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 232, 236 (1994); Duro v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 530, 531 (1992).  The question is whether the appellant meets the minimum active service requirements to be eligible for burial benefits to include a grave marker.  To repeat, 38 C.F.R. § 3.12a (a) defines the "minimum period of active duty" as the shorter of either: (i) twenty-four months of continuous active duty, or (ii) the full period for which a person was called or ordered to active duty.

As an initial matter, there is no evidence that the service member became disabled from a disease or injury incurred during a period of active-duty service or that he was discharged from service as a result of a service-connected disability.  Moreover, there is no indication in the record that the appellant served on ACDUTRA or INACDUTRA, and the appellant does not contend otherwise.  Instead, the records indicate that the appellant served one year, ten months, and twenty-five days - short of the two years or twenty-four months required by statute to be eligible for burial in a VA cemetery or to be eligible to receive a government-furnished grave marker.

The appellant's claim has been denied based on the findings of the National Cemetery Administration that his service does not establish that he had the requisite amount of active service under the law and that he never attained "veteran" status eligibility for burial benefits.  The Board does not disagree with the findings of the AOJ.  Notwithstanding the assertions made by the appellant, the legal authority is prescribed by Congress and implemented via regulations enacted by VA, and neither the agency of original jurisdiction nor the Board is free to disregard those laws and regulations enacted for the administration of VA's programs.  See 38 U.S.C. § 7104(c).  In other words, the Board is bound by the governing legal authority and is without authority to grant benefits where the threshold eligibility criteria are not met.  

Based on the facts of this case, there is no legal basis to award burial eligibility, to include the awarding of a government-furnished grave marker or medallion, and the appellant's claim is denied as a matter of law.  See Sabonis v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 426, 430 (1994).

 

 

MATTHEW W. BLACKWELDER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Patrick J. Costello

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.