Citation Nr: A25032684
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 231219-402450
DATE: April 9, 2025

ORDER

The claim for a rating higher than 20 percent for diabetes mellitus is denied.

The claim for an initial rating higher than 60 percent for diabetic nephropathy is denied.

The claim for a rating higher than 40 percent for diabetic retinopathy is denied.

The claim for a higher rating for diabetic peripheral neuropathy of the right upper extremity, rated as noncompensably disabling prior to September 19, 2022 and 40 percent disabling thereafter, is denied.

The claim for a higher rating for diabetic peripheral neuropathy of the left upper extremity, rated as noncompensably disabling prior to September 19, 2022 and 30 percent disabling thereafter, is denied.

The claim for a rating higher than 20 percent for diabetic peripheral neuropathy of the right lower extremity is denied.

The claim for a rating higher than 20 percent for diabetic peripheral neuropathy of the left lower extremity is denied.

The claim for a rating higher than 20 percent for left knee osteochondritis with arthritic changes based on instability is denied.

The claim for a separate 10 percent rating for left knee osteochondritis with arthritic changes based on painful motion is granted.

REMANDED

The claim for a total disability rating due to individual unemployability resulting from service-connected disability (TDIU) prior to April 21, 2021 is remanded.

The claim for basic eligibility to Dependents' Educational Assistance (DEA) based on permanent and total disability status prior to April 21, 2021 is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACTS

1. The Veteran's diabetes mellitus requires treatment with daily insulin and a restricted diet; there is no regulation of occupational or recreational activities by a medical professional.

2. The Veteran's diabetic nephropathy manifests as chronic kidney disease with a glomerular filtration rate (GFR) higher than 29/mL/min/1.73m2; it has not required regular dialysis; the Veteran has not been eligible for a kidney transplant; the nephropathy has not manifested as persistent edema and albuminuria with blood urea nitrogen (BUN) of 40 to 80mg% or creatinine 4 to 8mg%; it has not manifested as generalized poor health characterized by lethargy, weakness, anorexia, weight loss, or limitation of exertion; it has not precluded more than sedentary activity or manifested as markedly decreased function of kidney or other organ systems.

3. The Veteran's diabetic retinopathy manifests blurry vision and a left macular edema with corrected visual distance acuity of 20/40 in the right eye and 20/100 in the left eye.

4. The Veterans diabetic retinopathy manifests impairment of the visual fields with right contraction to 45 degrees and left contraction to 21 degrees. 

5. The Veteran does not manifest any incapacitating episodes of diabetic retinopathy. 

6. Prior to September 19, 2022, the Veteran's diabetic peripheral neuropathy of the right and left upper extremities had no objective or subjective manifestations and is part of the Veteran's overall diabetic process.

7. From September 19, 2022, the Veteran's diabetic peripheral neuropathy of the right and left upper extremities manifested sensory deficits that most nearly approximate moderate without impairments to strength, reflexes, or motor functioning. 

8. The Veteran's diabetic peripheral neuropathy of the right lower extremity manifests sensory deficits that most nearly approximate moderate without impairments to strength, reflexes, or motor functioning.

9. The Veteran's diabetic peripheral neuropathy of the left lower extremity manifests sensory deficits that most nearly approximate moderate without impairments to strength, reflexes, or motor functioning.

10. The Veteran's left knee osteochondritis with arthritic changes manifests instability without an unrepaired or failed repair of a complete ligament tear, and without instability of the patellofemoral complex.

11. The Veteran's left knee osteochondritis with arthritic changes manifests painful motion of the joint with flexion to 55 degrees or better and full extension to 0 degrees. 

12. The Veteran's left knee osteochondritis with arthritic changes does not manifest  dislocation or removal of the cartilage with frequent episodes of "locking," pain, and effusion into the joint, ankylosis or its functional equivalent, or impairment of the tibia or fibula.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for a rating higher than 20 percent for diabetes mellitus are not met. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.119, Diagnostic Code 7913.

2. The criteria for an initial rating higher than 60 percent for diabetic nephropathy are not met. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.115, Diagnostic Code 7541 (2020 & 2024).

3. The criteria for a rating higher than 40 percent for diabetic retinopathy are not met. 38?U.S.C. §?1155; 38?C.F.R. § 4.79, Diagnostic Codes 6040, 6066, 6080.

4. The criteria for a higher rating for diabetic peripheral neuropathy of the right upper extremity, rated as noncompensably disabling prior to September 19, 2022 and 40 percent disabling thereafter, are not met. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.14, 4.123, 4.124, Diagnostic Code 8513.

5. The criteria for a higher rating for diabetic peripheral neuropathy of the left upper extremity, rated as noncompensably disabling prior to September 19, 2022 and 30 percent disabling thereafter, are not met. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.14, 4.123, 4.124, Diagnostic Code 8513.

6. The criteria for a rating higher than 20 percent for diabetic peripheral neuropathy of the right lower extremity are not met. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.14, 4.123, 4.124, Diagnostic Code 8520.

7. The criteria for a rating higher than 20 percent for diabetic peripheral neuropathy of the left lower extremity are not met. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.14, 4.123, 4.124, Diagnostic Code 8520.

8. The criteria for a rating higher than 20 percent for left knee osteochondritis with arthritic changes based on instability are not met. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.10, 4.40, 4.45, 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5257.

9. The criteria for a separate 10 percent rating, but not higher, for left knee osteochondritis with arthritic changes based on painful motion are met. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.59, Diagnostic Codes 5256, 5258-5262. 

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty with the United States Air Force from May 1975 to May 1979 and from March 1980 to November 1982. This case comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a January 2023 rating decision and April 2023 Higher-Level Review (HLR) decision issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

The Appeals Modernization Act (AMA) automatically applies to all claims for which VA issues notice of an initial decision on or after February 19, 2019. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.2400 (a)(1). Here, the January 2023 rating decision was issued in response to September 2022 supplemental claims for increased ratings and TDIU. The April 2023 HLR decision was issued as part of the HLR process at the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ). Both decisions constitute initial decisions and the AMA applies.

In September 2022, the Veteran filed a VA Form 20-0995 (Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim) and VA Form 21-8940 (Veteran's Application for Increased Compensation Based on Unemployability) seeking higher ratings for diabetes mellitus and its service-connected secondary disabilities, as well as a claim for TDIU. The AOJ also appears to have interpreted the September 2022 forms as indicating an intent to apply for a higher rating for a service-connected left knee disability.

In a January 2023 rating decision, the AOJ continued the ratings assigned the Veteran's diabetes mellitus, nephropathy, retinopathy, and left knee disability. Higher ratings were assigned for peripheral neuropathy of all four extremities, and eligibility for DEA was awarded effective September 19, 2022. The claim for TDIU was denied as moot (as the Veteran was in receipt of a schedular 100 percent evaluation for his combined disabilities). 

On January 31, 2023, the Veteran filed a VA Form 20-0996 (Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review) requesting readjudication of his claims for TDIU and DEA eligibility via the HLR process. The AOJ issued the April 2023 HLR decision on appeal granting entitlement to TDIU and eligibility to DEA from April 21, 2021 based on the evidence of record at the time of the January 2023 rating decision.

In response to the January 2023 rating decision and April 2023 HLR decision, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 10182 (Decision Review Request: Board Appeal) on December 19, 2023. He elected the Direct Review docket. As a valid and timely VA Form 10182 was received, the appeal is properly before the Board.

The Veteran has placed his appeal on the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the January 2023 rating decision with respect to all the claims on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. In other words, the Board cannot consider evidence submitted after the January 2023 rating decision.

The Veteran's December 2023 VA Form 10182 included an attached statement from his representative. Typically, this would necessitate clarification of the Veteran's document selection, as the Direct Review docket does not allow the Board to consider any evidence added to the record after the issuance of the decision on appeal. See Edwards v. McDonough, 36 Vet. App. 56 (2023). However, the December 2023 statement consists of argument, not evidence. The Board therefore finds there is no ambiguity regarding the Veteran's docket selection, and will proceed with a decision in this case. 

Increased Rating Claims

Disability evaluations are determined by evaluating the extent to which a Veteran's service-connected disability adversely affects his ability to function under the ordinary conditions of daily life, including employment, by comparing his symptomatology with the criteria set forth in the Schedule for Rating Disabilities (Rating Schedule). 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.10. Where the evidence contains factual findings that demonstrate distinct time periods in which the service-connected disability exhibits symptoms that would warrant different evaluations at any point during the appeal, the assignment of staged ratings is appropriate. See Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119 (1999); Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007).

For disabilities evaluated based on limitation of motion, VA is required to apply the provisions of 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.40, 4.45, pertaining to functional impairment. DeLuca v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 202 (1995); Johnston v. Brown, 10 Vet. App. 80, 84-5 (1997); 38 C.F.R. § 4.59; see also Chavis v. McDonough, 34 Vet. App. 1 (2021) (ankylosis may be met by evidence demonstrating the functional equivalent of ankylosis).

1. Entitlement to a rating higher than 20 percent for diabetes mellitus.

Service connection for diabetes mellitus was granted in a January 1984 rating decision with an initial 10 percent evaluation assigned effective November 5, 1982. A 20 percent evaluation was granted in an August 2010 rating decision, and was continued in the January 2023 rating decision on appeal. The Veteran contends a rating higher than 20 percent is warranted for diabetes due to the impact of the condition and its complications on his ability to work. 

The Veteran's diabetes mellitus is rated under Diagnostic Code 7913. This diagnostic code provides that when diabetes mellitus requires insulin and a restricted diet, or an oral hypoglycemic agent and a restricted diet, a 20 percent evaluation is merited. When insulin, restricted diet, and regulation of activities (avoidance of strenuous occupational and recreational activities) are required, it is evaluated as 40 percent disabling. Diabetes mellitus requiring insulin, restricted diet, and regulation of activities with episodes of ketoacidosis or hypoglycemic reactions requiring one or two hospitalizations per year or twice a month visits to a diabetic care provider, plus complications that would not be compensable if separately rated, is rated 60 percent disabling. Diabetes mellitus requiring more than one daily injection of insulin, restricted diet, and regulation of activities, with episodes of ketoacidosis or hypoglycemic reactions, requiring at least three hospitalizations per year or weekly visits to a diabetic care provider, plus either progressive loss of weight and strength or complications that would be compensable if separately evaluated. 38 C.F.R. § 4.119, Diagnostic Code 7913.

Note (1) following the rating criteria provides that compensable complications of diabetes mellitus are rated separately unless they are used to support a total disability rating. Noncompensable complications are considered part of the diabetic process under Diagnostic Code 7913. Id. at Note (1).

The criteria for ratings higher than 20 percent for diabetes mellitus are conjunctive not disjunctive. This means there must be insulin dependence and restricted diet and regulation of activities. "Regulation of activities" is defined by Diagnostic Code 7913 as the "avoidance of strenuous occupational and recreational activities." Medical evidence is required to show that occupational and recreational activities have been restricted. Camacho v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 360 (2007).

After review of the evidence of record, the Board finds that the Veteran's diabetes mellitus does not meet the criteria associated with a rating higher than 20 percent. Although the record establishes that the Veteran's diabetes mellitus is treated with daily injections of insulin and a restricted diet, the evidence does not establish regulation of activities. VA treatment records do not document any instance where the Veteran's diabetic care providers advised him to avoid strenuous occupational and recreational activities due to diabetes mellitus. In fact, the Veteran's diabetic care provider at the VA Medical Center (VAMC) has repeatedly urged him to increase his activities and exercise more. VA examiners in May 2021 and October 2022 also specifically noted that regulation of the Veteran's activities was not required due to diabetes.

The Board has considered the Veteran's statements and contentions, but he has never stated that his occupational or recreational activities are regulated by his diabetic care providers. Furthermore, any lay opinion expressed by the Veteran as to whether certain activities would cause complications and risks associated with the control of his diabetes mellitus and whether such activities should be regulated, cannot be accepted as competent evidence in this case. See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1376-1377 (Fed. Cir. 2007); Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1131, 1336 (Fed. Cir. 2006). The competent evidence establishes that the Veteran's occupational and recreational activities have not been restricted at any time during the claims period due to diabetes mellitus.

The record also does not establish that the Veteran's disability meets the other criteria associated with a higher rating under Diagnostic Code 7913. There is no lay or medical evidence of ketoacidosis or hypoglycemic reactions requiring hospitalization. Review of the Veteran's medical treatment records further demonstrates that he does not visit his diabetic care provider twice a month. The Veteran's diabetes mellitus has also only required treatment with insulin and a restricted diet during the applicable appeal period. Thus, an increased rating under Diagnostic Code 7913 is not warranted.

In sum, the Veteran's diabetes mellitus is appropriately rated as 20 percent disabling throughout the relevant rating period. The Board has also considered the Veteran's reports that his symptoms are more severe than reflected by the rating above, but the Board finds the competent medical evidence, based on objective testing and medical expertise, is more probative regarding the severity of the service-connected disability. The Board has also considered whether there is any other schedular basis for granting a higher rating, but has found none. In addition, the Board has considered the doctrine of reasonable doubt but has determined that it is not applicable because the evidence significantly and substantially weighs against the claim for an increased rating. 38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b); see also Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

2. Entitlement to a rating higher than 60 percent for diabetic nephropathy.

Service connection for diabetic nephropathy was granted in a May 2021 rating decision with an initial 60 percent evaluation assigned effective April 21, 2021. The January 2023 rating decision on appeal continued the current 60 percent evaluation. The Veteran generally contends that a higher rating is warranted for nephropathy, but has not provided any specific argument in support of his claim. 

The Veteran's diabetic nephropathy is assigned a 60 percent rating under 38 C.F.R. § 4.115b, Diagnostic Code 7541. This diagnostic code instructs the rater to evaluate nephropathy as renal dysfunction under 38 C.F.R. § 4.115a.

The criteria for rating disabilities based on renal dysfunction were substantively revised effective November 14, 2021. See Schedule for Rating Disabilities; The Genitourinary Diseases and Conditions, 86 Fed. Reg. 54081, 54089 (Sept. 30, 2021). 

If a law or regulation changes during the course of a claim or an appeal, the version more favorable to the Veteran will apply, to the extent permitted by any stated effective date in the amendment in question. 38 U.S.C. § 5110 (g). If the revised version of the regulation is more favorable, the implementation of that regulation under 38 U.S.C. § 5110 (g) can be no earlier than the effective date of that change. If the former version is more favorable, VA can apply the earlier version of the regulation for the period prior to, and from, the effective date of the change. 38 U.S.C. § 5110. 

Prior to November 14, 2021, renal dysfunction is rated under 38 C.F.R. § 4.115a. Under this regulation, in pertinent part, a 60 percent evaluation is warranted for constant albuminuria with some edema; or, definite decrease in kidney function; or, hypertension at least 40 percent disabling under Diagnostic Code 7101. An 80 percent evaluation is warranted for persistent edema and albuminuria with BUN 40 to 80mg% or creatinine 4 to 8mg%; or, generalized poor health characterized by lethargy, weakness, anorexia, weight loss, or limitation of exertion. A 100 percent evaluation is warranted for renal dysfunction requiring regular dialysis, or precluding more than sedentary activity from one of the following: persistent edema and albuminuria; or, BUN more than 80mg%; or, creatinine more than 8mg%; or, markedly decreased function of kidney or other organ systems.

As of November 14, 2021, a 60 percent evaluation is assigned for chronic kidney disease with GFR from 30 to 44 mL/min/1.73 m2 for at least 3 consecutive months during the past 12 months. An 80 percent evaluation is assigned for chronic kidney disease with GFR from 15 to 29 mL/min/1.73 m2 for at least 3 consecutive months during the past 12 months. A 100 percent evaluation is assigned for chronic kidney disease with GFR less than 15 mL/min/1.73 m2 for at least 3 consecutive months during the past 12 months; or requiring regular routine dialysis; or eligible kidney transplant recipient. An accompanying Note indicates that GFR, estimated GFR (eGFR), and creatinine-based approximations of GFR will be accepted for evaluation purposes under this section when determined to be appropriate and calculated by a medical professional.

The Board finds that the Veteran's nephropathy does not most nearly approximate the criteria associated with a higher rating at any time during the rating period under the old or current rating criteria. 

Laboratory testing performed throughout the relevant rating period demonstrates BUN, creatinine, and GFR results that are not consistent with a higher evaluation for renal dysfunction. VA examinations in March 2021 and October 2022 indicated a BUN of 34.1mg% and 20mg%, respectively. Similarly, creatinine at the VA examinations was measured to 1.44mg% and 1.26mg%. These findings are not consistent with a higher rating under the former version of the renal dysfunction criteria. Similarly, the Veteran's GFR has been well above the criteria associated with a higher evaluation under the new criteria; laboratory tests from the VAMC and the VA examinations demonstrate a lowest GFR of 49 mL/min in April 2021. As noted above, an 80 percent evaluation is warranted with a GFR measuring 15 to 29 mL/min/1.73 m2 for at least 3 consecutive months. Thus, laboratory testing indicates kidney function well above that contemplated by a higher evaluation under the former and current rating criteria for renal dysfunction. 

The Board also notes that the Veteran's renal dysfunction does not require medication or other treatment for chronic kidney disease. The March 2021 VA examiner observed that the Veteran denied any current symptoms related to the condition, and the October 2022 VA examiner found there were no manifestations of kidney disease based on the Veteran's laboratory results. The Veteran has never received dialysis, and there is no lay or medical evidence of lethargy, weakness, anorexia, weight loss, or limitation of exertion due to kidney disease. Additionally, the record does not indicate any edema or albuminuria associated with the Veteran's nephropathy. Finally, the October 2022 VA examiner found that the Veteran's kidney disease had no impact on his occupational functioning or ability to perform ordinary activities.

The Board has considered the lay evidence, but notes that the Veteran has not provided any specific argument or contentions in support of the claim. The Board has also considered whether there is any other schedular basis for granting a higher rating, but has found none. In addition, the Board has considered the doctrine of reasonable doubt but has determined that it is not applicable because the evidence significantly and substantially weighs against the claim for an increased rating. 38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b); see also Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

3. Entitlement to a rating higher than 40 percent for diabetic retinopathy.

Service connection for diabetic retinopathy of both eyes was granted in an August 2010 rating decision. An initial noncompensable evaluation was assigned effective March 15, 2010, and the Veteran's retinopathy was combined with his diabetes mellitus as a noncompensable diabetic complication under Diagnostic Code 7913. In October 2021, an increased 40 percent evaluation was assigned to the Veteran's diabetic retinopathy, and the rating was separated from the overall diabetic process effective April 21, 2021. The January 2023 rating decision on appeal continued the current 40 percent evaluation and characterized the disability as diabetic retinopathy of both eyes with macular edema of the left eye. 

The Veteran contends a higher rating is warranted for diabetic retinopathy as it causes blurry vision affecting his ability to work as a truck driver. After review of the evidence, the Board finds that a rating higher than 40 percent is not warranted for the service connected diabetic retinopathy of both eyes with left eye macular edema.

The Veteran's retinopathy is currently rated as 40 percent disabling under Diagnostic Code 6040-6066. The use of a hyphen in the assigned diagnostic code indicates a rating by analogy, with the same anatomical functions and closely analogous symptomatology. 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.20, 4.27. In this case, the Veteran's eye disability contemplates diabetic retinopathy (Diagnostic Code 6040) resulting in impairment to visual acuity (Diagnostic Code 6066).

VA regulations direct that evaluation of visual impairment is rated based on three factors: 1) impairment of visual acuity (excluding developmental errors of refraction), 2) visual field, and 3) muscle function. 38 C.F.R. § 4.75. 

Diagnostic Code 6040 for retinopathy provides for rating the disability pursuant to the General Rating Formula for Diseases of the Eye which instructs to evaluate on the basis of either visual impairment due to a particular condition or on incapacitating episodes, whichever results in a higher evaluation. 38 C.F.R. § 4.79, Diagnostic Code 6040.

Note (1) indicates that, for the purposes of evaluations under 38?C.F.R. §?4.79, an incapacitating episode is an eye condition severe enough to require a clinic visit to a provider specifically for treatment purposes. Note (2) indicates that examples of treatment may include but are not limited to: systemic immunosuppressants or biologic agents; intravitreal or periocular injections; laser treatments; or other surgical interventions. Note (3) indicates that, for the purposes of evaluating visual impairment due to a particular condition, refer to 38?C.F.R. §?4.75-4.78 and to § 4.79, Diagnostic Codes 6061-6091. 

The competent and relevant evidence in this case consists of records of private eye treatment and VA examinations dated in September 2021 and October 2022. In June and July 2020, the Veteran underwent private dilated fundus examinations (DCEs) of both eyes, as well as optical coherence tomography (OCT). He complained of blurry vision, particularly in the left eye, and was diagnosed with mild diabetic retinopathy with accompanying macular edema of the left eye. The Veteran's retinopathy was treated with injections to prevent the spread of the observed macular edema and associated blurry vision.

Upon VA examinations in September 2021 and October 2022, the Veteran manifested corrected distance vision of 20/40 in the right eye and 20/100 in the left eye. He again reported experiencing blurry vision due to retinopathy, and physical examination demonstrated microaneurysms of both eyes and macular edema of the left. A visual defect was documented, though the Veteran did not manifest any loss of his visual field. Both VA examiners found the Veteran had no incapacitating episodes due to diabetic retinopathy and found the condition did not result in any impact on the Veteran's occupational functioning. 

As noted above, Diagnostic Code 6066 directs the Board to rate the Veteran's retinopathy as visual impairment or based on the number of incapacitating episodes, whichever results in a higher evaluation. 38 C.F.R. § 4.79, Diagnostic Code 6040. 

The Veteran does not allege, and the record does not show, that his retinopathy results in any incapacitating episodes as defined by general rating formula. Both the September 2021 and October 2022 VA examiners specifically found the Veteran did not have incapacitating episodes due to retinopathy, and VA treatment records are negative for any evidence of treatment for his eye condition. The Veteran received private testing and injections for retinopathy in 2020, but this care was for testing purposes and preventative in nature-to determine the extent and slow the advance of macular edema and related visual impairment-rather than in response to specific episodes of eye symptoms. As the Veteran's retinopathy does not manifest incapacitating episodes, a rating higher than 40 percent is not possible under the General Rating Formula for Diseases of the Eye, and the Board must determine whether a higher evaluation is warranted based on visual impairment. 

The Board must therefore rate the Veteran's retinopathy as visual impairment. To determine the evaluation for visual impairment when both decreased visual acuity and visual field defect are present in one or both eyes and are service connected, the Board must separately evaluate the visual acuity and visual field defect (expressed as a level of visual acuity) and combine them under the provisions of § 4.25. 38?C.F.R. §?4.77 (c). 

The Veteran manifested corrected distance visual acuity of 20/40 in the right eye and 20/100 in the left eye at the September 2021 and October 2022 VA examinations. Under Diagnostic Code 6066, corrected distance visual acuity of 20/100 in one eye with corrected distance visual acuity of 20/40 in the other eye warrants a 10 percent evaluation. 38?C.F.R. §?4.79, Diagnostic Code 6066. 

The Board must now calculate the degree of the Veteran's visual field defect under Diagnostic Code 6080. The September 2021 and October 2022 VA examinations indicated similar visual field defects. In the right eye, a visual field contraction with remaining field between 31 to 45 degrees is evaluated as visual acuity of 20/70. In the left eye, visual field contraction with remaining field between 16 to 30 degrees should be evaluated as visual acuity of 20/100. Under Diagnostic Code 6066, corrected distance vision acuity of 20/70 and 20/100 warrants a 30 percent rating. Id. 

As the Board has determined the appropriate ratings based on visual acuity and visual field defect, the two evaluations are now combined to determine the total rating based on visual impairment. Under 38?C.F.R. §?4.25 (Combined Ratings Table), a 30 percent rating and a 10 percent rating combine to a 40 percent rating. 

The Board therefore finds that the Veteran's diabetic retinopathy warrants a 40 percent evaluation during the relevant rating period. A higher evaluation is not possible as the evidence does not show loss of visual acuity or contraction of the visual fields that most nearly approximates the criteria associated with an increased evaluation. Additionally, there is no evidence the Veteran experiences incapacitating episodes of retinopathy that most nearly approximate seven or more treatment visits during a 12 month period. In addition, the Board has considered the doctrine of reasonable doubt but has determined that it is not applicable because the evidence significantly and substantially weighs against the claim for an increased rating. 38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b); see also Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

4. Entitlement to higher ratings for diabetic peripheral neuropathy of the right upper extremity, rated as noncompensably disabling prior to September 19, 2022 and 40 percent disabling thereafter.

5. Entitlement to higher ratings for diabetic peripheral neuropathy of the left upper extremity, rated as rated as noncompensably disabling prior to September 19, 2022 and 30 percent disabling thereafter.

Service connection for diabetic peripheral neuropathy of the right and left upper extremities was granted in a July 2013 rating decision. The Veteran's peripheral neuropathy was rated as a noncompensable (0 percent) complication of diabetes and considered part of the diabetic process in accordance with 38 C.F.R. § 4.119, Diagnostic Code 7913, Note (1). Accordingly, the neuropathy was not assigned a separate noncompensable evaluation, but was instead combined with the Veteran's 20 percent evaluation for diabetes mellitus. 

The January 2023 rating decision on appeal separated the evaluations for the Veteran's upper extremity peripheral neuropathy from the diabetic process. The right upper extremity (major) was assigned a 40 percent rating, while the left upper extremity (minor) was assigned a 30 percent rating. Both increased ratings were effective September 19, 2022. The Veteran contends that higher ratings are warranted for the upper extremity neuropathy, in particular due to his weakened grip. 

The Veteran's upper extremity peripheral neuropathy is currently rated under Diagnostic Code 8513 for incomplete paralysis affecting all radicular groups. 

The Veteran is right hand dominant; thus, it is considered his major extremity for rating purposes. Under Diagnostic Code 8513 for the major extremity, a 20 percent rating is warranted for mild incomplete paralysis; a 40 percent rating for moderate incomplete paralysis; a 70 percent rating for severe incomplete paralysis; and a 90 percent rating for complete paralysis. The minor extremity warrants a 20 percent rating for mild incomplete paralysis; a 30 percent rating for moderate incomplete paralysis; a 60 percent rating for severe incomplete paralysis; and an 80 percent rating for complete paralysis. 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Diagnostic Codes 8513.

Disability involving a neurological disorder is ordinarily rated in proportion to the impairment of motor, sensory, or mental function. When the involvement is wholly sensory, the rating should be for the mild, or, at most, the moderate degree. 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.120, 4.124a.

The words "mild," "moderate," "moderately severe," and "severe" as used in the various diagnostic codes are not defined in the VA Schedule for Rating Disabilities. Rather than applying a mechanical formula, the Board must evaluate all the evidence, to the end that its decisions are equitable and just. 38 C.F.R. § 4.6. 

The adjective "mild" is defined as "not being or involving what is extreme," and "not severe: temperate." Mild, Merriam-Webster Dictionary Online, https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/mild, Definitions 2 and 3 (last visited April 1, 2025). The adjective "moderate" is defined as "not violent, severe, or intense;" and "limited in scope or effect." Moderate, Merriam-Webster Dictionary Online, https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/moderate, Definitions 3 and 5 (last visited April 1, 2025). "Severe," as an adjective, is defined as "causing discomfort or hardship;" "very painful or harmful;" "of a great degree." Severe, Merriam-Webster Dictionary Online, https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/severe, Definitions 6a, 6b, and 8 (last visited April 1, 2025). 

It is noted that the Veteran has not provided any definitions of those terms for the Board's consideration.

Regulations provide that the ratings for peripheral neurological disorders are assigned based on the relative impairment of motor function, trophic changes, or sensory disturbance. 38 C.F.R. § 4.120. Consideration is also given for loss of reflexes, pain, and muscle atrophy. See 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.123, 4.124. Thus, the Board must determine the relative severity of the neurological disability based on all the factors above, as well as the amount of impairment resulting from the condition. 

It should also be noted that use of terminology such as "severe" by VA examiners and others, although an element of evidence to be considered by the Board, is not dispositive of an issue. All evidence must be evaluated in arriving at a decision regarding an increased rating. 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.2, 4.6. 

Prior to September 19, 2022, the Board finds that a compensable evaluation is not warranted for the diabetic neuropathy of the right and left upper extremities. Upon VA examination in May 2021, the Veteran denied symptoms affecting the upper extremities. Physical examination of the upper extremities was normal aside from some decreased reflexes in the upper extremities not specifically attributed to diabetic neuropathy. In fact, following the examination, the May 2021 VA examiner concluded that the Veteran did not have peripheral neuropathy of the upper extremities. Similarly, during a July 2022 VAMC orthopedic surgery evaluation, the Veteran reported that while he had a diagnosis of peripheral neuropathy of the upper extremities, he felt his hands and arms "work pretty well." 

Thus, prior to September 19, 2022, the Veteran's peripheral neuropathy manifested few symptoms and impairment, with the May 2021 VA examiner concluding that the Veteran did not manifest any diabetic neuropathy of the upper extremities. Similarly, the Veteran reported to his VAMC orthopedist in July 2022 that his upper extremities worked "pretty well" and did not report any specific complaints or impairment. The Board therefore finds that rating the right and left upper extremity neuropathy as part of the diabetic process under Diagnostic Code 7913 prior to September 19, 2022 is appropriate as the record does not document any specific manifestants or subjective complaints due to the condition.

During the period beginning September 19, 2022, the Veteran's right upper extremity neuropathy is rated as 40 percent disabling, with the left upper extremity neuropathy rated as 30 percent disabling-both consistent with moderate incomplete paralysis of all the radicular groups. The Board finds that higher ratings are not warranted as the upper extremity neuropathy does not most nearly approximate severe as it is consistent with impairment that is wholly sensory in nature.

Upon VA examination in October 2022, the Veteran reported experiencing tingling, burning, and numbness of the hands and forearms. As a result of these sensory deficits, he reported having some difficulty with fine finger manipulation such as using tools, opening jars, and some difficulty buttoning a shirt. The VA examiner characterized the Veteran's reports of constant pain as mild. Physical examination of the upper extremities showed normal strength in the upper extremities, normal reflexes, and decreased light touch sensation in the forearms and absent light touch sensation in the fingers. The Veteran also manifested some decreased position, vibratory, and cold sense. The October 2022 VA examiner concluded the Veteran manifested moderate incomplete paralysis of the radial, ulnar, and median nerves. 

The competent medical evidence dated from September 19, 2022 therefore establishes the presence of impairment in the upper extremities that is sensory in nature. There is no lay or medical evidence of deficiencies to muscle strength, motor or reflex impairments, or symptoms that are not considered sensory. The Board acknowledges the Veteran's reports of difficulty with fine motor manipulation and dropping objects, but these complaints are contemplated by the Veteran's sensory impairments. Additionally, as the Veteran's neuropathy is limited to sensory deficiencies, the Board finds that it "limited in scope and effect" and most nearly approximates a moderate disability. Finally, the Board observes that 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a specifically provides that when neurological involvement is wholly sensory, the assigned rating should be "at most" the moderate degree. The Board therefore finds that increased ratings are not warranted for the upper extremity diabetic peripheral neuropathy at any time during the relevant ratings period. 

The Board has considered the Veteran's contentions that his symptoms are more severe than reflected by the rating above, but the Board finds the competent medical evidence, based on objective testing and medical expertise, is more probative regarding the severity of the service-connected disability. The Board has also considered whether there is any other schedular basis for granting higher ratings, but has found none. In addition, the Board has considered the doctrine of reasonable doubt but has determined that it is not applicable because the evidence significantly and substantially weighs against the claims for additional increased ratings. 38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b); see also Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

6. Entitlement to a rating higher than 20 percent for diabetic peripheral neuropathy of the right lower extremity. 

7. Entitlement to a rating higher than 20 percent for diabetic peripheral neuropathy of the left lower extremity.

Service connection for diabetic peripheral neuropathy of the right and left lower extremities was granted in a July 2013 rating decision. Initial 10 percent evaluations were assigned for each lower extremity effective October 22, 2011. The January 2023 rating decision on appeal increased the evaluations assigned the right and left lower extremity to 20 percent from September 19, 2022. The Veteran contends that higher ratings are warranted due to pain and weakness in his legs affecting his balance. 

The Veteran's diabetic neuropathy is currently rated as 20 percent disabling for each lower extremity under Diagnostic Code 8520 pertaining to incomplete paralysis of the sciatic nerve. Diagnostic Code 8520 provides that mild incomplete paralysis is rated 10 percent disabling; moderate incomplete paralysis is rated 20 percent disabling; moderately severe incomplete paralysis is rated 40 percent disabling; and severe incomplete paralysis, with marked muscular atrophy, is rated 60 percent disabling. Complete paralysis of the sciatic nerve, the foot dangles and drops, no active movement possible of muscles below the knee, flexion of knee weakened or (very rarely) lost, is rated 80 percent disabling.

As noted above, the words "mild," "moderate," "moderately severe," and "severe" as used in the various diagnostic codes are not defined in the VA Schedule for Rating Disabilities. The Board has provided definitions of the terms "mild," "moderate," and "severe," in the previous section of this decisions, and for the purposes of brevity, will not fully reproduce them here. The Board also notes that "moderately severe" is not defined in the referenced dictionary but is understood to capture symptomatology between moderate and severe. For illustrative purposes, it is interpreted to mean an injury of such severity it causes more than average pain with more than average functional impairment, such as limited ability to perform physical activities.

Regulations provide that the ratings for peripheral neurological disorders are assigned based on the relative impairment of motor function, trophic changes, or sensory disturbance. 38 C.F.R. § 4.120. Consideration is also given for loss of reflexes, pain, and muscle atrophy. See 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.123, 4.124. Thus, the Board must determine the relative severity of the neurological disability based on all the factors above, as well as the amount of impairment resulting from the condition.

The Board finds that ratings higher than 20 percent are not warranted for the diabetic peripheral neuropathy as the Veteran's incomplete paralysis of the lower extremitates most nearly approximates moderate. The competent evidence, including an October 2022 VA examination, establishes symptoms of pain in both legs, as well as decreased sensation and limitations to standing and walking. The Veteran also reported experiencing moderate constant pain in both legs at the VA examination, though he denied other symptoms of paresthesias and numbness. 

The neurological impairment associated with the Veteran's lower extremities is sensory in nature. Physical examination of the nerves at the October 2022 VA examination did not demonstrate any loss of reflexes, trophic changes, muscle atrophy, or motor dysfunction of either leg. Although the October 2022 VA examiner characterized the Veteran's incomplete paralysis of the sciatic nerves as moderately severe, the only impairments noted at the physical examination were sensory; the Veteran demonstrated decreased sensation to light touch in the ankle and lower leg, with absent sensation in the feet and toes. The same findings were noted with respect to position, vibration, and cold sense. However, as noted above, the Veteran's strength, reflexes, and motor functioning were normal. 

Based on the above, the Board finds that the Veteran's diabetic neuropathy in each leg most nearly approximates moderate incomplete paralysis of the sciatic nerve. The impairment is sensory in nature, with complaints of pain and objective loss of sensation. The Veteran's limitations to standing and walking, requiring the use of an assistive device outside the home due to decreased sensation and an inability to feel the ground, are contemplated by a 20 percent evaluation in each lower extremity. To the extent the Veteran contends his neuropathy requires the use of a walker, the Board notes that the October 2022 VA examiner clarified that the Veteran utilized a walker due to the combined impairment of his neuropathy and left knee disability. 

As the Veteran's neurological impairment is wholly sensory in nature, the Board finds that it most nearly approximates a severity that is "limited in scope or effect" and moderate. The rating criteria also specifically provide that when neurological impairment is wholly sensory, "the rating should be...at most, the moderate degree." 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a. The Board therefore finds that the service-connected lower extremity peripheral neuropathy most nearly approximates 20 percent ratings for each lower extremity under Diagnostic Code 8520.

The Board has considered the Veteran's general contentions that his symptoms are more severe than reflected by the rating above, but the Board finds the competent medical evidence, based on objective testing and medical expertise, is more probative regarding the severity of the service-connected disability. The Board has also considered whether there is any other schedular basis for granting a higher rating, but has found none. In addition, the Board has considered the doctrine of reasonable doubt but has determined that it is not applicable because the evidence significantly and substantially weighs against the claims for increased ratings. 38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b); see also Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

8. Entitlement to a rating higher than 20 percent for left knee osteochondritis with arthritic changes based on instability.

Service connection and an initial 20 percent evaluation was granted for left knee osteochondritis with arthritic changes in a January 1984 rating decision effective November 5, 1982. The current 20 percent evaluation was continued in the January 2023 rating decision on appeal. The Veteran contends that a higher rating is warranted for his left knee disability, as instability associated with the condition has worsened causing multiple falls and requiring assistive devices. 

The Veteran's left knee disability is rated as 20 percent disabling under Diagnostic Code 5257-5010. Hyphenated diagnostic codes are used when a rating under one diagnostic code requires use of an additional diagnostic code to identify the basis for the rating assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.27. The hyphenated disability will be rated by analogy under a diagnostic code for a closely related disability that affects the same anatomical functions and has closely analogous symptomatology. 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.20, 4.27. In this case, the Veteran's left knee disability contemplates instability (Diagnostic Code 5257) and posttraumatic arthritis (Diagnostic Code 5010).

The current 20 percent evaluation was assigned based on the criteria contained in Diagnostic Code 5257 pertaining to other impairment of the knee. 

Under Diagnostic Code 5257 recurrent subluxation or lateral instability warrants a maximum 30 percent evaluation for an unrepaired or failed repair of a complete ligament tear causing persistent instability, and a medical provider prescribes both an assistive device (e.g., cane(s), crutch(es), walker) and bracing for ambulation. A 20 percent evaluation is assigned for one of the following: (a) a sprain, incomplete ligament tear, or repaired complete ligament tear causing persistent instability, and a medical provider prescribes a brace and/or assistive device (e.g., cane(s), crutch(es), walker) for ambulation, or; (b) unrepaired or failed repair of complete ligament tear causing persistent instability, and a medical provider prescribes either an assistive device (e.g., cane(s), crutch(es), walker) or bracing for ambulation. A 10 percent evaluation is assigned for a sprain, incomplete ligament tear, or complete ligament tear (repaired, unrepaired, or failed repair) causing persistent instability, without a prescription from a medical provider for an assistive device (e.g., cane(s), crutch(es), walker) or bracing for ambulation. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5257.

Diagnostic Code 5257 also provides specific ratings for patellar instability. The patellofemoral complex consists of the quadriceps tendon, the patella, and the patellar tendon. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5257, Note (1). A 30 percent evaluation is warranted with instability involving the patellofemoral complex with recurrent instability after surgical repair that requires a prescription by a medical provider for a brace and either a cane or a walker. Instability involving the patellofemoral complex with recurrent instability after surgical repair that requires a prescription by a medical provider for one of the following: a brace, cane, or walker is rated as 20 percent disabling. And finally, instability involving the patellofemoral complex with recurrent instability (with or without history of surgical repair) that does not require a prescription from a medical provider for a brace, cane, or walker is rated as 10 percent disabling. Note (2) following this criteria states that a surgical procedure that does not involve repair of one or more patellofemoral components that contribute to the underlying instability shall not qualify as surgical repair for patellar instability (including, but not limited to, arthroscopy to remove loose bodies and joint aspiration). Id.

The Board finds that a higher rating is not warranted for instability of the left knee under the criteria for Diagnostic Code 5257. As noted above, the current criteria defines specific types of instability. The Board acknowledges the Veteran reported in a September 2022 statement that he utilized a cane as an assistive device with knee stability. However, with respect to lateral instability, the Veteran does not manifest a knee sprain, an incomplete ligament tear, or repaired complete ligament tear causing persistent instability. The Veteran underwent a surgical meniscus repair in 1981, but this condition represents a tear of the cartilage of the knee rather than the ligaments. Similarly, regarding the presence of any patellar instability, the Veteran has not undergone a surgical repair of the left patellofemoral complex. Furthermore, May 2021 and October 2022 VA examiners specifically found that the Veteran did not manifest the specific types of instability defined by Diagnostic Code 5257. In short, the Veteran does not meet the criteria for higher ratings based on lateral or patellar instability under Diagnostic Code 5257.

9. Entitlement to a separate rating for left knee osteochondritis with arthritic changes with painful motion.

The Board finds that while an increased rating is not warranted based on instability of the knee, a separate 10 percent evaluation is appropriate for painful noncompensable limitation of motion of the joint under 38 C.F.R. § 4.59.

38 C.F.R. § 4.59 provides for a minimum compensable rating, i.e., a 10 percent rating, under Diagnostic Code 5260 and 5261 if the criteria for a compensable rating are otherwise not met. Thus, even if the Veteran does not meet the requirements for compensable rating based on limitation of motion, 38 C.F.R. § 4.59 provides for a 10 percent evaluation based on actual painful motion. The regulation does not provide any mechanism for a rating higher than 10 percent and a higher rating is not possible under 38 C.F.R. § 4.59.

In this case, the Veteran's left knee manifests painful limited range of motion throughout the relevant rating period. Flexion was most limited at the October 2022 VA examination when the examiner estimated flexion was limited to 55 degrees with consideration of pain, fatigability, weakness, lack of endurance, and incoordination during flare-ups of symptoms. Flexion to 55 degrees is noncompensable under Diagnostic Code 5260. The Veteran has manifested full extension of the left knee to 0 degrees throughout the rating period, to include upon VA examinations in May 2021 and October 2022. As the record establishes painful noncompensable limitation of motion associated with the Veteran's left knee disability, a 10 percent evaluation, but not higher, is warranted under 38 C.F.R. § 4.59.

The Board has also considered whether a higher rating is warranted under Diagnostic Code 5010 pertaining to posttraumatic arthritis. Under this diagnostic code, arthritis is rated as limitation of motion, dislocation, or other specified instability under the affected joint. The Veteran is already in receipt of a 20 percent evaluation for left knee instability under Diagnostic Code 5257. As discussed below, the Board also finds that a separate or higher rating is not warranted under the other criteria pertaining to the knee, to include consideration of dislocation of the semilunar cartilage under Diagnostic Code 5258. 

The Board has also awarded a separate 10 percent evaluation for painful limited motion of the left knee joint under 38 C.F.R. § 4.59. The Board has determined the Veteran's limitation of motion of the left knee is noncompensable, but will determine whether a higher rating is warranted for limited motion of the left knee with consideration of functional factors and discounting the ameliorative effects of the Veteran's medication.

The Veteran has consistently reported experiencing pain in the left knee along with instability that causes falls and limitations to walking and running. The October 2022 VA examiner also found the left knee limited the Veteran's ability to squat, restricted walking to one block, and prevented him from climbing more than a few stairs. The Board finds that the Veteran's current ratings based on painful limited motion and instability contemplate the pain and physical impairments described by the Veteran and his healthcare providers. Additionally, the range of motion measurements utilized by the Board in the assignment of the separate 10 percent rating for painful motion are based on the October 2022 VA examiner's consideration of functional factors, including the presence of additional loss of motion following repetitive testing, as well as the impact of pain, weakness, fatigability, and incoordination on the Veteran's functional ability with repeated use over time and with flare-ups. Even with consideration of all relevant functional factors, the Veteran's left knee still manifested noncompensable limitation of motion.

The Board acknowledges the Veteran is competent to report the symptoms he experiences, as well as his functional abilities. While he contends his functional abilities are much worse than reflected in the current ratings, the Board finds that the competent medical evidence, based on medical expertise and objective testing, is more probative regarding the impact of functional loss on left knee motion. The weight of the evidence simply does not establish a reduction of flexion or extension so severe due to functional loss as to warrant higher ratings for the left knee. Particularly as the Veteran's reports of functional loss are considered in the award of a separate rating for painful motion of the left knee.

The Board has also considered and discounted the ameliorative effects of the Veteran's medication as set forth by the United States Court of Appeals of Veterans Claims (Court) in Jones v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 56, 63 (2012) and Ingram v. Collins, No. 23-1798, ___ Vet. App. ___ (2025). In Jones, the Court found that the Board may not deny entitlement to a higher rating on the basis of relief provided by medication when those effects are not specifically contemplated by the rating criteria. Jones at 61. The more recent case, Ingram, held that Jones applies to the Board's review of ratings under the diagnostic codes for rating musculoskeletal disabilities. Ingram, supra. The Court also held that, with regard to these and other diagnostic codes that do not reference medication, "the Board must discount beneficial medication effects when assigning an evaluation." Id. Thus, in the current case, the Board must acknowledge, discuss, and discount the beneficial effects of the medication used to treat the Veteran's knee disability

The Veteran has consistently reported treating his knee pain and other symptoms with steroid injections. VAMC treatment records also document the use of a prescribed pain killer. The Board acknowledges the Veteran's use of medication and injections, but notes that all the VA examiners, in rendering range of motion findings, documented and considered the lay statements describing functional limitations in all worst-case scenarios (e.g., during flare ups, on repetitive motion, due to lack of endurance, lack of coordination, etc.). There is no indication that the examiners considered the ameliorative effects of medication in rendering the findings in the report, nor did the examiners indicate the Veteran was on any pain medications at the time of the examination. Additionally, the Veteran reported at the October 2022 VA examination that knee injections "did not help" his left knee condition, indicating that they did not provide any ameliorative effects on his pain or functional ability. 

Based on the above, the Board finds that the VA examination reports are adequate and provide a basis to discount the Veteran's medication and steroid injections. Additionally, as the lay and medical evidence does not establish that the Veteran's range of motion as demonstrated on physical examination during the relevant rating period is improved by the use of medication, the Board finds that an award of a higher rating based on limitation of motion is not appropriate, even when discounting the effect of the Veteran's medications.

The Board has also considered whether higher or separate ratings are warranted under the other criteria for evaluating the knee. Under Diagnostic Code 5258, a maximum 20 percent evaluation is assigned for dislocated semilunar cartilage with frequent episodes of "locking," pain, and effusion into the joint. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5258. A separate 10 percent rating is also assigned for removal of the semilunar cartilage under Diagnostic Code 5259.

As noted above, the Veteran underwent repair of a meniscal tear in 1981 and therefore has a meniscal condition for the purposes of this decision. The Board also acknowledges the Veteran's reports of occasional left knee swelling at the May 2021 and October 2022 VA examinations. However, the Board finds that a separate 20 percent rating is not warranted under Diagnostic Code 5258 as the evidence does not establish "frequent" episodes of locking, pain, or effusion separately associated with a meniscal condition. Both the May 2021 and October 2022 VA examiners specifically found that the Veteran did not have residual manifestations of his meniscal condition (to include frequent episodes of locking, pain, or effusion). Furthermore, the Veteran's private and VAMC treatment records only document one finding of effusion during the relevant rating period: in April 2021 when the Veteran's primary care physician noted moderate effusion of the left knee. The Veteran is also already in receipt of a 20 percent evaluation for instability of the left knee, and the evidence does not indicate the presence of true dislocation or locking of the joint in addition to the instability described by the Veteran. As the evidence does not establish separate symptomatology associated with the Veteran's past meniscus repair, separate ratings are not warranted under Diagnostic Codes 5258 and 5259 pertaining to the semilunar cartilage of the knee.

The Board has also considered whether higher or separate ratings are possible under Diagnostic Codes 5256 and 5262, but finds that they are not for application in this case. These codes provide for ratings with a showing of ankylosis and impairment of the tibia or fibula. The medical evidence is negative for findings associated with these specific diagnostic codes and the Veteran has not alleged symptomatology producing the functional equivalent of ankylosis. Chavis v. McDonough, 34 Vet. App. 1 (2021). The Board therefore finds that higher or separate ratings under these other diagnostic codes are not appropriate.

The Veteran's left knee is therefore properly rated as 20 percent disabling for instability of the left knee, with an additional 10 percent evaluation granted for noncompensable painful motion of the left knee under 38 C.F.R. § 4.59. The Board has considered the Veteran's reports that his symptoms are more severe than reflected by the rating above, but the Board finds the competent medical evidence, based on objective testing and medical expertise, is more probative regarding the severity of the service-connected disability. The Board has also considered whether there is any other schedular basis for granting a higher rating, but has found none. In addition, the Board has considered the doctrine of reasonable doubt but has determined that it is not applicable because the evidence significantly and substantially weighs against the claim for an increased rating other than that granted above. 38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b); see also Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to TDIU prior to April 21, 2021.

2. Entitlement to basic eligibility to DEA based on permanent and total disability status prior to April 21, 2021.

The Veteran is currently in receipt of TDIU from April 21, 2021 as awarded in the April 2023 HLR decision on appeal. The Veteran contents that TDIU is warranted prior to April 21, 2021 on an extraschedular basis under 38 C.F.R. § 4.16 (b).

As a preliminary matter, the Board finds that the issue of entitlement to TDIU prior to April 21, 2021 is properly before the Board. In statements accompanying the April 21, 2021 VA Form 21-526EZ, the Veteran's attorney argued for TDIU as an inferred claim accompanying the Veteran's claims for increased ratings for diabetes mellitus and its associated complications. However, the Board finds that an earlier claim for TDIU has remained pending since at least December 2011, and the relevant rating period for TDIU therefore reaches back prior to April 21, 2021. 

In November 2011, the Veteran filed a claim for service connection for small vessel disease secondary to diabetes mellitus. On December 15, 2011, he submitted a statement contending that he not able to work due to his service connected disabilities. A month later, on January 19, 2012, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 21-8940 (Veteran's Application for Increased Compensation Based on Unemployability). The claim for TDIU was denied in a July 2013 rating decision with notice of the decision provided to the Veteran on July 29, 2013. 

On July 30, 2013-the day after he was mailed notice of the July 2013 rating decision-the Veteran was seen at the VAMC by his endocrinologist. At that time, he reported losing his commercial truck driving license because of the severity of his service connected diabetes mellitus and left knee disability. 

The Board finds that the July 30, 2013 VAMC medical record, generated the day after issuance of the July 2013 rating decision, constitutes new and material evidence regarding whether the Veteran was unemployable due to service connected disabilities. This VAMC record was not addressed, either explicitly or implicitly, by any subsequent AOJ adjudication of the claim until the January 2023 rating decision and April 2023 HLR decision. In accordance with 38 C.F.R. § 3.156 (b), the claim for TDIU remained pending following the July 2013 rating decision. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.156 (b) (New and material evidence received prior to the expiration of the appeal period will be considered as having been filed in connection with the claim which was pending at the beginning of the appeal period.).

Based on the above, the award of TDIU in the April 2023 HLR decision (with an effective date of April 21, 2021) is not a full grant of the benefit sought, and the claim for TDIU prior to April 21, 2021 remains pending. 

The Veteran contends that entitlement to a TDIU is warranted on an extraschedular basis under 38 C.F.R. § 4.16 (b). The Board itself may not assign an extraschedular rating in the first instance. Bowling v. Principi, 15 Vet. App. 1, 10 (2001) (recognizing that "the [Board] is not authorized to assign an extraschedular rating in the first instance under 38 C.F.R. § 3.321 (b)" or § 4.16 (b)); accord Smallwood v. Brown, 10 Vet. App. 93, 98 (1997); Floyd v. Brown, 9 Vet. App. 88, 94-95 (1996). As the Board cannot make a determination regarding extraschedular consideration in the first instance, the claim must be remanded so the issue can be referred to the Director of Compensation and Pension (Director). This remand is necessary in order to fulfill a regulatory or statutory duty. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802 (a).

The Board also notes that the Veteran's representative argues in a December 2023 statement accompanying the VA Form 10182 that referral to the Director is not required; rather, the representative contends that the Board may award extraschedular TDIU in the first instance. The representative specifically notes that 38 C.F.R. § 4.16 (b) states that the "rating board should submit to the Director...for extra-schedular compensation..." (emphasis added). The representative notes that the use of the word "should" is permissive, not mandatory. The Board acknowledges the representative's argument, but cannot overlook the holding of Bowling, nor VA's longstanding policy that claims for extraschedular consideration must be referred to the Director in the first instance. As such, the Board finds that referral is appropriate in this case.

Finally, the Veteran's claim for basic eligibility to DEA based on permanent and total disability status prior to April 21, 2021is inextricably intertwined with the claim for TDIU, and is therefore also remanded.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

(Continued on the next page)

?

Refer the claim for entitlement to TDIU on an extraschedular basis prior to April 21, 2021 to the Director of Compensation and Pension Service pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 4.16 (b).

 

 

Danette Mincey

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

M. Riley, Attorney for the Board of Veterans' Appeals

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.