Citation Nr: A25032723
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 221215-305672
DATE: April 9, 2025

ISSUE

Entitlement to a waiver of recovery of an overpayment of Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) pension benefits, in the amount of $30,936.00, to include a challenge to the validity of the debt.

REMANDED

Entitlement to a waiver of recovery of an overpayment of Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) pension benefits, in the amount of $30,936.00, to include a challenge to the validity of the debt is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the Army from December 1971 to December 1973, and from January 1982 to November 1988. The Veteran died in September 1989, and the Appellant is the Veteran's surviving spouse.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a July 2022 administrative decision, issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Debt Management Center (DMC).

Following the July 2022 DMC decision, the Appellant filed a VA Form 10182, Notice of Disagreement (NOD). The Appellant selected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the July 2022 decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.303. The Board cannot consider evidence submitted or received after the July 2022 decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. 

If evidence was associated with the claims file during a period of time when additional evidence was not allowed, the Board has not considered it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. § 20.300. If the Appellant would like VA to consider any evidence that was added to the claims file that the Board could not consider, the Appellant may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

As discussed below, in addition to claiming entitlement to a waiver of recovery of an overpayment of VA pension benefits in the amount of $30,936.00 the Appellant has also challenged the validity of the debt. Thus, the claim has been expanded to include that challenge, as reflected on the title page.

Entitlement to a waiver of recovery of an overpayment of Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) pension benefits, in the amount of $30,936.00, to include a challenge to the validity of the debt is remanded.

The Appellant has requested a waiver of recovery of VA pension benefits. She has also appealed the validity of the debt.

For reference, basic entitlement to pension exists if, among other things, the claimant's income is not in excess of the maximum annual pension rate (MAPR) specified in 38 C.F.R. § 3.23. 38 U.S.C. § 1541; 38 C.F.R. § 3.3 (a)(3).

By way of background, following the Veteran's death, the Appellant was granted VA pension benefits, effective October 1, 1989. She then regularly received correspondence informing her of her updated pension rate and reminding her to inform VA if, and when, her income changed.

In October 2020, after a request from VA, the Appellant submitted a VA Form 21P-8416, Medical Expense Report, and a Care Expense statement.

VA took this information and increased the Appellant's death pension award. They noted that they were considering her medical expenses, which reduced her countable income, as well as her annual wages from the Social Security Administration (SSA).

In December 2021, the Appellant again submitted updated medical expenses, however pages of the VA Form 21-8416 were missing. The Appellant responded with the missing pages after VA alerted her to this fact, later in December 2021.

The returned forms were lacking some information however, which VA identified in December 2021. They wrote to the Appellant requesting that she submit clarifying information on her medical reports, including those expenses from February 2020 through December 2020, January 2021 through February 2021, and March 2021 through December 2021.

The Appellant then submitted the requested information in February 2022. She included a copy of the initial medical expense form she had submitted in December 2021, along with an updated form. She submitted information from February 2020 through December 2020, January 2021 through February 2021, another form with January 2021 through December 2021, and another form with March 2021 through December 2021. Some of this information and the covered periods overlapped.

Following that, an internal award print screen was generated, noting that the Appellant's pension award was terminated on March 1, 2020, because the Appellant's income was greater than the MAPR, effective December 1, 2019. The award print screen notes a debt of $30,936.00. It is unclear from the screen provided if the award was terminated from March 2020, or from December 1, 2019.

Importantly, clarity on the debt was not provided because the Appellant was not sent a Notification letter informing her how, and why, her pension benefits were terminated retroactively. The award print screen is an internal VA screen, and even if it was sent to the Appellant, it does not provide a full description as to how the debt was created and calculated.

In July 2022, the Appellant was sent a letter from the Debt Management Center (DMC), informing her that an overpayment had been created in the amount of $30,936.00. The Appellant was informed of her rights to dispute the debt and/or to request a waiver of recovery of the debt. Again, this was just a letter informing her of her rights, and the amount of the debt. No explanation for how the debt was created was given.

The Appellant returned her copy of the DMC letter, which she had hand-written on. She circled the amount of debt and wrote she "disagrees with [overpayment]" and wished to appeal the claim to the Board. She wrote that the debt was in error.

An audit report is included within the claims file, but it is unclear if that audit was sent to the Appellant. The report appears to be for internal VA-use only, and no sender address is included to show that this information was. No description is included within the audit, even to explain what some of the abbreviated terms mean.

The Appellant then submitted her VA Form 10182, NOD. She wrote that she was requesting a "waiver of overpayment," and selected the Direct Review docket.

The Appellant's claim is now before the Board.

Of note, months after the certification of the Appellant's claim to the Board, the Appellant also submitted VA Form 5655, Financial Status Report(s), which the Board is unable to review for AMA evidentiary purposes. The Board observes, however, that these FSRs do not appear to have been forwarded to the Committee on Waivers and Compromises (COWC). Furthermore, recent reports from January 2024 note that the Appellant had contacted VA because she was still disputing the debt and had no idea where the debt came from. In those letters, VA officials acknowledge that she was not sent a decision informing her why her pension debt was terminated, however that Decision has still not been associated with the claims file. While all this information is not strictly reviewable by the Board, due to the AMA, the Board still recognizes that much of the development required has still not occurred, even after the Appellant's claim was certified to the Board in December 2022.

Again, the Appellant's claim is now before the Board, however additional evidentiary development is required before the claim on appeal is adjudicated.

One of the effects of the AMA is to narrow the set of circumstances in which the Board must remand appeals to the AOJ for further development instead of immediately remanding them directly. Nevertheless, even under the AMA the Board still has the duty to remand issues when necessary to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error. See 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

To begin, the Appellant was never issued a Decision as to how the debt was generated. The Board has reviewed the claims file, and it appears that only an internal Award Print screen is available. Even if this screen had provided a reason for how and why the debt was created, that information was not sent to the Appellant. Of note, the financial audits whereby the debt was calculated were also not sent to the Appellant. This is important not only from a due process standpoint, but as the Appellant has directly challenged the validity of the debt by returning the DMC letter stating that the overpayment was an "error."

The Court of Veterans Appeals (Court) has directed that appellate review by the Board on the Veteran's waiver claim must be deferred pending formal adjudication of the Veteran's challenge to the validity of the debt by the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ). Schaper v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 430, 437 (1991) ("when a Veteran raises the validity of the debt as part of a waiver application... it is arbitrary and capricious and an abuse of discretion to adjudicate the waiver application without first deciding a veteran's challenge to the lawfulness of the debt asserted against him or her"); VAOPGCPREC 6-98 (July 24, 1998) (holding that when a veteran challenges the validity of the debt and seeks waiver of the debt, the [Regional Office] must first fully review the debt's validity and, if the office believes the debt to be valid, prepare a written decision fully justifying the validity of the debt before referring the waiver request to the Committee on Waivers and Compromises (COWC)). A debtor may dispute the amount or existence of a debt, which is a right that may be exercised separately from a request for waiver or at the same time. 38 C.F.R. § 1.911(c)(1). Resolution of the creation issue must precede consideration of the waiver issue.

Again, that development did not take place. Despite the Appellant's challenge, no formal finding has been made as to the validity of the debt. In fact, she has not even been sent a decision on how and why the overpayment was created. Therefore, the Board finds that a pre-decisional Duty to Assist error has taken place.

Second, the Appellant has requested a waiver of recovery of the debt. It is clear from the fact pattern that the Appellant faces financial hardship - a factor which arguably made her, in part, eligible for VA pension benefits in the first place. This is in addition to her repeated submissions of medical expenses, showing that she receives in-home care and has numerous health difficulties. Thus, affording her the benefit of the doubt, arguments surrounding her waiver claim were present even before she submitted her VA Form 10182, NOD. Within that Form she specifically requested a waiver of recovery of the debt. And while the Board is restricted from reviewing the content of the submitted FSRs, because they were associated with the claims file after the July 2022 DMC letter on appeal, the Board is cognizant that the COWC has not decided her claim on the merits. Collectively, because none of this development has taken place, the Board finds that a second duty to assist error has taken place.

The Board further finds that referral on these grounds would, at the very least, have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the Appellant's claim. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802. See further, Schaper, Id.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. The RO must make a formal finding as to the validity of the overpayment created. If deemed necessary, an explanatory audit should be included which accounts for, at the very least, the Appellant's calculated income, the medical expenses considered, and the amount of pension benefits she was paid and entitled to. Importantly, this formal finding/Decision, as well as the audit, must be sent to the Appellant at her current address of record. If any amount of the purported overpayment is determined to be valid, the Appellant should again be informed of any rights/obligations associated with the overpayment.

The RO is reminded that when an Appellant raises the validity of the debt as part of a waiver application, the issue regarding the challenge to the lawfulness of the debt asserted against the Appellant must first be decided. See Schaper v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 430, 437 (1991).

2. Following the decision as to the validity of the debt (and if any portion of the debt is still found to be valid), the RO is to refer the issue related to a waiver of recovery of the debt to the Committee on Waivers and Compromises (COWC) for any additional development deemed necessary, followed by a decision on the issue of entitlement to a waiver of recovery of the debt. The COWC should request an updated VA Form 5655, Financial Status Report (FSR), if deemed necessary.

The COWC is directed to consider the Appellant's medical situation, her explicit and/or implied financial hardship, and if recovery of the overpayment would defeat the purpose of pension benefits.

 

 

Michael A. Pappas

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	G. Mulrain, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.