Citation Nr: A25032283
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240510-438958
DATE: April 8, 2025

ORDER

The November 2023 rating decision that severed (discontinued) entitlement to special monthly compensation based upon housebound status effective October 18, 2017, not being proper, the appeal is granted.

REMANDED

Entitlement to special monthly compensation based on aid and attendance is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The AOJ did not follow the proper procedure for the severance (discontinuance) of special monthly compensation based upon housebound status.

2. The severance (discontinuance) of the Veteran's special monthly compensation based upon housebound status was retroactive to the date of the initial grant.

3. There is no evidence of fraud by the Veteran.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The severance (or discontinuance) of entitlement to special monthly compensation based upon housebound status effective October 18, 2017, was not proper.  38 U.S.C. § 5112; 38 C.F.R. § 3.105.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from September 1979 until his honorable discharge in October 1982.  See October 1982 DD Form 214 (Certificate of Release or Discharge from Active Duty).

The rating decision(s) on appeal were issued in November 2023 and January 2024, and constitutes initial decision(s); therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.  See November 2023 Rating Decision; see also January 2024 Rating Decision.

In the May 2024 VA Form 10182 (Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement)), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  See May 2024 VA Form 10182 (Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement)), Part II.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the respective November 2023 and January 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decisions on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of entitlement to special monthly compensation based on the need for aid and attendance, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Severance (or Discontinuance)

Service Connection (or Special Monthly Compensation) will be severed (or discontinued) only where evidence establishes that it is clearly and unmistakably erroneous (CUE) (the burden of proof being on the Government).  38 C.F.R. § 3.105(d).

When severance (or discontinuance) of service connection (or Special Monthly Compensation) is considered warranted, a rating proposing severance (or discontinuance) will be prepared setting forth all material facts and reasons.  The claimant will be notified at his or her latest address of record of the contemplated action and furnished detailed reasons therefor and will be given 60 days for the presentation of additional evidence to show that service connection should be maintained. Unless otherwise provided in paragraph (i) of this section, if additional evidence is not received within that period, final rating action will be taken and the award will be reduced or discontinued, if in order, effective the last day of the month in which a 60-day period from the date of notice to the beneficiary of the final rating action expires.  38 C.F.R. § 3.105(d).

A change in diagnosis may be accepted as a basis for severance action if the examining physician or physicians or other proper medical authority certifies that, in the light of all accumulated evidence, the diagnosis on which service connection was predicated is clearly erroneous.  This certification must be accompanied by a summary of the facts, findings, and reasons supporting the conclusion.  38 C.F.R. § 3.105(d).

To establish that a grant of service connection (or establish special monthly compensation) was the product of CUE, VA must show that (1) either the correct facts as they were known at the time were not before the adjudicator, the adjudicator made an erroneous factual finding, or the statutory or regulatory provisions were incorrectly applied; (2) the alleged error was undebatable, not merely a disagreement as to how the facts were weighted or evaluated; and (3) the error manifestly changed the outcome of the prior decision. See Allen v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 54, 58-59 (2007); Stallworth v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 482, 487-88 (2006); cf. Bustos v. West, 179 F.3d 1378, 1380-81 (Fed. Cir. 1999); Damrel v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 242, 245 (1994); Russell v. Principi, 3 Vet. App. 310, 313-14, 319 (1992) (en banc).  A clear and unmistakable error is one about which reasonable minds cannot differ. See, e.g., 38 C.F.R. § 20.1403(a).

In most respects, the CUE standard for severing (or discontinuing) service connection (or special monthly compensation) under 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(d) is equivalent to the CUE standard for reversing or revising a prior final decision under 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(a).  See Baughman v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 563, 566 (1991).  38 C.F.R. § 3.105(d) places at least as high a burden of proof on the VA when it seeks to sever service connection as 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(a) places upon an appellant seeking to have an unfavorable previous determination overturned.  See id. 

However, the determination is not limited to the law and the record that existed at the time of the original decision. VA may consider medical evidence and diagnoses that postdate the original award of service connection to demonstrate that the diagnosis on which service connection was predicated is clearly erroneous. Stallworth, 20 Vet. App. At 488. The Secretary's burden is not to prove clear and unmistakable error in the original decision in the same manner a claimant would show CUE under 38 U.S.C. § 5109A or 38 C.F.R. § 7111.  Id. 

A decision that is reversed or amended on the basis of CUE is revised to conform to the true state of the facts or the law that existed at the time of the original adjudication. Allen, 21 Vet. App. At 62 (internal quotations omitted).

In addition, when fraud is found to have formed the basis for an award of service-connected benefits, regardless of the length of time a claimant has been in receipt of those benefits, severance of the award can be made upon a showing of fraud alone.  Roberts v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 416, 428-29 (2010).

Fraud is defined in VA regulations as an intentional misrepresentation of fact, or the intentional failure to disclose pertinent facts, for the purpose of obtaining or retaining VA benefits, with knowledge that the misrepresentation or failure to disclose may result in the erroneous award or retention of such benefits. 38 U.S.C. § 501; 38 C.F.R. § 3.1(aa)(2).

The procedural protection provisions afforded under 38 C.F.R. § 3.105 do not apply where an award was based on an act or commission or omission of fraud by the payee, or with his or her knowledge.  Roberts v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 416, 426 (2010).

The November 2023 rating decision that severed (discontinued) entitlement to special monthly compensation based upon housebound status effective October 18, 2017, not being proper, the appeal is granted.

The Veteran asserts that the severance (or discontinuance) of special monthly compensation based upon housebound status was not proper.  However, the Veteran has not provided a basis of his assertion.  See May 2024 VA Form 10182 (Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement)).

The Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) did not follow the applicable due process procedures in severing service connection.  A November 2023 letter from VA, which included the November 2023 rating decision, notified the Veteran of the proposal to sever (or discontinue) special monthly compensation based upon housebound status, effective October 18, 2017, due to clear and unmistakable error.  The November 2023 letter advised the Veteran that he had 30-days to request a personal hearing and 60-days to submit medical or other evidence to show that the severance should not be made.  See November 2023 Notification Letter.

The Veteran did not request a personal hearing, nor did he submit medical or other evidence to show that the severance (or discontinuance) should not be made. 

In January 2024, the AOJ issued the decision to sever (or discontinue) special monthly compensation based upon housebound status, effective October 18, 2017.  The severance (or discontinuance) of special monthly compensation based upon housebound status was not effective the last day of the month in which a 60-day period from the date of notice to the beneficiary of the final rating action expires.  In contrast, the AOJ severed (or discontinued) the Veteran's special monthly compensation based upon housebound status retroactively to October 18, 2017, the date that it was initially granted.

Although in very rare circumstances (issues of fraud), a retroactive severance (or discontinuance) is permitted, the evidence does not demonstrate that the Veteran committed fraud in obtaining entitlement to special monthly compensation based upon housebound status.

The first question for the Board is if the AOJ followed the appropriate procedures to sever (or discontinue) special monthly compensation based upon housebound status.  The Board notes that the AOJ appropriately proposed the rating decision, afforded the Veteran 30-days to request a Personal Hearing, and provided the Veteran 60-days to submit evidence.  However, because the AOJ made the severance effective retroactively to the date of the initial grant of special monthly compensation based upon housebound status without evidence of fraud by the Veteran, the Board finds that the AOJ did not follow the appropriate procedures for severance of special monthly compensation based upon housebound status.

Therefore, the Veteran's appeal is granted and restoration of his special monthly compensation based upon housebound status is appropriate.

The Veteran is advised that this decision does not prevent the AOJ from severing (or discontinuing) his special monthly compensation based upon housebound status in the future, if it is done appropriately.  This decision was made based solely upon a failure by the AOJ to follow the proper procedure for severance (or discontinuance) of special monthly compensation based upon housebound status.  The Board has not considered nor addressed the merits of severance (or discontinuance) of special monthly compensation based upon housebound status.

REMANDED

Entitlement to special monthly compensation based on aid and attendance is remanded.

Where VA provides the veteran with an examination, the examination must be adequate.  Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007).

The Veteran was afforded an Aid and Attendance or Housebound Examination in September 2023.  The September 2023 VA examiner noted that the Veteran was a healthy appearing male in a wheelchair that requires assistance for transfers, hygiene, dressing, bathing, cooking meals, and toileting.

However, the September 2023 VA examiner does not address what disabilities (including but not limited to addressing service-connected and nonservice-connected disabilities) require the Veteran to obtain regular aid and attendance.

1. For any service-connected disability that produces a need for the Veteran's wheelchair use and/or produces the Veteran's need for regular aid and attendance, an examination shall be scheduled with an appropriate clinician, preferably a medical doctor, if there is not a current VA examination. (The AOJ is advised that an examination should be within the past 23 months from adjudication to be considered current).

For any musculoskeletal disabilities, the examiner must test the Veteran's active motion, passive motion, and pain with weight-bearing and without weight-bearing.  If it is not possible to provide a specific measurement without speculation, the examiner must state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training).

For any musculoskeletal disabilities, the examiner must attempt to elicit information regarding the severity, frequency, and duration of any flare-ups, and the degree of functional loss during flare-ups.  If it is not possible to provide a specific measurement based on direct observation, the examiner should provide an estimate, if at all possible, of the additional impairment due to flare-ups based on the other evidence of record and the Veteran's statements.  If it is not possible to provide a specific measurement without speculation, the examiner must state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training).

2. After the above development, schedule the Veteran for a VA examination by an appropriate clinician for his claim for entitlement to special monthly compensation due to the need of regular aid and attendance, preferably with a medical doctor.  The examiner must review the entire claims file.

The examiner should specifically discuss (a) Do the Veteran's service-connected disabilities alone require regular and attendance?; (b) What service-connected disabilities require the Veteran's use of a wheelchair?; (c) What service-connected disabilities require the Veteran's need for regular aid and attendance?; (d) What nonservice-connected disabilities require the Veteran's need for regular aid and attendance?; (e) Does the current severity of the Veteran's service-connected radiculopathy of the bilateral lower extremities require the use of the wheelchair and inability to perform the reported function(s) of daily living? (f) What records support the Veteran's assertion(s) that the examiner has relied upon?

The examiner must provide a detailed rationale for all opinions, including citations to any medical and/or scientific research that the examiner has relied upon.  If the examiner is unable to provide an opinion, the examiner must note if the inability is due to a lack of personal knowledge (the examiner does not have the knowledge or training); or a lack of knowledge in the medical community (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts); or a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required).

 

G. William Riggs

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	G. Deemer, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.