Citation Nr: A25032776
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240301-421469
DATE: April 9, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an initial compensable rating for scar, status post appendectomy, effective September 25, 2023, is denied.

Entitlement to an initial compensable rating for rhinitis, effective September 25, 2023, is denied.

Entitlement to an initial compensable rating for sinusitis, effective September 25, 2023, is denied.

Entitlement to an initial compensable rating for erectile dysfunction, effective September 25, 2023, is denied. 

Entitlement to an initial compensable rating for testicular condition, right (varicocele), effective September 25, 2023. is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for inguinal hernia is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for right wrist carpal tunnel syndrome is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1.  From the date of award of service connection, September 25, 2023, the Veteran's scar status post appendectomy is superficial and does not exceed 6 square inches; nor is it painful or unstable.

2.  From the date of award of service connection, September 25, 2023, the Veteran's rhinitis has not been manifested by greater than 50 percent obstruction of the nasal passage on both sides, the complete obstruction of the nasal passage on one side, or polyps.

3.  From the date of award of service connection, September 25, 2023, the Veteran's sinusitis has not been manifested by incapacitating episodes or non-incapacitating episodes.

4.  From the date of award of service connection, September 25, 2023, the Veteran's erectile dysfunction has not been manifested by deformity of the penis with loss of erectile power.  

5.  From the date of award of service connection, September 23, 2023, the Veteran's testicular condition, right (varicocele) has not been manifested by complete atrophy of his right testicle.

6.  The evidence persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran has had an inguinal hernia at any time during or approximate to the pendency of the claim.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1.  The criteria for an initial compensable rating for scar, status post appendectomy, effective September 25, 2023, have not been met.  38 U.S.C. § 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.151, 3.155, 3.400, 4.118, Diagnostic Codes 7802.

2.  The criteria for an initial compensable rating for rhinitis, effective September 25, 2023, have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. Part 4, including § 4.97, Diagnostic Code 6522.

3. The criteria for an initial compensable rating for sinusitis, effective September 25, 2023, have not been met.  38 U.S.C. § 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. Part 4, including § 4.97, Diagnostic Code 6513.

4. The criteria for an initial compensable rating for erectile dysfunction, effective September 25, 2023, have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. Part 4, including §§ 4.7, 4.115b, Diagnostic Code 7522.

5.  The criteria for an initial compensable rating for testicular condition, right (varicocele), effective September 25, 2023, have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. Part 4, including §§ 4.7, 4.115b, Diagnostic Code 7543.

6.  The criteria for service connection for inguinal hernia have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from December 2015 to December 2019.

In a December 2023 rating decision, service connection was denied for inguinal hernia, right carpal tunnel syndrome and sleep apnea.  Subsequently, in a January 2024 rating decision, service connection was granted for appendectomy scar, rhinitis, sinusitis, erectile dysfunction and right testicular condition, all effective September 25, 2023.  In the March 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran appealed these issues and elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the December 2023 and January 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decisions on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

With respect to the issues decided herein, if the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of entitlement to service connection right carpal tunnel syndrome and sleep apnea, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Increased Rating Claims

Disability evaluations are determined by the application of the Schedule for Rating Disabilities, which assigns ratings based on the average impairment of earning capacity resulting from a service-connected disability.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. Part 4.  Where there is a question as to which of two evaluations shall be applied, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating. Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7.

To evaluate the level of disability and any changes in condition, it is necessary to consider the complete medical history of the Veteran's condition.  Schafrath v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 589, 594 (1991).   As the appeal arises from the original assignment of a disability evaluation following an award of service connection, the severity of the disability at issue is to be considered during the entire period from the initial assignment of the disability rating to the present time.  See Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119 (1999).  Separate ratings for distinct periods of time, based on the facts are for consideration.  Id. at 126.  

As noted above, service connection for these disorders has been awarded effective September 25, 2023.  The record shows that the Veteran filed his initial claim in October 2023.  The evidence does not show, nor has the Veteran asserted that he submitted a claim prior to the current effective date.  As such, an earlier effective date for the award of service connection is not warranted and the Board will determine whether initial higher ratings are warranted from the date.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.400.

Scar status post appendectomy

The Veteran has generally asserted that a compensable rating is warranted for his appendectomy scar. 

The Veteran's scar, status post appendectomy has been rated under 38 C.F.R. § 4.118, Diagnosed 7802, which applies to burn scars or scars due to other causes, not of the head, face, or neck, that are not associated with underlying soft tissue damage.  Under this code, a scar exceeding an area or areas of 144 square inches (929 square centimeters) warrants a compensable, maximum 10 percent rating.  Note (1) reads: For the purposes of Diagnostic Codes 7801 and 7802, the six (6) zones of the body are defined as each extremity, anterior trunk, and posterior trunk. The midaxillary line divides the anterior trunk from the posterior trunk.  Note (2) reads: A separate evaluation may be assigned for each affected zone of the body. Combine the separate evaluations under §4.25.  Alternatively, if a higher evaluation would result from adding the areas affected from multiple zones of the body, a single evaluation may also be assigned under this diagnostic code.  38 C.F.R. § 4.118, Diagnostic Code 7802.

Turning to other rating codes that apply to scars, in this case, Diagnostic Code 7800 is not for application as it applies to burn scars or other scars of the head, face or neck. 38 C.F.R. § 4.118, Diagnostic Code 7800.  Diagnostic Code 7801 contemplates burn scars or scars due to other causes, not of the head, face, or neck, that are associated with underlying soft tissue damage.  38 C.F.R. § 4.118, Diagnostic Code 7801.  Under this code, a 10 percent rating is awarded when the area of the scar(s) covers at least 6 square inches (39 square centimeters), but less than 12 square inches (77 square centimeters).  Higher ratings are available for when scars cover greater areas.

Further, Diagnostic Code 7804 provides disability ratings for scars that are unstable or painful.  A 10 percent rating is warranted for one or two scars that are unstable or painful.  A 20 percent rating is warranted for three or four scars that are unstable or painful.  A maximum 30 percent rating is warranted for five or more scars that are unstable or painful.  Note (1) states that an unstable scar is one where, for any reason, there is frequent loss of covering of skin over the scar. Note (2) provides that if one or more scars are both unstable and painful, an additional 10 percent should be added to the evaluation based on the total number of unstable or painful scars. Note (3) states that scars evaluated under diagnostic codes 7800, 7801, 7802, or 7805 may also receive an evaluation under this diagnostic code, when applicable. 38 C.F.R. § 4.118, Diagnostic 7804.

Based on the evidence of record, the Board finds that an initial compensable rating for scar, status post appendectomy is not warranted under Diagnostic Code 7802.  The January 2024 VA examination does not document that the Veteran's right lower quadrant scar covers an area of 144 square inches or greater to warrant a 10 percent rating under Diagnostic Code 7802.  The VA examination shows that the Veteran's appendectomy scar measures 3 X .5 cm.  The approximate total scar area is 1.5 cm.   The remaining clinical records do not address the severity of the scar for rating purposes.

Moreover, the Board also finds that higher ratings are not warranted under the other diagnostic codes pertaining to scars.  In this regard, there have been no findings that the Veteran's scar has underlying soft tissue damage to warrant a higher rating under Diagnostic Code 7801.  The VA examiner expressly found no underlying soft tissue damage.  There is also no finding that the scar is unstable or painful to warrant a compensable rating under Diagnostic Code 7804.  Again, the VA clearly found that the Veteran's scars were not painful or unstable.  Further, as no other symptoms have been documented, a higher rating is also not warranted based other disabling effects under Diagnostic Code 7805.   In this regard, the VA examination also noted that there was no limitation of function.

The Board has carefully reviewed and considered the Veteran's contentions regarding the severity of his scar.  The Board acknowledges that the Veteran, in advancing this appeal, believes that the disabilities on appeal have been more severe than the assigned disability ratings reflect.  Moreover, the Veteran is competent to report observable symptoms.  Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465 (1994).  In this case, the competent medical evidence offering detailed, specific, and specialized determinations pertinent to the rating criteria is the most probative evidence for evaluating the Veteran's symptoms for the scar on appeal.  The medical evidence also largely contemplates the Veteran's descriptions of symptoms.

The Board has also considered whether staged ratings under Fenderson, supra, are appropriate; however, the Board finds that his symptomatology has been stable since the award of service connection.  Therefore, assigning staged ratings for such disability is not warranted.

In conclusion, the Board finds that the evidence persuasively weighs against the Veteran's claim for an initial compensable rating for scar, status post appendectomy.  In denying such a rating, the Board finds the benefit of the doubt doctrine is not applicable.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7.

Rhinitis

The Veteran is service connected for rhinitis, which has been evaluated as noncompensable.  The Veteran generally contends that a higher rating is warranted.

Under 38 C.F.R. § 4.97, Diagnostic Code 6522, allergic or vasomotor rhinitis without polyps, but with greater than 50 percent obstruction of nasal passage on both sides or complete obstruction on one side warrants a 10 percent rating. Allergic or vasomotor rhinitis with polyps results in a maximum 30 percent rating.

Based on the evidence of record, the Board finds that a compensable rating is not warranted for allergic rhinitis.  In this regard, the Veteran's allergic rhinitis does not result in greater than 50 percent obstruction of the nasal passage on both sides, the complete obstruction of the nasal passage on one side, or polyps.  The January 2024 VA examination explicitly found no obstruction or polyps.  Moreover, VA records are silent with respect to any obstruction or nasal polyps.  

Moreover, as discussed further below, the Veteran has already been assigned a separate rating for his sinusitis symptoms.  The medical evidence does not show that the Veteran has been diagnosed with any other diseases of the nose and throat to warrant a higher or separate rating under other diagnostic codes pertaining to such.

The Board has carefully reviewed and considered the Veteran's statements regarding the severity of his service-connected rhinitis.  Again, the Veteran is competent to report observable symptoms.  Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465 (1994).  In this case, however, the competent medical evidence offering detailed specific specialized determinations pertinent to the rating criteria are the most probative evidence with regard to evaluating the pertinent symptoms for the disability on appeal; the medical evidence also largely contemplates the Veteran's descriptions of symptoms.  The lay testimony has been considered together with the probative medical evidence clinically evaluating the severity of the pertinent disability symptoms.

The Board has considered whether staged ratings under Fenderson, supra, are appropriate for the Veteran's service-connected rhinitis; however, the Board finds that his symptomatology has been stable since the award of service connection.  Therefore, assigning staged ratings for such disability is not warranted.

In sum, the Board finds that an initial compensable rating for rhinitis is not warranted.  In denying a higher rating, the Board has considered the applicability of the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine.  However, as the evidence persuasively weighs against a higher or an additional separate rating, that doctrine is not applicable.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7. 

Sinusitis

The Veteran also generally asserts that a compensable rating is warranted for his sinusitis.

The General Rating Formula for Sinusitis (Diagnostic Codes 6510 to 6514) provides a noncompensable rating if detected by x-ray only; a 10 percent rating for one or two incapacitating episodes per year of sinusitis requiring prolonged (lasting four to six weeks) antibiotic treatment, or; three to six non-incapacitating episodes per year of sinusitis characterized by headaches, pain, and purulent discharge or crusting; a 30 percent rating for three or more incapacitating episodes per year of sinusitis requiring prolonged (lasting four to six weeks) antibiotic treatment, or; more than six non-incapacitating episodes per year of sinusitis characterized by headaches, pain, and purulent discharge or crusting; and a 50 percent rating following radical surgery with chronic osteomyelitis, or; near constant sinusitis characterized by headaches, pain and tenderness of affected sinus, and purulent discharge or crusting after repeated surgeries.  38 C.F.R. § 4.97.  A Note to the General Rating Formula provides that an incapacitating episode of sinusitis means one that requires bed rest and treatment by a physician. 

Based on the evidence of record, the Board finds that an initial compensable rating is not warranted for sinusitis.  In this regard, the January 2024 VA examination clearly found that the Veteran did not suffer from incapacitating or non-incapacitating episodes warranting a compensable rating.  VA clinical records are also silent with respect to such episodes.  

Moreover, with the exception of rhinitis discussed above, the medical evidence does not show that the Veteran has been diagnosed with any other diseases of the nose and throat to warrant a higher or separate rating under other diagnostic codes pertaining to such.

The Board has carefully reviewed and considered the Veteran's statements regarding the severity of his service-connected sinusitis.  Moreover, again, the Veteran is competent to report observable symptoms.  Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465 (1994).  In this case, however, the competent medical evidence offering detailed specific specialized determinations pertinent to the rating criteria are the most probative evidence with regard to evaluating the pertinent symptoms for the disability on appeal; the medical evidence also largely contemplates the Veteran's descriptions of symptoms.  The lay testimony has been considered together with the probative medical evidence clinically evaluating the severity of the pertinent disability symptoms.

The Board has considered whether staged ratings under Fenderson, supra, are appropriate for the Veteran's service-connected sinusitis; however, the Board finds that his symptomatology has been stable since the award of service connection.  Therefore, assigning staged ratings for such disability is not warranted.

In sum, the Board finds that an initial compensable rating for sinusitis is not warranted.  In denying a higher rating, the Board has considered the applicability of the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine.  However, as the evidence persuasively weighs against a higher or an additional separate rating, that doctrine is not applicable.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7. 

Erectile dysfunction

The Veteran has generally asserted that a higher rating is warranted for his erectile dysfunction.  Under diagnostic code 7522 for erectile dysfunction, penis deformity, with loss of erectile power is evaluated as 20 percent disabling.  38 C.F.R. § 4.115b, Diagnostic Code 7522.   In every instance where the schedule does not provide a zero percent evaluation for a diagnostic code, a zero percent evaluation shall be assigned when the requirements for a compensable evaluation are not met.  38 C.F.R. § 4.31.

In this case, the schedular rating criteria require evidence of deformity of the penis to warrant a compensable rating.  Based on the evidence of record, the Board finds that deformity of the penis as to warrant an initial compensable evaluation is neither alleged nor shown by the medical evidence of record.  Importantly, the January 2024 VA examiner found that the Veteran's penis was normal.  Treatment records are also silent with respect to any penis deformity.    

Moreover, the Board notes that the Veteran's service-connected erectile dysfunction is already compensated for an inability to achieve erection sufficient for penetration and ejaculation with an award of special monthly compensation (SMC) based on the loss of use of a creative organ pursuant to 38 U.S.C. § 1114(k) and 38 C.F.R. § 3.350(a).  The amount of SMC for loss of use of a creative organ is a non-variable amount and is set by statute.  See 38 U.S.C. § 1114 (k).  As the rate for SMC for loss of use of a creative organ is set by statute and is not variable, the facts and circumstances relating to the Veteran's loss of use of a creative organ are not determinative to the amount of SMC compensation for loss of use of a creative organ.

In conclusion, the Board finds that the evidence persuasively weighs against a finding that an initial compensable evaluation is warranted for the Veteran's service-connected erectile dysfunction.  As the evidence weighs against the claim, the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine does not apply.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b).  

?

Testicular condition, right (varicocele)

The Veteran has a noncompensable disability rating for his service-connected right testicular condition under Diagnostic Code 7543.

Under Diagnostic Code 7543, a maximum noncompensable disability rating is assigned for varicocele.  38 C.F.R. § 4.115b, Diagnostic Code 7543.  Therefore, the Veteran is precluded from being assigned a compensable schedular disability rating under Diagnostic Code 7543.   

The Board also observes that an initial compensable rating is not afforded under other applicable diagnostic codes.  In this regard, under Diagnostic Code 7523, complete atrophy of a single testicle is noncompensable.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.115b, Diagnostic Code 7523.  Under Diagnostic Code 7524, removal of a single testicle is also noncompensable.  Thus, even considering the Veteran's symptoms of testicular pain, a compensable rating is not available under applicable diagnostic codes.  As such, entitlement to an initial compensable rating for right testicular condition is denied.  As the evidence weighs against the claim, the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine does not apply.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b).  

Service Connection

Service connection may be granted for disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.  The three-element test for service connection requires evidence of: (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury.  Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166 -67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

Inguinal hernia

The Veteran is also seeking service connection for an inguinal hernia. 

The Board concludes that the Veteran does not have current diagnosis of an inguinal hernia and has not had any diagnosis of such disorder at any time during the pendency of the claim or recent to the filing of the claim.  Romanowsky v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 289, 294 (2013); McClain v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 319, 321 (2007).

The Veteran's service treatment records show that the Veteran was evaluated for a possible hernia.  However, it was determined that the Veteran did not have a hernia.   Moreover, importantly, there is no post-service medical evidence of record indicating that the Veteran has an inguinal hernia.  In fact, with the exception of the Veteran's service treatment records, no other medical evidence has been identified by the Veteran.  Significantly, the Veteran is not competent to provide a diagnosis in this case because the issue is medically complex as it requires specialized medical knowledge.  Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377, 1377 n.4 (Fed. Cir. 2007).  In sum, there is no competent medical evidence showing that the Veteran suffers from an inguinal hernia.

Moreover, as the service records do not document a diagnosis of a hernia; and given that there is no competent post-service medical evidence showing a hernia or indicating that there may be a link to service, a VA opinion addressing the etiology of this disorder is not necessary.  See McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79.

In conclusion, the evidence persuasively weighs against finding that service connection for inguinal hernia is warranted.  As the evidence persuasively weighs against the Veteran's claim, the benefit-of-the-doubt standard of proof does not apply. 38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b).

REASONS FOR REMAND

Entitlement to service connection for right wrist carpal tunnel syndrome is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea is remanded.

The AOJ denied these issues as there was no evidence of a current disability.  However, post service VA clinical records show a provisional diagnosis of right carpal tunnel syndrome.  Moreover, the Veteran has reported ongoing symptoms.  The Veteran was not afforded a VA examination with respect to this issue.  However, the Board finds that a VA examination is necessary in order to determine whether the Veteran has a current disability that is related to service.  As such, this issue must be remanded in order to correct this pre-decisional duty to assist error. 

Likewise, with respect to sleep apnea, service treatment records dated in September 2019 appear to indicate that sleep apnea was suspected and referral for a sleep study was recommended.  However, it does not appear that a sleep study was done.  As such, it is unclear from the record whether the Veteran has a current disability.  The Veteran has not been afforded a VA examination.  However, the Board finds that a VA examination is necessary in order to determine whether the Veteran has a current disability that manifested in service.  As such, this issue must be remanded in order to correct this pre-decisional duty to assist error. 

Moreover, importantly, in August 2022, the SFC Heath Robinson Honoring Our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxins Act of 2022, Pub. L. 117-168, 136 Stat. 1759 ("PACT Act") was passed.  Under the PACT Act, certain development is necessary when a Veteran participates in toxic exposure risk activities (TERAs). VA is required to provide a disability examination and medical nexus opinion when a veteran submits a compensation claim and has evidence of a disability and participation (TERAs), but the evidence is not sufficient to establish service connection for the disability.  See 38 U.S.C. § 1168(a) (see PACT Act, Sec. 303). As such, the Board finds that these claims must also be developed under the PACT Act. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1.  Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination by an appropriate clinician to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's right carpal tunnel syndrome.  After reviewing the claims file and examining the Veteran, to include any necessary testing, the examiner must determine whether the Veteran suffers from right carpal tunnel syndrome.  If so, the examiner must opine whether the Veteran's right carpal tunnel syndrome is at least as likely as not (a) began during active service, (b) manifested within one year after discharge from service, (c) was noted during service with continuity of the same symptomatology since service, or (d) related to active service, to include the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran. 

The examiner must offer a detailed rationale for all opinions.  The examiner must consider service treatment records, post service treatment records and the Veteran's lay statements.

2.  Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination by an appropriate clinician to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's sleep apnea.  After reviewing the claims file and examining the Veteran, to include any necessary testing, the examiner must determine whether the Veteran suffers from sleep apnea.  The examiner must opine whether the Veteran's sleep apnea is at least as likely as not related to active service, to include the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran. 

?

The examiner must offer a detailed rationale for all opinions.  The examiner must consider service treatment records, post service treatment records and the Veteran's lay statements.  

 

L. M. BARNARD

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	J.N. Moats, Counsel 

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.