Citation Nr: A25032293
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 241113-488859
DATE: April 8, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to special monthly compensation (SMC) based on aid and attendance/housebound, as an accrued benefit is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

The evidence is relatively balanced that the Veteran was in need of the regular aid and attendance of another person to perform the routine activities of daily living due to his service-connected Parkinson's Disease.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to SMC based on the need for regular aid and attendance have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1114(l), 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.350, 3.352.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Marine Corps from July 1960 to December 1980.

Unfortunately, during the course of his appeal, the Veteran died in July 2021. The appellant is his surviving spouse.  The Board extends condolences to the family.  

This case comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a September 2024 rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ).

In November 2024 the appellant submitted a VA Form 10182, notice of disagreement, requesting direct review by a Veterans Law Judge. Therefore, the Board will consider only the evidence of record at the time of the rating decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301.

This matter has been advanced on the Board's docket pursuant to 38 U.S.C. § 7107(a)(2); 38 C.F.R. § 20.902(c).

In a January 2025 letter the Board informed the appellant that they had the right to select a different Board review option by submitting a new VA Form 10182 within one year from the date the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) mailed the decision on appeal, or within 60 days of the date the Board received their VA Form 10182, whichever date is later. 38 C.F.R. § 20.202(c)(2). A waiver of time to select a different board review option was included. The appeal was placed in abeyance for 75 days to allow time for mail processing. The appellant did not respond to the letter. Here, because the Board is granting the appeal in full, the appellant is not prejudiced by adjudication. See Williams v. McDonough, 37 Vet. Ano. 305 (2024).

Entitlement to special monthly compensation based on aid and attendance/housebound

The appellant seeks entitlement to SMC based on the need for regular aid and attendance of another person due to the Veteran's service-connected Parkinson's Disease.

SMC at the aid and attendance rate is warranted if a veteran, as the result of service-connected disability, has suffered the anatomical loss or loss of use of both feet, or of one hand and one foot, or is blind in both eyes, or is permanently bedridden or so helpless as to be in need of regular aid and attendance. 38 U.S.C. § 1114(l); 38 C.F.R. § 3.350(b).

In determining the need for regular aid and attendance, consideration is given to: (1) inability of the veteran to dress or undress himself, or to keep himself ordinarily clean and presentable; (2) frequent need of adjustment of any special prosthetic or orthopedic appliances which by reason of the particular disability cannot be done without such aid; (3) inability of the veteran to feed himself because of the loss of coordination of upper extremities or because of extreme weakness; (4) inability to attend to the wants of nature; or (5) physical or mental incapacity which requires care or assistance on a regular basis to protect the veteran from the hazards or dangers incident to his daily environment. 38 C.F.R. § 3.352(a).

A finding that the veteran is "bedridden" also provides a proper basis for the determination. Bedridden will be that condition which, through its essential character, actually requires that the veteran remain in bed. The fact that a veteran has voluntarily taken to bed or that a physician has prescribed rest in bed for the greater or lesser part of the day to promote convalescence or cure will not suffice. 38 C.F.R. § 3.352(a).

It is not required that all of the disabling conditions enumerated in 38 C.F.R. § 3.352(a) be found to exist before a favorable rating may be made. The particular personal functions that the veteran is unable to perform must be considered in connection with the veteran's condition as a whole. The evidence need only establish that the veteran is so helpless as to need regular aid and attendance, not that there be a constant need. Determinations that a veteran is so helpless as to be in need of regular aid and attendance will not be based solely upon an opinion that the claimant's condition is such as would require him or her to be in bed. They must be based on the actual requirement of personal assistance from others. 38 C.F.R. § 3.352(a); Turco v. Brown, 9 Vet. App. 222, 225 (1996).

In this case, service connection is in effect for Parkinson's Disease with urinary problems, rated 60 percent disabling; bradykinesia with tremor and muscle rigidity, right upper extremity associated with Parkinson's disease, rated 50 percent disabling; bradykinesia with tremor and muscle rigidity, left upper extremity associated with Parkinson's disease, rated 40 percent disabling; balance impairment associated with Parkinson's disease, rated 30 percent disabling; bradykinesia and muscle rigidity, right lower extremity associated with Parkinson's disease, rated 30 percent disabling; bradykinesia with tremor and muscle rigidity, left lower extremity associated with Parkinson's disease, rated 30 percent disabling; residuals of low back injury, rated 20 percent disabling; tinnitus, rated 10 percent disabling; speech changes associated with Parkinson's disease, rated 10 percent disabling; loss of automatic movements, left side associated with Parkinson's disease, rated 10 percent disabling; loss of automatic movements, right side associated with Parkinson's disease, rated 10 percent disabling; stooped posture, right side associated with Parkinson's disease, rated 10 percent disabling, stooped posture, left side associated with Parkinson's disease, rated 10 percent disabling; residuals of traumatic brain injury, rated 10 percent disabling; residuals, fracture, left elbow, rated noncompensable; residuals, injury, left index finger, rated noncompensable; bilateral hearing loss, rated noncompensable; loss of smell associated with Parkinson's disease, rated noncompensable; and cognitive disorder associated with Parkinson's disease, rated noncompensable. The appellant is in receipt of Basic Eligibility to Dependents' Educational Assistance (DEA) benefits.

In a December 2020 VA medical treatment record notes the Veteran was being cared for by the appellant but that she was no longer able to do so as he wanders through the night so they are paying out of pocket for 10 hours daily with a home health aide. A June 2021 medical record notes the appellant requested further assistance for the Veteran to help with bathing, which he is unable to complete on his own. An additional June 2021 medical record notes a worsening of the Veteran's dementia after experiencing a stroke. A July 2021 medical record notes the Veteran received assistance to bath, dress, and groom himself. 

In a February 2021 VA examination the Veteran was noted to have moderate balance impairment and severe bradykinesia. The Veteran was independent in ambulation, dressing, and feeding but needed minimal assistance with toileting and was unable to drive himself. 

After careful consideration of the above medical and lay evidence, the Board finds that entitlement to SMC based on the need for regular aid and attendance of another person is warranted. In this regard, the evidence is relatively balanced that the Veteran requires the regular aid and attendance of another person to perform routine activities of daily living due solely to his service-connected disability of Parkinson's Disease and related conditions.

In making this finding, the Board notes that the Veteran's disabilities did not cause him to be bedridden. To the contrary, the evidence shows that the Veteran was able to leave the home for doctor's appointments. Therefore, the proper inquiry is whether the Veteran requires the regular assistance of another person for most of the activities of daily living and for protection against the hazards or dangers incident to daily life. To that end, the Board finds that the lay and medical evidence of record reasonably shows that the Veteran required care or assistance on a regular basis to dress himself, bathe, and use the restroom. He also required someone to drive him to attend medical appointments.

(Continued on next page.)

?

In sum, the evidence is relatively balanced as to whether the Veteran has difficulty performing the activities of daily living without the aid and assistance of another person because of his service-connected Parkinson's Disease and related conditions. Therefore, reasonable doubt must be resolved in the Veteran's favor and entitlement to SMC based on the need for the regular aid and attendance of another person is warranted. The appeal is granted. 38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49 (1990).

 

 

Paulette Vance Burton

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Jarvis, Krystal L.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.