Citation Nr: A25032365
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 221122-298980
DATE: April 8, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for Sjogren's disease is denied.

Entitlement to a total disability rating based upon individual unemployability (TDIU), is granted from March 19, 2019.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran's Sjogren's disease did not have its onset in active service and is not related to such service, to include exposure to contaminated water at Camp Lejeune. 

2. The Veteran's service-connected disabilities rendered her unemployable as of the date her claim for a TDIU was received, March 19, 2019.  

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for establishing service connection for Sjogren's disease have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.304. 

2. The criteria establishing entitlement to a TDIU from March 19, 2019, have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107, 5110; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.400.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from January 1987 to February 1991. 

This matter is before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal of a November 15, 2022 rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA).

This case is being reviewed according to the appellate process set forth under the Veterans Appeals Improvement and Modernization Act of 2017 (AMA).  This law creates a new framework for Veterans dissatisfied with a VA decision on their claim to seek review.  This decision has been written consistent with the new AMA framework.

On November 22, 2022, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 10182 Decision Review Request form opting into AMA and selecting the Direct Review lane.  As explained in the VA Form 10182, "direct review" means that the Board's decision must be based upon the evidence of record at the time of the prior decision, with no evidence submission or hearing request.  The Board notes that the Veteran had requested a Higher-Level review in April 2022 of a December 2021 rating decision.  In a June 2022 rating decision, it was noted that a duty to assist error was found and the subsequent November 2022 rating decision was issued.  As such, the Board has considered the evidence of record at the time of the November 2022 decision.

1. Entitlement to service connection for Sjogren's disease is denied.

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from a disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service.  See 38 U.S.C. § 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.  "To establish a right to compensation for a present disability, a veteran must show: "(1) the existence of a present disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service"-the so-called "nexus" requirement."  Holton v. Shinseki, 557 F.3d 1362, 1366 (Fed. Cir. 2010) (quoting Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004)).

The Veteran contends that she developed Sjogren's disease due to service, to include as due to exposure to contaminated water at Camp Lejeune.  A review of the Veteran's records shows that VA has conceded exposure to contaminants water at Camp Lejeune.  However, Sjogren's disease is not recognized by VA as diseases associated with exposure to contaminants in the water supply at Camp Lejeune.  38 C.F.R. §§ 3.309(e), (f).  Thus, service connection on a presumptive basis is not warranted.

Notwithstanding the presumptive provisions, in Combee v. Brown, the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit held that when a veteran is found not to be entitled to a regulatory presumption of service connection for a given disability, the claim must nevertheless be reviewed to determine whether service connection can be established on a direct basis.  34 F.3d 1039, 1043-1044 (Fed. Cir. 1994), reversing in part Combee v. Principi, 4 Vet. App. 78 (1993).

In support of her appeal, the Veteran has submitted articles regarding exposure to chemicals.  The Veteran has also submitted Board decisions for other Veteran's appealing the same disability.  Of note, Board decisions are nonprecedential in nature, and "each case presented to the Board will be decided on the basis of the individual facts of the case."  See 38 C.F.R. § 20.130.  This means that other Board decisions, favorable or unfavorable, are not binding upon the Board in this case. 

Service treatment records do not show complaints or treatment for Sjogren's disease while in service.  A post-service diagnosis of Sjogren's syndrome is of record. (See VA treatment record dated in September 2019) 

A May 2019 VA medical opinion shows that a VA doctor opined that the claimed condition was less likely than not incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event or illness.  The VA doctor noted a review of the claims file and included explanations of the disease, referenced multiple articles and studies regarding the claimed disease and risk factors.  The VA doctor stated that stated that available medical literature showed that age, female sex, and the presence of autoimmune diseases were risk factors in developing Sjogren's disease.  The medical records showed that the Veteran had significant risk factors which included age and female sex.  The available literature showed that children and adults exposed to estimated TCE levels during the years in question might have resulted in increased risk for autoimmune diseases like scleroderma and systemic lupus, but volatile organic compound exposure had not been identified as a significant contributor to the development of Sjogren's disease.  Therefore, based upon the currently available literature, the presence of other significant risk factors and the exposure to environmental contaminants that was neither intense nor prolonged, the VA doctor stated that it was her medical opinion that the autoimmune condition of Sjogren's disease was less likely as not caused by or a result of the Veteran's exposure to contaminated water at Camp Lejeune. 

A July 2020 private medical note shows that Dr. L. indicated that the Veteran was being treated for pulmonary complications related to her Sjogren's disease.  The private doctor opined that the condition was more likely than not caused by the Veteran's exposure to chemicals as part of the Camp Lejeune water contamination incident.  The Veteran did not have the condition prior to service and did not have a family history of autoimmune disorders.  The Veteran also experienced fibromyalgia.  

An August 2020 VA medical note shows that a VA doctor noted a review of the Veteran's medical record and medical sources in text and online forms.  The VA doctor stated that there was no medical or scientific evidence that established relationship between the Veteran's Sjogren's syndrome and specific exposure to contaminants in the water supply at Camp Lejeune during service.  

The VA doctor noted a review of the private opinion from Dr. L. and stated it lacked factual, objective, medical and scientific evidence to support the medical opinion and described findings and characteristics of Sjogren's disease.  The VA doctor noted that based on medical literature, Sjogren's disease was classified as an autoimmune disorder, common to women older than 40 years, medically known to be accompanied with other autoimmune disorders to include fibromyalgia, and according to scientific/medical research literature, was a particular condition that did not appear to be inherited itself.  

The Veteran's objective demographic risk factors, to include female gender, age, related and associated autoimmune disorders, and natural progression of the disease, to include restrictive lung disease, were the actual fact and cause the Veteran's Sjogren's disease.  Therefore, it was less likely than not incurred in or caused by the exposure to contaminated water at Camp Lejeune during active duty during service.  References to articles were included.

After a review of the evidence, the Board finds that the evidence is persuasively against a finding that the claimed disability is causally related to the Veteran's service.  The Veteran is currently diagnosed with Sjogren's disease-that has been conceded by the VA.  Also, in support of her contentions of service connection, the July 2020 private medical note is of record.  However, that private opinion was not supported by any clinical evidence or underlying reasoning or rationale, which significantly reduces its probative weight.  See Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 124 (2007).

Conversely, the determinations by the May 2019 and August 2020 VA examiners that Veteran's disability is less likely than not due to her active military service and/or exposure to contaminated water constitute the most probative evidence on this determinative issue of etiology.  See Bloom v. West, 12 Vet. App. 185, 187 (1999); Prejean v. West, 13 Vet. App. 444, 448-9 (2000).  

These opinions were provided based upon comprehensive reviews of the claims file and provided fully adequate rationales, to include relevant medical literature and supporting data.  As such, these opinions are persuasive and are afforded greater probative weight.  See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 302-04 (2008). 

Although lay persons are competent to provide opinions on some medical issues, the etiology of a Sjogren's disease disability falls outside the realm of common knowledge of a lay person.  See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372 (Fed. Cir. 2007).  In this regard, the determination of the diagnosis and etiology of the condition requires medical training and credentials.  Thus, the Veteran's opinion as to the cause of her condition does not constitute as competent evidence.

In sum, the Board finds that the evidence is persuasively against a finding that the Veteran's Sjogren's disease disability is related to service, and the claim is denied.  Since the evidence is persuasively against the claim, the benefit of the doubt rule is not applicable.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b).

2. Entitlement to a total disability rating based upon individual unemployability (TDIU), is granted from March 19, 2019.

The Veteran submitted an Application for Increased Compensation based on Unemployability on March 19, 2019, and it was received by the VA that same date.  

The Veteran indicated that she was working at an insurance company and had become disabled on the date of the application.   She noted that her Sjogren's disease prevented her from working. 

The Board observes the Veteran's Sjogren's disease is not service connected.  However, though the Veteran had no service-connected disabilities at the time the AOJ denied her application, subsequent decisions have awarded her service connection for a broad range of disabilities with effective dates and disability ratings that impel the Board to provide a de novo review of her entitlement to a TDIU given the disability picture that, as a matter law, now applies to the period on appeal here.  As explained below, the Board finds the Veteran is entitled to a TDIU as of the date her claim was received.

Background

A veteran with a combined schedular disability rating that is less than total may nevertheless be entitled to a total disability rating in the form of a TDIU when they are unable to secure and follow a substantially gainful occupation as a result of service-connected disabilities. 38 C.F.R. § 4.16. The lack of a current job, or difficulty finding or maintaining a job is not sufficient to qualify a veteran for a TDIU. Rather, a veteran must be unemployable-i.e., unable to find or maintain a job. See, e.g., Van Hoose v. Brown, 4 Vet. App. 361, 363 (1993). 

In Ray v. Wilkie, 31 Vet. App. 58, 73 (2019), the Court broke the issue of unemployability down into two separate components: economic and noneconomic. 

The economic component focuses on whether a given occupation is "gainful-i.e., does it enable a veteran to earn an income that is more than "marginal," based on the poverty threshold for one person as established by the Department of Commerce. 

The noneconomic component focuses on the veteran's abilities-specifically, their physical and mental ability to perform the tasks required by an occupation, based on not only on the nature of their service-connected disabilities, but also on subjective factors such as their specific symptoms and impairments associated with their disabilities, as well as their vocational and educational history, geographical location, and skills. Id. See also, Vettese v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 31, 34-35 (1994) (the essential reason for filing a TDIU claim is to address "subjective" factors that "objective" disability ratings do not take into account).

An award of total disability is appropriate "when there is present any impairment of mind or body which is sufficient to render it impossible for the average person to follow a substantially gainful occupation." 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.340(a)(1), 4.15. However, even when a veteran's disability picture does not qualify them for a 100 percent combined rating, the VA will nevertheless assign them a total disability for individual unemployability if the evidence shows the veteran is actually unable to secure or maintain substantially gainful employment due to their service connected disabilities. 38 C.F.R. § 4.16.

Thus, a TDIU rating is "an alternate way to obtain a total disability rating without being rated 100 percent disabled under the Rating Schedule." Norris v. West, 12 Vet. App. 413, 420-21 (1999). The key distinction between these two types of total disability lies in what VA considers when making a decision. Specifically, a 100 percent disability rating under the Rating Schedule is assigned when the average veteran would be so impaired by the claimant's disabilities that they would be rendered unemployable. 38 C.F.R. § 4.1. In contrast, a TDIU rating is assigned when the individual claimant is actually impaired by their disabilities to the point they are rendered unemployable. 38 C.F.R. § 4.16. 

In other words, the crux of a TDIU analysis is a personalized assessment of whether a veteran's service-connected disabilities render them unable to secure or maintain substantially gainful employment in light of their particular work history, education, skills, and training. Todd v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 79, 85 (2014). 

If an unemployable veteran has a single disability ratable at 60 percent or more, or, if the veteran has a single disability ratable at 40 percent or more and a combined rating of 70 percent or more, they may be awarded "schedular" TDIU.  38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a). If a veteran fails to meet either threshold requirement for schedular TDIU, but they are nonetheless unemployable, they still may be eligible for "extraschedular" TDIU. 38 C.F.R. § 4.16(b).  

Evidence and Analysis

The Veteran became eligible for schedular TDIU as of March 24, 2017, with a combined disability rating of 80 percent and a single disability rated at 50 percent. The Board considered whether a remand for consideration of extraschedular TDIU for the period before March 24, 2017, was appropriate for this case, but the Board notes the Veteran's application for a TDIU says she was employed prior to filing that application. 

The Board finds the Veteran's actual employment highly probative evidence of employability. In Faust v. West, 13 Vet. App. 342, 356 (2000), the Court held when a veteran is employed in a substantially gainful occupation, the Board considers them are virtually per se "employable" because, unless they are in a protected environment, they are demonstrating their ability to secure and maintain gainful employment. 

Therefore, the Board finds there is no reasonable possibility the Director, Compensation Services, would find the veteran was unemployable because of her service-connected disabilities prior to Mach 24, 2017. Snider v. McDonough, 35 Vet. App. 1, 7-8 (2021) citing Ray v. Wilkie, 31 Vet. App. 58, 66 (2019).  

Once the Veteran became unemployed, the question becomes whether that meant she was unable to secure and maintain gainful employment. Her relevant disabilities as of March 19, 2019 include obstructive sleep apnea associated with Hashimoto's thyroiditis, Hashimoto's thyroiditis, unspecified depressive disorder with generalized anxiety disorder, bilateral knee osteoarthritis, bilateral ankle arthralgia, and chronic fatigue syndrome.

While the Board hesitates to stray into genuine scientific or medical analysis, the evidence supporting the previous decisions concerning these disabilities makes clear this array of disabilities would severely restrict the Veteran's physical strength and endurance including her ability to stand and walk, and her mental alertness, concentration, and focus. Therefore, no specialized expertise is required for the Board to find the Veteran would not be able to secure or maintain a gainful occupation.

Effective Date of a TDIU

As for the effective dae of the Veteran's entitlement to a TDIU, the Board's analysis begins with the recognition that a TDIU is not a disability-it is a rating based on the cumulative impairment caused by the Veteran's service-connected disabilities. As a result, a TDIU is treated like an increased disability rating for purposes of assigning an effective date. Phillips v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 394, 402 (2024); Dalton v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 23 (2007). 

That is, the effective date of a TDIU will generally be either the date the veteran filed the TDIU application or the date the veteran actually became unemployable, whichever is later. 38 U.S.C. § 5110(a)(1); 38 C.F.R. § 3.400(o)(1).  

However, the VA provides veterans with a one-year "grace period" to file claims for increased disability ratings-in other words, in the TDIU context, if the veteran files a claim within one year after their unemployability initially becomes "factually ascertainable," the effective date of the TDIU will be the date their unemployability became evident.  If the veteran delays filing beyond the one-year mark, however, the grace period expires, and the general rule applies. 38 C.F.R. § 3.400(o)(2). See also, Gaston v. Shinseki, 605 F.3d 979, 983 (Fed. Cir. 2010). 

Thus, to derive the correct effective date for a TDIU, the Board must determine the date the claim for a TDIU was filed, then determine when the veteran first became unemployable due to their service-connected disabilities.

(Continued on the next page)

?

Here, the date the claim was received was, conveniently enough, also the date the Veteran herself identified as the date she became unemployable. Therefore, the Board need not delve any deeper into the issue of effective date. Entitlement to a TDIU is granted from March 19, 2019.

 

Timothy Cothrel

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Evans, A-L

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.