Citation Nr: A25032881
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240702-452074
DATE: April 9, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric condition is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from September 1974 to April 1981.  

This appeal to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) arose from a June 2024 rating decision from a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office.  In July 2024, the Veteran filed a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), and elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

However, because the Board is remanding the claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

?

Service connection for an acquired psychiatric condition. 

While the Board regrets the delay, remand is required.  Under the Appeals Modernization Act, the Board must remand to correct pre-decisional duty to assist errors, including when VA fails to make reasonable efforts to obtain VA treatment records or relevant federal or private treatment records; fails to obtain a VA examination; or provides an inadequate VA examination or opinion.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).  In this case, the record includes an examination and opinion from both a private physician and a VA examiner.  For the reasons outlined below, the record is inadequate for adjudication purposes. 

The Veteran contends that he suffers from an acquired psychiatric condition due to his service-connected tinnitus and bilateral hearing loss.  See August 2023 VA 21-526EZ.  When submitting his claim for service connection, the Veteran also submitted a letter from a private physician.  There, the private physician diagnosed the Veteran with a depressive disorder and an anxiety disorder.  See August 2023 Medical Treatment Record - Non-Government Facility.

The Veteran reported having a good relationship with his two sons from his first marriage.  He further stated to the private physician that he got "along great" with his wife and was currently happily married.  However, he also stated that, due to his tinnitus, he found it difficult to attain and sustain friendships, because it was difficult to communicate and that made him feel nervous.  In addition, due to the constant ringing in his ears, he stated that he had lost interest in the activities that he used to find enjoyable, and instead mainly watched television.  Id.

The Veteran reported that he slept seven hours a night, but that he often woke up due to his tinnitus and had diminished energy the next day.  He further reported that his tinnitus caused him to have trouble concentrating.  Due to his tinnitus, he reported feeling frustrated, irritated, nervous, and self-conscious, and stated that he worried all of the time.  Id.  After the examination, the private physician described the Veteran's speech as being "normal," without pressured speech, and found that the Veteran's tone and volume were normal. His affect was constricted. The Veteran's memory was described as "not good at all," although no explanation was given as to the cause of the Veteran's reported subjective memory loss.  Id.

Based upon the above reporting, the private physician opined that the symptoms of his mental health conditions included depressed mood, anxiety, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss, flattened affect, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work like setting, and an inability to establish and maintain effective relationships. The private physician opined that the Veteran's condition caused occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas."  Id. at 2. 

The Board notes that these findings are internally inconsistent.  In this, the Veteran reported that he was married, and that it was "a very good marriage" where both he and his wife were happy, and he had a good relationship with his sons.  However, the private physician opined that the Veteran had an "inability to establish and maintain effective relationships."  Id. at 3.  The private physician further stated that the Veteran had a "flattened affect."  Id. at 2.  However, he went on to describe the Veteran's speech as being effectively normal, with the affect as "constricted" rather than "flattened."  Id. at 3.  Also, the private physician stated that the Veteran had mild memory loss due to his mental health condition, without explanation as towards how or why that would be so and without any testing to determine whether memory loss existed.  These internal inconsistencies reduce the probative value of the examination, as it indicates an inaccurate factual premise.  See Reonal v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 458, 460-61 (1993).

The Board further notes that the private physician opined that it was at least as likely as not that the Veteran's anxiety and depression disorders were caused by his service-connected tinnitus, as "provided the identified at ideology, course and type of Veteran symptoms, this examiner opines, it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran tinnitus has contributed and aggravated his depression and anxiety disorders."  See August 2023 Medical Treatment Record - Non- Government Facility.  The Board finds this rationale to be inadequate, as it is generalized and conclusory.  The private physician did not provide an explanation about why the "ideology," "course," or "type" of symptoms would make them as likely as not caused by the Veteran's tinnitus.  See Jones v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 382, 387 (2010). 

Also of record is a December 2023 VA examination.  There, the VA examiner diagnosed the Veteran with a "severe alcohol use disorder" and opined that the Veteran did not have any other diagnosed mental disorder.  The Veteran's symptoms were anxiety and disturbances of motivation and mood only, which caused occupational and social impairment due to mild or transient symptoms which decreased work efficiency and ability to perform occupational tasks only during periods of significant stress.  In making this determination, the VA examiner noted that the Veteran had repeatedly and clearly denied having any symptoms related to a depressed mood, and rather had symptoms of anxiety, low motivation, being withdrawn, and having mood swings.  See December 2023 C&P Exam.

However, as with the private examination, the VA examination that was provided contained internal inconsistencies.  The private physician stated that the Veteran had denied having any symptoms of depression and that he had "good sleep."  However, he went on to state that the Veteran's sleep problems and depression could be explained by his tinnitus and hearing loss.  The Board notes that this appears to be a positive nexus opinion.  However, the VA examiner went on to opine that the Veteran's mental health symptoms were more likely caused by his alcohol use disorder, which he believed was not caused by the Veteran's tinnitus. The VA examiner did not explain why the Veteran's alcohol use disorder was not caused, or aggravated by, his tinnitus.  Id.  These internal inconsistencies, along with the lack of rationale for his nexus opinion, cause the VA examiner's examination and opinion to be inadequate for adjudication purposes.  See Jones v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 382, 387 (2010). 

As the evidence as a whole was inadequate, it was a pre-decisional duty to assist error not to afford the Veteran a new VA examination with medical opinion to reconcile the conflicting evidence, clarify his diagnosis and etiology, and to provide a new nexus opinion.  Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007); 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a). 

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain a VA examination and an addendum opinion from a qualified examiner to clarify the diagnosis of the Veteran's psychiatric condition(s).  Thereafter, the examiner should opine as towards whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that any diagnosed psychiatric condition was caused by, or was aggravated by, his service-connected tinnitus and/or hearing loss.

2. The examiner must review the claims file (including this Remand, the private physician's letter and the prior VA examination) and should note that review in the report.  A complete history should be elicited from the Veteran.  Any tests and studies deemed necessary by the examiner should be conducted. 

3. A complete rationale should be provided for any opinion expressed. (By law, the Board is not permitted to rely on any conclusion that is not supported by a thorough explanation. Providing an opinion or conclusion without a thorough explanation will delay processing of the claim and may also result in a clarification being requested).

 

 

S. CHARLES NEILL

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	P. Abels, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.