Citation Nr: A25032377
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240723-460423
DATE: April 8, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for sinusitis is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for HBV (hepatitis B) is denied.  

Entitlement to service connection for anemia is denied. 

Entitlement to service connection for Kaposi sarcoma is denied. 

Entitlement to special monthly compensation based on the need for aid and attendance / housebound status, is denied.

REFERRED ISSUE

In February 2023, in addition to compensation, the Veteran also filed a claim for nonservice-connected pension benefits, to include special monthly pension. It does not appear the RO responded to this claim, and it is referred for appropriate action.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran has, or has had at any time during the appeal, a current diagnosis of sinusitis.

2. The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran has, or has had at any time during the appeal, a current diagnosis of HBV.

3. The Veteran's anemia was not shown in service and did not manifest to a compensable degree within the applicable presumptive period; continuity of symptomatology is not established; and the disability is not otherwise etiologically related to an in-service injury or disease.

4. The Veteran's Kaposi sarcoma did not have its onset in service, has not been chronic or continuous since service separation, did not manifest to a compensable degree within a year of service separation, and is not etiologically related to an in-service disease or injury.

5. The Veteran's service-connected disability of allergic rhinitis does not render him sufficiently helpless as to need regular aid and attendance, nor require him to remain in bed.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for service connection for sinusitis have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

2. The criteria for service connection for HBV have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

3. The criteria for service connection for anemia have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

4. The criteria for service connection for Kaposi sarcoma have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

5. The criteria for entitlement to special monthly compensation (SMC) based on the need for aid and attendance / housebound have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1114 (l) and (s); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.350, 3.352.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from July 1987 to January 1995.

On August 23, 2017, the President signed into law the Veterans Appeals Improvement and Modernization Act, Pub. L. No. 115-55 (codified as amended in scattered sections of 38 U.S.C.), 131 Stat. 1105 (2017), also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA).  The law creates a new framework for veterans dissatisfied with VA's decision on their claim to seek review, and this decision has been written consistent with the new AMA framework.

The rating decisions on appeal were issued in September 2023, January 2024, and February 2024.  In July 2024, the Veteran selected the Direct Review docket for this appeal; the Board will therefore consider only the evidence of record as of the date the September 2023, January 2024, and February 2024 rating decisions were issued with respect to the claim(s) decided therein.  See 38 C.F.R. § 20.301.

None of the evidence added to the file after the rating decisions can be considered as to the claims denied in those decisions, based on the Veteran's choice of the Direct Review docket.  38 C.F.R. § 20.300.  If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was added to the claims file that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

Service Connection

Service connection may be granted directly as a result of disease or injury incurred in service based on nexus using a three-element test: (1) The existence of a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by service.  See 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303 (a), (d); Holton v. Shinseki, 557 F.3d 1363, 1366 (Fed. Cir. 2009).

Certain disorders, listed as "chronic" in 38 C.F.R. § 3.309 (a) and 38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (b), are capable of service connection based on a continuity of symptomatology without respect to an established causal nexus to service. See Walker v. Shinseki, 708 F.3d 1331 (Fed. Cir. 2013). Anemia, primary, is listed under 38 C.F.R. § 3.309 (a). Thus, the presumptive service connection provisions based on "chronic" in-service symptoms and "continuous" post-service symptoms under 38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (b) apply.  Walker, 708 F.3d at 1331.  Where the evidence shows a "chronic disease" in service or "continuity of symptoms" after service, the disease shall be presumed to have been incurred in service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (b).

Where a veteran served ninety days or more of active service, and certain chronic diseases, such as anemia, become manifest to a degree of 10 percent or more within one year after the date of separation from such service, such disease shall be presumed to have been incurred in service, even though there is no evidence of such disease during the period of service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 1112, 1113, 1137; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307, 3.309(a).  While the disease need not be diagnosed within the presumptive period, it must be shown, by acceptable lay or medical evidence, that there were characteristic manifestations of the disease to the required degree during that time.  Id. 

The requirement for a current disability is satisfied if the disability is present at any point proximate to the claim, during the claim, or to the appeal period.  See McClain v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 319 (2007); Romanowsky v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 289 (2014).  If there is no evidence of a present disability, there can be no valid claim.  Brammer v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 223, 225 (1992).

1. Entitlement to service connection for sinusitis is denied.

The Veteran seeks entitlement to service connection for sinusitis.  

The question for the Board is whether the Veteran has a current disability that began during service or is at least as likely as not related to an in-service injury, event, or disease.  The Board concludes that that the Veteran has not had sinusitis at any time during the pendency of the claim or recent to the filing of the claim. Romanowsky v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 289, 294 (2013); McClain v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 319, 321 (2007).

The medical treatment records dated during the pendency of the claim and recent to the filing of the claim show that the Veteran established care with VA in 2022. There is no indication that the Veteran was diagnosed with or treated for sinusitis during the pendency of the claim or recent to the filing of the claim. Although he filed a claim for entitlement to service connection for sinusitis, his VA records through the date of the September 2023 decision on appeal show no such diagnosis and he has not referenced any private treatment.  Additionally, the Veteran was provided a VA sinusitis/rhinitis examination in August 2023.  The VA examiner diagnosed the Veteran with allergic rhinitis.  However, the Veteran was not diagnosed with sinusitis.  As such, there is no evidence that the Veteran had the claimed condition prior to the September 2023 rating decision on appeal.  The Board notes that the Veteran was provided a VA sinusitis/rhinitis examination in January 2024, after the rating decision on appeal.  The Veteran was diagnosed with chronic sinusitis with a date of diagnosis of 2024.  As noted above, if the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was added to the claims file that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.    

The Board acknowledges the Veteran's contention that he has sinusitis that is etiologically attributable to his active service.  The Veteran, as a lay person, is not competent to diagnose a particular disability.  See Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 469 (1994); Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377, 1377 n.4 (Fed. Cir. 2007).  Diagnosing such a disability requires knowledge of particular disabilities and the appropriate diagnostic testing for those disabilities.  The Veteran has not been shown to possess the medical expertise or knowledge to diagnose sinusitis. Therefore, his contentions do not constitute competent evidence of a current service-connectable disability related to sinusitis.

In view of the foregoing, the Board concludes that the evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran has had sinusitis at any time during or proximate to the pendency of the claim.  As noted above, in the absence of proof of a current disability, there can be no valid claim for entitlement to service connection.  Brammer, 3 Vet. App. at 225.  Because the evidence persuasively weighs against a finding that there is a current disability, the doctrine of reasonable doubt is not for application, and the claim is denied. 

2. Entitlement to service connection for HBV is denied.

The Veteran seeks entitlement to service connection for HBV.  The Veteran has not provided any argument as to how this condition is related to his active service.

The initial threshold question for the Board is whether the Veteran has a current disability, and if so, whether that disability began during service or is at least as likely as not related to an in-service injury, event, or disease.  The Board concludes that the Veteran does not have a current diagnosis related to HBV and has not had one at any time during the pendency of the claim or recent to the filing of the claim.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107(b); Holton, 557 F.3d at 1366; Romanowsky, 26 Vet. App. at 294 (2013); McClain, 21 Vet. App. at 321; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (a), (d).

The only medical treatment records are the Veteran's VA treatment records beginning October 2022.  None of these records reflect a diagnosis of HBV or any similar condition.  The veteran had laboratory testing done to screen for hepatitis, and it was noted the results were "nonreactive," and no diagnosis of hepatitis was ever provided. The Veteran has not submitted or identified any medical treatment records showing that he has been diagnosed with HBV at any time during the pendency of the claim or recent to the filing of the claim, nor have any such records been received. The Veteran has not been shown to possess the medical expertise or knowledge to diagnose HBV. Therefore, his contentions do not constitute competent evidence.

The Board acknowledges that the Veteran was not afforded a VA examination relating directly to his claimed HBV.  On these facts, however, an examination is not required.  VA will provide a medical examination or obtain a medical opinion if the evidence indicates the existence of a current disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability that may be associated with an event, injury, or disease in service, but the record does not contain sufficient medical evidence to decide the claim.  38 U.S.C. § 5103A (d) (2); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159 (c)(4) (i); McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006).

In this case, the claim does not meet these requirements for obtaining a VA medical opinion.  As noted above, there is no medical evidence showing a diagnosis or relevant complaints.  While lay evidence may suffice to show a current disability, the Veteran merely filed a claim for HBV, without submitting any lay evidence of current symptoms, impairment or diagnosis, or without asserting he has had any continuity of symptoms since service.  Because the weight of the evidence demonstrates no indication of a current disability, no examination is required. Absent evidence of a current disability, no VA examination or opinion is necessary under the PACT Act (discussed more below).  Accordingly, the Board finds that VA's duty to assist with respect to obtaining a VA examination or opinion with respect to the Veteran's claim for entitlement to service connection for HBV has not been triggered.  38 C.F.R. § 3.159 (c) (4).

In summary, the record does not show that the Veteran had HBV at any time during or recent to the filing of the claim.  As noted above, the existence of a current disability is the cornerstone of a claim for VA disability compensation.  In the absence of proof of a current disability, there can be no valid claim.  Brammer, 3 Vet. App. at 225.  In view of the foregoing, the Board concludes that the evidence for and against the claim is not in approximate balance, but rather weighs against the claim for entitlement to service connection for HBV.  Because there is not an approximate balance in the weight of the evidence, the doctrine of reasonable doubt is not for application, and the claim must be denied.

3. Entitlement to service connection for anemia is denied.

The Veteran seeks entitlement to service connection for anemia.  In the January 2023 rating decision, the AOJ found that there is a current disability of anemia, and that toxic exposure risk activity is conceded based on his service in the Southwest Asia theater of operations for at least one day between August 2, 1990, through July 31, 1991.  The Board is bound by these favorable findings.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.104 (c).

As to the second element of service connection on a direct basis, that of an in-service injury, disease, or incurrence, there is no indication one exists.  The service treatment records are silent regarding anemia.  Thus, the second element of service connection, on a direct basis, is not met.

Additionally, the Veteran was provided a VA examination in September 2023.  The VA examiner diagnosed the Veteran with anemia and opined that it is most likely that the Veteran's anemia is from his diagnosed HIV, which is a known cause of anemia.  

Service connection for the Veteran's anemia as a "chronic disease" is not warranted.  The evidence reflects that the Veteran's anemia began well after service separation.  The service treatment records are silent regarding anemia. The earliest manifestation of anemia documented in the available VA treatment records is in October 2022.  Because the anemia did not manifest within the presumptive period of one year, service connection is not warranted on this basis.  See 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307 (a) (3); 3.309 (a).

Additionally, the Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxins Act of 2022 (PACT Act) added new examination requirements where toxic exposure risk activities (TERA) are implicated.  38 U.S.C. § 1119.  The PACT Act provides that, if a Veteran submits a claim for service connection with evidence of disability and evidence of participation in a TERA, then VA shall obtain a medical opinion as to whether it is at least likely as not that there is a nexus between the disability and the toxic exposure risk activity.  38 U.S.C. § 1168.

The Veteran has participation in a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA) due to service in Southwest Asia theater of operations.  See December 2022 TERA Memorandum.  Although VA has an obligation to obtain medical opinions for any service connection claim which cannot be granted where there is evidence of a TERA and of a disability, VA has identified several exceptions to this general obligation where there is no indication of an association between the disability and the TERA.  38 U.S.C. § 1168 (b).  Specifically, a TERA opinion is not required for disabilities resulting from physical trauma; mental disorders; disabilities that have not been shown to have any positive association with herbicide exposure; and disabilities that manifested during service or with a clear etiology that is not associated with toxic exposure.  See VBA Letter 20-22-10 at 10-13, Processing Claims Involving the PACT Act, 87 Fed. Reg. 78,543 (Dec. 22, 2022).

Here, the Veteran's anemia is a disability with a clear etiology that is not associated with toxic exposure.  As noted above, the September 2023 VA examiner opined that it is most likely that the Veteran's anemia is related to his nonservice-connected HIV.  

To the extent that the Veteran believes that his current anemia is related to his active service, he is not competent to provide a nexus opinion regarding this issue. The issue is medically complex, as it requires complex medical knowledge and the interpretation of complicated diagnostic testing.  It is outside the competence of the Veteran in this case because the record does not show that he has the medical training or credentials to make such a determination.  Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377, 1377 n.4 (Fed. Cir. 2007); see also Kahana v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 428, 434 (2011).

In view of the foregoing, the Board concludes that the evidence persuasively weighs against the claim for entitlement to service connection for anemia as directly related to his active service.  Because the evidence persuasively weighs against the claim, the doctrine of reasonable doubt is not for application, and the claim must be denied. 

4. Entitlement to service connection for Kaposi sarcoma is denied.

The Veteran seeks entitlement to service connection for Kaposi sarcoma. 

The Veteran's VA treatment records reflect that he was first diagnosed with Kaposi sarcoma in October 2022.  Additionally, in the September 2023 rating decision, the AOJ found that there is a current disability of Kaposi sarcoma.  The Board is bound by this favorable finding.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.104 (c).  However, the Veteran's service treatment records are silent for any complaints of, or treatment related to Kaposi sarcoma.  The Veteran's December 1994 separation examination reflects that he was evaluated as normal for all systems.  Thus, the record does not factually establish in-service occurrence of Kaposi sarcoma.

The Veteran was provided a VA examination and opinion related to Kaposi sarcoma in June 2023.  The VA examiner noted the Veteran's diagnosis of Kaposi sarcoma and opined that the condition was less likely than not caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activities, after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran. As rationale, the VA examiner noted that the Veteran's exposure information was reviewed.  The VA examiner noted that the Veteran had risk factors outside of military service, including HIV/AIDS, diagnosed in 2022.  The VA examiner further noted that the Veteran's entrance and separation examinations show no findings related to Kaposi sarcoma.  Additionally, the Veteran's post-service medical treatment records do not demonstrate Kaposi sarcoma until October 2022, which is a type of cancer that forms in the lining of blood and lymph vessels, and they typically appear as painless purplish spots on the legs, feet or face.  The VA examiner further explained that the underlying cause of Kaposi sarcoma is infection with a virus called human herpesvirus 8 (HHV-8).  The VA examiner noted that in healthy people, HHV-8 infection usually causes no symptoms because the immune system keeps it under control; however, in people with weakened immune systems HHV-8 has the potential to trigger Kaposi sarcoma.  Additionally, people infected with HIV have the highest risk of Kaposi sarcoma.  The VA examiner noted that the immune system damage caused by HIV allows cells harboring HHV-8 to multiply.  The examiner's opinion is probative because it is based on an accurate medical history and provides an explanation that contains clear conclusions and supporting data.  Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008).  It is consistent with the service treatment records and post-service medical treatment records. 

The Board acknowledges that the Veteran reported that he believed his Kaposi sarcoma was due to service.  However, the June 2023 VA examiner acknowledged the Veteran's toxic risk exposure, yet still concluded the condition was not related to service. While the Veteran was competent to report observable symptoms, his opinion as to the cause of his symptoms simply cannot be accepted as competent evidence, as he does not have the medical training and expertise required to make such an opinion. Accordingly, the Board affords the June 2023 VA opinion more probative value than the Veteran's statements.

In view of the foregoing, the Board concludes that the evidence persuasively weighs against the claim for entitlement to service connection for Kaposi sarcoma, as directly related to his active service.  The VA examiner's negative opinion is the most persuasive evidence of record.  Because the evidence persuasively weighs against the claim, the doctrine of reasonable doubt is not for application, and the claim must be denied.  

5. Entitlement to special monthly compensation (SMC) based on the need for aid and attendance / housebound status is denied.

The Veteran seeks entitlement to SMC based on the need for aid and attendance or at the housebound rate.  In a February 2023 statement, the Veteran reported that he was hospitalized from June 2022 to November 2022 with complex medical conditions, including transfusion-dependent anemia, Kaposi sarcoma of multiple sites, and newly diagnosed AIDS with opportunistic infections and extensive foot wounds.  He further reported that once stabilized he was transferred to Tuscaloosa VAMC.  The Veteran reported that upon admission to Tuscaloosa VAMC he was completely bedridden.  The Veteran reported that he is able to ambulate up to 300 feet using a walker and assistance of a physical therapist.  He reported he requires assistance for preparation of meals, setup for bathing and hygiene, and assistance with basic housework.  The Veteran reported he is able to leave home on a very limited basis and can tolerate a maximum time away from home of four hours per day, no more than one to two days per week.  

Under 38 U.S.C. § 1114 (l), SMC is payable if, as the result of service-connected disability, the Veteran is so helpless as to be in need of regular aid and attendance of another person.  38 U.S.C. § 1114 (l); 38 C.F.R. § 3.350 (b).

Under 38 C.F.R. § 3.352 (a), the following factors will be accorded consideration in determining whether the Veteran is in need of regular aid and attendance of another person: the inability of the Veteran to dress or undress himself, or to keep himself ordinarily clean and presentable; frequent need of adjustment of any special prosthetic or orthopedic appliances which by reason of the particular disability cannot be done without such aid; inability of the Veteran to feed himself because of the loss of coordination of upper extremities or because of extreme weakness; and the inability to attend to the wants of nature; or incapacity, physical or mental, which requires care or assistance on a regular basis to protect the Veteran from the hazards or dangers incident to his daily environment.  38 C.F.R. § 3.352 (a).

It is not required that all the disabling conditions enumerated in 38 C.F.R. § 3.352 (a) be found to exist before a favorable rating may be made.  The particular personal functions which the Veteran is unable to perform should be considered in connection with his condition as a whole.  It is only necessary that the evidence establish that the Veteran is so helpless as to need regular aid and attendance, not that there is a constant need.  38 C.F.R. § 3.352 (a); see also Turco v. Brown, 9 Vet. App. 222, 224 (1996) (holding that at least one factor listed in section 3.352(a) must be present for a grant of SMC based on need for aid and attendance).

During the period on appeal, the Veteran was service connected for allergic rhinitis, rated as 10 percent disabling.  His combined disability rating is 10 percent.

The Veteran submitted a February 2023 VA Form 21-2680, Examination for Housebound Status or Permanent Need for Regular Aid and Attendance, which was completed by a VA physician.  In the section for the diagnoses that equate to the level of assistance described in the report, the physician noted Kaposi sarcoma, multiple sites, which as noted above, is not service connected.  

This February 2023 VA Form 21-2680 does not support finding that the Veteran is entitled to aid and attendance benefits. The physician explicitly noted that the Veteran's limitations are due to his nonservice-connected Kaposi sarcoma.  During the period on appeal, the Veteran is only service connected for allergic rhinitis.  The February 2023 physician did not indicate that the Veteran had any limitations related to his allergic rhinitis. While the Veteran may have functional limitations, it is not because of his service-connected disability.

The weight of the evidence is persuasively against finding that the Veteran is so helpless as to be in need of regular aid and attendance of another person.  His service-connected disability does not result in the need for regular assistance to perform any of the activities listed in 38 C.F.R. § 3.352 (a).

The Veteran also does not meet the criteria for SMC under 38 U.S.C. § 1114 (s), which requires that he have "a service-connected disability rated as total, and (1) has additional service-connected disability or disabilities independently ratable at 60 percent or more, or, (2) by reason of such veteran's service-connected disability or disabilities, is permanently housebound."  See also 38 C.F.R. § 3.350 (i) (setting forth criteria for SMC at the housebound rate).  The Veteran does not have any service-connected disability rated as total, nor has he been awarded a total disability rating based on individual unemployability.  His total combined rating is 10 percent.  He does not meet the criteria for SMC based on housebound status.

For the foregoing reasons, the Veteran is not entitled to SMC based on the need for aid and attendance or housebound status.  The evidence is not in approximate balance, but is persuasively against the claim.  Entitlement to SMC based on the need for aid and attendance or housebound is denied.

 

 

MICHELLE L. KANE

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	LeMoine, Brian

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.