Citation Nr: A25032057
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240627-452688
DATE: April 8, 2025

REMANDED

Service connection for prostate cancer is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from October 1972 to July 1974.

In an April 2024 rating decision, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ), a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO), denied service connection for prostate cancer.

In June 2024 the Veteran appealed that denial to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) in a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal. The Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. 

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was associated with the claims file during a period of time when additional evidence was not allowed, the Board has not considered it in this decision. 38 C.F.R. § 20.300. However, as a remand of this matter is warranted, any such evidence will be considered by the AOJ on remand.

An appellant has 90 days from the certification of an appeal to the Board to change representation for any reason. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1304(a). If a change in representation in requested more than 90 days after the certification, the appellant must show good cause for the change. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1304(b). At the time of the June 2024 VA Form 10182, the Veteran was represented by attorney Neil M. Woods. A July 2024 letter from the Board Late informed the Veteran that his case was formally placed on the Board's docket and that he had 90 days from the letter to request a change in representation. In January 2025 the Veteran submitted VA Form 21-22 naming The American Legion as his representative. The Board finds no good cause for the attempted change in representation in January 2025. Therefore the attorney Neil M. Woods will remain the representative for purposes of this appeal pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 20.1304.

In September 2024 the Veteran's representative wrote that the Veteran was waiving his right to select a different Board review option, and asking that his appeal be reviewed as soon as possible.

1. Service connection for prostate cancer is remanded.

The Veteran contends that his prostate cancer is related to exposures in service.

In the April 2024 rating decision, the RO made the favorable finding that the Veteran has been diagnosed with a prostate condition. The RO made the favorable finding that the Veteran's participation in service in a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA) is conceded. The Board is bound by those findings absent clear and unmistakable error. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).

The Veteran was diagnosed with prostate cancer in 2006 and had surgery. He had a reoccurrence in 2023 and was treated with radiation.

In a January 2024 memorandum, VA found that during the Veteran's service he participated in a TERA. Specifically, VA found that in the Veteran's military occupations of combat engineer and infantry he was exposed to explosives, lead dust and fumes, oils, asbestos, fuels, solvents, and automotive chemicals. 

In March 2024 a VA examiner expressed an opinion that, after considering  the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran, his prostate cancer was less likely than not caused by his TERAs. As rationale, the examiner noted that the Veteran had some of the risk factors for prostate cancer. The examiner opined that his non-military risk factors outweighed his TERAs as risks for prostate cancer.

The March 2024 opinion is not adequate. The examiner did not explain why the Veteran's prostate cancer was more likely due to his risk factors of age, obesity, and hypertension, than to his TERAs in service. Stated another way, the examiner did not offer a sufficient rationale for the conclusion that the Veteran's prostate cancer was less likely than not due to his exposures in service.

Once VA undertakes the effort to provide an examination or medical opinion it must provide an adequate one. Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007). The RO's failure to obtain an adequate opinion was pre-decisional duty-to-assist error. To correct that error, the Board is remanding the matter for additional opinion.

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain an addendum opinion, from an appropriate clinician who has not previously examined the Veteran or provided an opinion, to address the etiology of the Veteran's prostate cancer. The examiner is to review the Veteran's claims file. 

The examiner is to provide an opinion as to whether it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's prostate cancer is etiologically related to his conceded exposures to explosives, lead dust and fumes, oils, asbestos, fuels, solvents, and automotive chemicals as a combat engineer and infantry member. See January 2024 TERA Memorandum.

The examiner's attention is directed to the February 2025 Appellate Brief.

The examiner should specifically consider and discuss the synergistic, combined effect of all of the Veteran's toxic exposure risk activities (TERA). 

An adequate medical opinion may not be predicated solely on the absence of medical literature supporting a nexus without discussing the specific facts in the case.

A complete rationale for all opinions must be provided.

 

 

Rebecca N. Poulson

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	K. J. Kunz, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.