Citation Nr: A25032107
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240708-458688
DATE: April 8, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for migraines, including as secondary to insomnia disorder with unspecified depressive disorder and alcohol use disorder, and as secondary to tinnitus, is remanded. 

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from September 1977 to February 1978 and March 1979 to August 1983.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a November 2023 rating decision by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO); therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.

In the July 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the November 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of entitlement to service connection for migraines, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Service Connection

Service connection will be granted if the evidence demonstrates a current disability resulted from an injury or disease incurred in or aggravated by active military service, even if the disability was initially diagnosed after service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a).  Establishing service connection generally requires (1) medical evidence of a current disability; (2) medical or, in certain circumstances, lay evidence of in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) evidence of a nexus between the claimed in-service disease or injury and the present disability.  Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004).  Service connection may be granted for any disease initially diagnosed after service when all the evidence, including pertinent to service, establishes the disease was incurred in service.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).  

Service connection may also be granted on a secondary basis for a disability if there is evidence sufficient to show (1) that a current disability exists and (2) that the current disability was either (a) caused by or (b) aggravated by a service-connected disability.  38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a)-(b).  Secondary causation exists when, but for the service-connected disability, the non-service-connected was caused by a service-connected disability either in a direct, etiological way or via multiple steps in a causal chain.  Spicer v. McDonough, 61 F.4th 1360, 1365 (Fed. Cir. 2023).  Secondary aggravation exists when the non-service-connected disability not caused by a service-connected disability would be less severe were it not for a service-connected disability.  Id. at 1364.  For example, secondary aggravation may be established where the natural progression of the non-service-connected disability could have been arrested or improved but for the service-connected disability.  Id.

VA is responsible for determining whether the evidence supports the claim or is in relative equipoise, with a claimant prevailing in either event. 38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102. The claimant is entitled to the benefit of the doubt when there is an "approximate" (meaning nearly equal) balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any material determination. See Lynch v. McDonough, 999 F.3d 1391 (2021); Ortiz v. Principi, 274 F.3d 1361 (Fed. Cir. 2001). If the evidence persuasively weighs against the claim, the claim is denied.

The Veteran filed an October 2021 claim for service connection for migraines. See October 2021 VA Form 21-526EZ. The Veteran seeks service connection for migraines which he contends began during service and have continued since. In the alternative, the Veteran contends that his migraine disability is secondary to his service-connected insomnia disorder with unspecified depressive disorder and alcohol use disorder. The Veteran also contends that his migraine disability is secondary to his service-connected tinnitus.

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in September 2016. The examiner noted a diagnosis for migraines. The examiner noted that the Veteran's headache condition did not impact his ability to work. The Board notes that the examiner did not provide a nexus opinion.

In a March 2019 VA medical opinion, the clinician opined that the Veteran's migraine condition was less likely than not incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness. The clinician noted that there is no evidence of a headache disorder in service (or in subsequent medical records). The clinician further noted that the headaches documented in service are related to systemic illness and not a headache disorder.

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in December 2021. The examiner opined that the Veteran's migraine condition is less likely than not the result of the Veteran's service-connected insomnia disorder with unspecified depressive disorder and alcohol use disorder. The examiner noted that no good current studies conclude that migraine headaches are at least as likely as not the result of insomnia disorder. The Board notes that the examiner failed to address aggravation. A medical opinion addressing secondary service connection must address causation and aggravation. See El-Amin v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 136, 140 (2013). Therefore, the opinion is inadequate for adjudication purposes.

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in May 2022. The examiner opined that the Veteran's migraine condition is less likely than not the result of the Veteran's service-connected insomnia disorder with unspecified depressive disorder and alcohol use disorder. The examiner noted that peer-reviewed medical literature does not document a causal relationship between migraine headaches and insomnia disorder with unspecified depressive disorder and alcohol use disorder. The Board notes that this examiner failed to address aggravation. Therefore, the opinion is inadequate for adjudication purposes.

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in April 2023. The examiner noted a diagnosis of migraines. The examiner further reported that due to the Veteran having trouble completing tasks when having a migraine his migraine disability does impact his ability to work. The examiner did not provide a nexus opinion.

In a May 2023 VA medical opinion, the clinician opined that the Veteran's migraine disability was less likely than not incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness. The examiner noted that the Veteran's headaches in service appear to be secondary to other temporary conditions. Regarding secondary service connection, the clinician opined that the Veteran's migraine disability is less likely than not the result of the Veteran's service-connected psychiatric disorder. The Board notes that the examiner did not provide an opinion regarding aggravation. As discussed above, an opinion addressing secondary service connection must address both causation and aggravation. Therefore, the opinion is inadequate.

In an October 2023 VA medical opinion, the clinician opined that the Veteran's migraine disability is less likely than not the result of the Veteran's service-connected tinnitus. The clinician noted that medical research does not suggest that tinnitus causes migraines but may support the theory that headaches cause tinnitus. The Board notes that the clinician did not provide an opinion regarding aggravation and did not adequately address the medical article submitted by the Veteran regarding headaches and tinnitus. Therefore, the opinion is inadequate

In a November 2023 VA medical opinion, the clinician opined that the Veteran's migraine condition was less likely than not incurred in or caused by an in-service injury, event, or illness. The clinician noted that without chronicity during service or after service, a post-service event, illness, or injury is considered to be a more likely etiology. The opinion was based solely on the clinician's finding that there is no evidence of chronicity of symptoms since service. As the clinician did not consider the Veteran's lay statements as to a continuity of symptoms since service, the opinion is inadequate.

Further, regarding secondary service connection, the clinician opined that it is not at least as likely as not that the Veteran's migraine disability was aggravated beyond its natural progression by the Veteran's service-connected tinnitus. The clinician noted that there is no objective evidence that the migraine headache has been aggravated beyond normal progression by the tinnitus condition. The Board notes that the clinician did not adequately address the medical article provided by the Veteran as it relates to tinnitus and headaches. This opinion is also inadequate.

The Board finds that, while the AOJ took steps to obtain a VA opinion on the Veteran's behalf, it did not ensure that it was adequate for the purposes of the determination being made. Once VA undertakes the effort to provide an examination or medical opinion when developing a service connection claim, even if not statutorily obligated to do so, it must provide one that is adequate for the purposes of the determination being made. Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007). This constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error, which must be corrected on remand.

In light of the above, the Board finds that while the record does contain an adequate medical opinion to determine direct service connection, it does not contain medical opinions that are sufficient to consider the theory of secondary service connection. Therefore, a remand is required to obtain an adequate opinion regarding secondary service connection of the Veteran's migraine disability. See Douglas v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 19, 26 (2009). 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Obtain an addendum VA opinion from an appropriate clinician addressing secondary service connection of the Veteran's migraine disability. The need for an in-person examination is left to the discretion of the clinician proffering the opinion.

The clinician must review the claims file in its entirety and the review should be noted in the report.

Thereafter, the clinician should provide the following opinions:

(a)	Whether the Veteran's migraine disability was caused by his service-connected psychiatric disability and explain why or why not.

(b)	Whether the Veteran's migraine disability was aggravated by his service-connected psychiatric disability and explain why or why not.

(c)	Whether the Veteran's migraine disability was caused by his service-connected tinnitus disability and explain why or why not.

(d)	Whether the Veteran's migraine disability was aggravated by his service-connected tinnitus disability and explain why or why not.

(Continued on the next page)

?

In rendering an opinion, the clinician should consider the relevant medical evidence of record, to include the Veteran's lay statements.

The clinician should provide a complete rationale for any opinions offered. If the clinician is unable to provide any requested opinion without resorting to speculation, he or she should explain why this is so.

 

 

J. NICHOLS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	K. Fuller, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.