Citation Nr: A25032536
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240211-415301
DATE: April 8, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to special monthly compensation based on the need for regular aid and attendance or at the housebound rate is denied.

FINDING OF FACT

During the course of this appeal, the Veteran did not have a single service-connected disability rated 100 percent with separate service-connected disabilities rated 60 percent or more and the Veteran was not permanently confined to his immediate premises as a result of service-connected disabilities, and the evidence does not show the actual need for aid and attendance of another person.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

1. The criteria for entitlement to special monthly compensation based on the need for regular aid and attendance or at the housebound rate have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1114, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.350, 3.352.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from July 1990 to April 1994. 

This case comes before the?Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a July 2023 rating decision by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Veterans Benefits Administration Regional Office (RO), which is the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).?? The July 2023 rating?decision denied entitlement to special monthly compensation based on the need for regular aid and attendance and at the housebound rate.  In February 2024, the Veteran requested a direct review of the appeal by the Board.? 

The current appeal stems from the Veteran's selection of direct review, in which the Veteran acknowledged that the review will be based on the evidence submitted to VA at the time of the AOJ decision on the issues on appeal.  Therefore, only evidence of record as of the date of the July 2023 rating?decision will be considered.

1. Entitlement to special monthly compensation based on the need for regular aid and attendance or at the housebound rate.

Special monthly compensation (SMC) is payable under 38 U.S.C. § 1114(l) if, as the result of service-connected disability, the Veteran is permanently bedridden or is so helpless as to be in need of regular aid and attendance of another person. 38 U.S.C. § 1114(l); 38 C.F.R. § 3.350(b).

The need for aid and attendance means being so helpless as to require the regular aid and attendance of another person.  38 C.F.R. § 3.350(b).  The criteria for establishing that need include whether the Veteran is permanently bedridden or is so helpless as to be in need of regular aid and attendance as determined under criteria enumerated under 38 C.F.R. § 3.352(a).  The following factors will be accorded consideration in determining whether the Veteran is in need of regular aid and attendance of another person:  (1) inability of the Veteran to dress or undress himself, or to keep himself ordinarily clean and presentable; (2) frequent need of adjustment of any special prosthetic or orthopedic appliances which by reason of the particular disability cannot be done without such aid; (3) inability of the Veteran to feed himself because of the loss of coordination of upper extremities or because of extreme weakness; (4) inability to attend to the wants of nature; or (5) physical or mental incapacity which requires care or assistance on a regular basis to protect the Veteran from the hazards or dangers incident to his daily environment.  38 C.F.R. § 3.352(a).

It is not required that all of the disabling conditions enumerated in 38 C.F.R. § 3.352(a) be found to exist before a favorable rating may be made.  The particular personal functions which the Veteran is unable to perform should be considered in connection with his condition as a whole.  It is only necessary that the evidence establish that the Veteran is so helpless as to need regular aid and attendance not that there is a constant need for aid and attendance.  Turco v. Brown, 9 Vet. App. 222 (1996) (at least one factor listed in 38 C.F.R. § 3.352(a) must be present to grant special monthly compensation based on the need for aid and attendance).

Special monthly compensation at the housebound rate is payable when a Veteran has a single service-connected disability rated 100 percent and (1) has additional service-connected disability or disabilities independently rated 60 percent, separate and distinct from the 100 percent service-connected disability and involving different anatomical segments or bodily systems; or (2) is permanently housebound by reason of service-connected disability or disabilities.  38 U.S.C. § 1114(s); 38 C.F.R. § 3.350(i)(1).

The requirements of 38 U.S.C. § 1114(s)(2) are met when a Veteran is substantially confined as a direct result of service-connected disabilities to his dwelling and the immediate premises or, if institutionalized, to the ward or clinical area, and it is reasonably certain that the disability or disabilities and resultant confinement will continue throughout his lifetime.  38 C.F.R. § 3.350(i)(2).

The Veteran asserts that special monthly compensation based on the need for regular aid and attendance, being permanently housebound, or at the housebound rate was warranted as the service-connected disabilities resulted in the need for regular aid and attendance of another individual to perform activities of daily living, made him permanently housebound, and/or met the criteria for special monthly compensation at the housebound rate.  The Board, after a thorough review of the relevant medical and lay evidence of record, finds that the criteria for an allowance of the claim are not met.

The Veteran has established service connection for posttraumatic stress disorder with major depressive disorder and alcohol use disorder (PTSD), erectile dysfunction, hypertension, and irritable bowel syndrome (IBS). The combined service-connected disability rating is, 70 percent, effective October 23, 2013; and 100 percent, effective November 11, 2022.  PTSD is the only compensable disability.

At an April 2021 VA PTSD examination, the disability was found to result in occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking and/or mood.

In a June 2021 treatment note, the Veteran was noted as being independent in regard to dressing, grooming, ambulating, eating, toileting, bathing, transferring, and job-related tasks.  The Veteran was also noted as having no limitation in mobility and having excellent nutrition. 

A July 2021 emergency department triage note describes the Veteran as being in a motor vehicle accident.  The Veteran was a restrained driver and was rear-ended. 

In a January 2022 emergency department triage note, the Veteran complained of left arm pain.  The Veteran drove himself to the emergency room for treatment.

In an unsigned, undated examination for housebound status or permanent need for regular aid and attendance received by VA in March 2023, the Veteran was noted as being able to feed himself, not being blind, and not needing nursing home care. The Veteran needed assistance with preparing meals, bathing and tending to other hygiene needs, medication management, and managing benefit payments. 

At a December 2023 VA hypertension examination, the disability was not found to result in any overall functional impairment.

At a December 2023 VA intestinal condition examination, the disability was not found to result in any overall functional impairment.

At a December 2023 VA mental disorders examination, the disability was found to result in total occupational and social impairment.  At the time of the examination, the Veteran reported being married to his wife of 32 years and having one good friend from childhood.  When asked about what he did, the Veteran was unable to say except that he remained in bed.  The Veteran had two grandchildren, one who was a newborn, and had seen the baby and a daughter recently.  The Veteran was found capable of managing his own financial affairs.

At a January 2024 VA intestinal condition examination, the disability was found to impact the Veteran's ability to focus, eat, and run errands at times. 

At a January 2024 examination for housebound status or permanent need for regular aid and attendance, the Veteran was not found to be permanently bedridden, but was noted as not being able to travel beyond his current domicile.  The Veteran was accompanied by his wife who had been assisting him at home, doing the household chores, cooking, and driving.  The Veteran stopped driving almost three years prior because of problems with memory.  The Veteran had used a cane since 2014.  The Veteran was noted as having chronic lower back, bilateral hip, and left leg pain that affected the ability to protect himself from the daily environment.  The Veteran was noted as being able to perform all self-care skills.  The Veteran was able to walk without the assistance of another person and had normal upper extremity function.  The Veteran had limitation of joint motion and muscle weakness in the lower extremities.  The Veteran was found to be capable of managing his own financial affairs. 

At a January 2024 VA PTSD examination, the disability was found to result in total occupational and social impairment.  At the time of the examination, the Veteran lived with his wife and granddaughter.  The Veteran reported having no circle of friends and not doing anything.  On a typical day, the Veteran moved from one room to another.  The Veteran slept three hours during the day.  The Veteran no longer drove due to memory concerns.  The Veteran did not watch television or help with chores.  The Veteran stated that his wife took care of everything.  His wife had a power of attorney.  The Veteran was found to not be capable of managing his own financial affairs due to significant cognitive impairment.

The Board finds that the Veteran was not entitled to SMC based on the need for regular aid and attendance of another person as a result of service-connected disabilities or being housebound.  The weight of the evidence of record does not show that the Veteran was permanently bedridden, was unable to dress or undress himself consistently or keep himself ordinarily clean and presentable, required assistance adjusting any special prosthetic or orthopedic appliances, was unable to feed himself, was unable to attend to the wants of nature, or required care or assistance on a regular basis to protect him from hazards or dangers incident to his daily environment as a result of the service-connected connected disabilities.  The evidence also does not show that the Veteran was substantially confined to his home or premises due to the service-connected disabilities.

The Board finds that the weight of the evidence of record is against a finding that that the Veteran was unable to perform the activities of daily living or that he required protection from the hazards or dangers present in his daily life as a result of service-connected disabilities alone.  There is no indication that the Veteran was permanently bedridden or housebound as a result of service-connected disabilities. 

The medical evidence of record does not show that the Veteran required assistance or restriction of activities as a result of service-connected disabilities.

Here, the Board notes that treatment records indicate that the Veteran has ongoing issues with his back, hips, and left leg.  However, the Veteran has not established service connection for any musculoskeletal disability at the time of this decision. Therefore, those conditions may not be considered in adjudication of this appeal. 

The Board finds that the Veteran was not entitled to SMC based on the need for regular aid and attendance of another person as a result of service-connected disabilities at any point during the course of this appeal.  The Board finds that the weight of the evidence of record does not show that the service-connected disabilities, alone, kept him permanently bedridden, unable to stay ordinarily clean and presentable, unable to feed himself, unable to attend to the wants of nature, or unable to protect him from hazards or dangers incident to his daily environment. As any need for aid and attendance was not due to service-connected disabilities, special monthly compensation cannot be granted for aid and attendance.

Additionally, the Board finds that the Veteran is not entitled to SMC by reason of being factually housebound, as the weight of the evidence of record is against a finding that he was confined to his home or the immediate premises as a result of service- connected disabilities.  The Veteran has been able to leave as he desires.  While the evidence shows that the Veteran is not able to drive himself when he leaves the home, and that he does not leave the home frequently, the Board finds that the weight of the evidence is against a finding that the service-connected disabilities cause the Veteran to be substantially confined to his home and premises.

Further, while the Veteran has a single service-connected disability rated 100 percent, the Veteran does not have an additional service-connected disability or disabilities independently rated 60 percent, separate and distinct from the 100 percent service-connected disability and involving different anatomical segments or bodily systems.  Therefore, the Veteran does not currently meet the criteria for SMC pursuant to 38 U.S.C. § 1114(s).

The Board acknowledges that the Veteran and the Veteran's spouse can attest to factual matters of which they have first-hand knowledge, such as ongoing physical problems and symptoms.  Washington v. Nicholson, 19 Vet. App. 362 (2005).  However, to the extent that the Veteran has reported that he was unable to perform tasks due to service-connected disabilities, those assertions are outweighed by the clinical findings suggesting that the Veteran is able to perform those activities.

Accordingly, the Board finds that the weight of the evidence is against the claim and entitlement to SMC based on the need for the regular aid and attendance of another person or being housebound is not warranted.  The Board finds that the evidence is not in approximate balance and there is no reasonable doubt to resolve in favor of the Veteran.  Therefore, the claim is denied.  38 U.S.C. § 5107.

 

 

Harvey P. Roberts

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Mondesir, Eric

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.