Citation Nr: A25032937
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 241002-479208
DATE: April 9, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for back strain is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for neck strain is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served in the United States Navy from August 2014 to August 2018 and from October 2019 to December 2020, with additional periods of reserve service. 

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from a June 2023 rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO), the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ), which denied service connection for back strain and neck strain. In July 2023, the Veteran filed for Higher-Level Review (HLR) and in October 2023, both denials were continued. In October 2024, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal, in which she elected the Direct review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the June 2023 AOJ decision, which was subsequently subject to HLR. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to HLR the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims for entitlement to service connection for neck strain and back strain, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

As this case is being decided under VA's modernized appeal system, pursuant to the Appeals Modernization Act (known as the AMA), the Board is bound by favorable findings of the AOJ in the absence of evidence of clear and unmistakable error. The relevant favorable findings identified in the June 2023 decision were that the claimed primary disability of migraine headaches is service-connected and that the Veteran has present diagnoses of both lumbosacral strain and cervical strain. The Board is bound by these favorable findings. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104.

Back Strain

The Veteran has requested service connection for back strain, stating that she injured her back in service but believes her migraines currently cause her back strain. 

The Veteran attended a VA examination to assess the nature and etiology of her back strain in April 2023. The examiner found the Veteran was diagnosed with lumbosacral strain as well as mild "S shaped" scoliosis. The Veteran reported that her back strain began in service while carrying heavy loads up flights of stairs. After service, she stated that she continued to have low back pain when she had migraine headaches. She stated that her back strain interferes with her ability to exercise and sleep, she cannot lift over 10 pounds without pain, and she cannot sit or stand for prolonged periods of time without a "low dull back ache." She also stated her back strain interferes with work productivity. 

The examiner found the Veteran's back strain was less likely than not proximately due to or the result of the Veteran's migraine headaches. The examiner stated that there was no evidence of a thoracolumbar condition in the Veteran's service treatment records and that there is no medical linkage between back strain and migraine headaches. Therefore, a nexus has not been established. 

The Board finds this opinion inadequate. The examiner failed to give a medical reason for the opinion, but rather gave a conclusory statement. The examiner also failed to consider the Veteran's statements that her back strain initially began in service and instead, relied on a lack of service treatment records to support a negative nexus. A lack of contemporaneous medical records does not serve as an "absolute bar" to the service connection claim and cannot be used as a rationale in explaining why the current disability is not related to service. See Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331, 1337 (Fed. Cir. 2006). Additionally, secondary service connection does not require an in service event, injury, or disease. Therefore, whether or not the Veteran's back strain began in service is irrelevant for this particular opinion. 

The examiner also failed to address whether the Veteran's service-connected migraine headaches aggravated her back strain. Both causation and aggravation must be addressed in any VA medical opinion concerning secondary service connection. El-Amin v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 136, 140 (2013). 

For these reasons, the Board finds this opinion inadequate and remands the issue so a new, adequate exam may be provided. 

Entitlement to service connection for neck strain is remanded.

The Veteran has also requested service connection for neck strain, stating she also injured her neck in service and that currently, her migraine headaches also cause neck pain. 

The Veteran attended a VA examination to assess the nature and etiology of her neck strain in April 2023. The examiner found the Veteran was diagnosed with lumbosacral strain as well as mild "S shaped" scoliosis. The Veteran stated she experienced "dull localized posterior neck pain" in service and currently, her neck pain is preceded by a migraine headache. She reported constant dull to sharp neck pain that is worsened upon extension. She stated that she has changed her posture to accommodate her neck pain. She also stated she is unable to stand or sit for prolonged periods of time and has left work early due to neck pain. 

The examiner found the Veteran's neck strain was less likely than not proximately due to or the result of the Veteran's migraine headaches. The examiner stated that there is no correlation between neck pain and migraine headaches and medical literature does not support a positive nexus. 

The Board also finds this opinion inadequate. The examiner once again gave a conclusory statement rather than a fully explained opinion based in medical reasoning. The examiner also failed to assess whether the Veteran's migraine headaches aggravated her neck strain. See Id. Therefore, this opinion is also given little probative value, and this issue is remanded for a new, adequate medical opinion. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Schedule the Veteran for an examination to address the nature and etiology of any back or neck disorder, and any secondary conditions stemming from a spine disorder. The examiner must be provided access to the entire claims file and must specify in the report that the claims file has been reviewed. The examiner should then address:

(a.) What are the Veteran's current diagnoses of the back (thoracolumbar spine)?

(b.) For all back disorders, is it at least as likely as not that the disorder had its onset during or is otherwise related to her military service? 

Please discuss the Veteran's contentions that she injured her back when she carried heavy equipment up flights of stairs, and her assertions that she experienced back pain after that incident and that she currently has back pain when having a migraine headache.

(c.) Is it as likely as not the Veteran's back disorder has been either a) caused or b) aggravated by her service-connected migraine headache disorder?

(d.) What are the Veteran's current diagnoses of the neck (cervical spine)?

(e.) For all neck disorders, is it at least as likely as not that the disorder had its onset during or is otherwise related to her military service? 

Please again discuss the Veteran's contentions that she injured her neck when she was carrying heavy equipment up flights of stairs in service, that she had neck pain after that incident, and that she currently has neck pain when she has a migraine headache.

(f.) Is it as likely as not the Veteran's neck disorder has been either a) caused or b) aggravated by her service-connected migraine headache disorder?

A complete and fully explanatory rationale must be provided for any opinion offered. If any opinion cannot be rendered without resorting to speculation, the examiner must explain why.

Signature on the next page 

 

DELYVONNE M. WHITEHEAD

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	H. Black

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.