Citation Nr: A25032825
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240729-458444
DATE: April 9, 2025

ORDER

Service connection for obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

Resolving all doubt in the Veteran's favor, his currently diagnosed OSA is proximately due to his service-connected unspecified trauma and stressor related disorder and patellofemoral pain syndrome/bursitis of the right knee.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for service connection for OSA have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.310.	

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from July 1989 to July 1993. This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a rating decision issued in October 2023 by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office under the modernized appeals system known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA).  In July 2024, the Veteran timely appealed such rating decision by submitting a Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) (VA Form 10182) and requested direct review of the evidence considered by the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).  

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the October 2023 AOJ decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. However, based on the evidence the Board may consider, service connection for OSA is awarded herein, which is a full grant of the benefit sought on appeal.

As a final initial matter, he Board notes that, throughout the pendency of the claim, the Veteran has been represented by Michelle Miramontes-Armitstead, an attorney; however, in March 2025, an Appointment of Individual as Claimant's Representative (VA Form 21-22a) in favor of Adam G. Werner, an attorney, was received. However, as the Veteran's VA Form 10182 was received in July 2024 and such change in representation was submitted more than 90 days thereafter without good cause, the Board finds that, at the current time, Ms. Miramontes-Armitstead retains representation in the instant appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1304 (a), (b). However, the Veteran's appointment of Mr. Werner is referred to the AOJ for appropriate action. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1304 (b)(1).

Entitlement to service connection for OSA, claimed as secondary to service-connected unspecified trauma and stressor related disorder and/or patellofemoral pain syndrome/bursitis of the right knee.

As an initial matter, the Board notes that the Veteran does not allege, nor does the record reflect, that his claimed OSA is directly related to his military service. Robinson v. Shinseki, 557 F.3d 1355, 1361 (2008). Rather, he contends that such disorder is caused or aggravated by his service-connected unspecified trauma and stressor related disorder and patellofemoral pain syndrome/bursitis of the right knee, to include as a result of weight gain. Specifically, he alleges that such disabilities interfere with his sleep and, as a result of their functional impact, he was less motivated and able to exercise.

In this regard, service connection may be established on a secondary basis for a disability that is proximately due to or the result of a service-connected disease or injury. 38 U.S.C. § 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.310 (a). Establishing service connection on a secondary basis requires evidence sufficient to show (1) that a current disability exists and (2) that the current disability was either (a) proximately caused by or (b) proximately aggravated by a service-connected disability. Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439, 448 (1995) (en banc). Service connection may not be established on the basis of aggravation without establishing a pre-aggravation baseline level of disability and comparing it to the current level of disability. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310 (b).

In January 2017, VA's Office of General Counsel issued a precedential opinion finding that obesity may be an "intermediate step" between a service-connected disability and a current disability that may be connected on a secondary basis. In order to meet these criteria, the veteran must show (1) that his service-connected disability caused or aggravated his obesity; and, if so, (2) whether the obesity as a result of the service-connected disability was a substantial factor in causing or aggravating his claimed condition; and (3) whether the claimed condition would not have occurred but for obesity caused or aggravated by the service-connected disability. VAOPGCPREC 1-2017; Walsh v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 300 (2020).

As an initial matter, in the October 2023 rating decision, the AOJ favorably found that the Veteran had a current diagnosis of OSA as reflected by an October 2023 VA examination with a sleep study and is service-connected for unspecified trauma and stressor related disorder and patellofemoral pain syndrome/bursitis of the right knee. The Board is bound by such favorable findings. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104 (c). Therefore, the remaining inquiry is whether the Veteran's current OSA is caused or aggravated by such service-connected disabilities.

In this regard, in March 2023, Dr. Z.M., a private physician certified in sleep medicine, reviewed the Veteran's medical history, to include his lay statements and an OSA screening tool, and opined that it is at least as likely as not that his current OSA is secondary to, related to, and/or aggravated by his service-connected psychiatric and knee disabilities. In this regard, he found that such service-connected disabilities promoted sleep disturbance and weight gain, which led to his current obesity and, ultimately, his diagnosis of OSA.

In support thereof, Dr. Z.M. noted that, the Veteran's service-connected disabilities can lead to or cause pain, painful motion, sleep disturbances (related to pain and forced sleep positions), diminished motivation, and/or overeating, which can lead to diminished activity with less caloric expenditure, which leads to and/or promotes weight gain and obesity. In this regard, he noted that the Veteran's current BMI is 33.5, meeting the national standard by the CDC for obesity and his neck circumference is greater than 16 inches. Furthermore, Dr. Z.M. noted that medical literature reflects that obesity is known to predispose patients to and directly cause OSA. He also observed that such explained how, from a pathophysiological perspective, OSA is associated with obesity, exacerbates hyperglycemia and other neuroendocrine chemicals and processes, and promotes further weight gain in a cyclical fashion due to an induced metabolic syndrome, with subsequent progression of weight gain and worsening of the OSA. 

Dr. Z.M. observed that pathophysiological process led to the deposition of fat around the pharyngeal airway, which increases the collapsibility of the upper pharyngeal airway. He also indicated that fat deposition around the abdomen leads to reductions in functional residual capacity that reduces lung volumes, tethering effects on the upper airway. It was further noted that low lung volumes are also associated with diminished oxygen stores, which would contribute to ventilatory control instability. Dr. Z.M. noted that obesity has been associated with functional impairment and weaking in the upper airway muscles, and snoring is noted to further weaken them and contribute to further collapsibility. 

Conversely, in August 2023, a VA examiner opined that it is less likely than not that the Veteran's OSA is proximately due to or the result of his service-connected disabilities as there is no indication of a positive correlation of psychiatric and knee disabilities with OSA. In this regard, he cited to a Mayo Clinic medical journal that indicated that OSA is the result of risk factors that include excess weight, neck circumference, narrowed airway, being male, being older, family history, use of alcohol, smoking, nasal congestion and medical conditions, to include congestive heart failure, high blood pressure, type 2 diabetes and Parkinson's disease. The examiner further noted that polycystic ovary syndrome, hormonal disorders, prior stroke and chronic lung diseases such as asthma also can increase risk. 

The VA examiner also opined that the information is insufficient to support a finding that the Veteran's obesity was at least as likely as not the result of his service-connected psychiatric and knee disabilities. In this regard, he indicated that there are many possible causes of obesity, which occurs when one intakes more calories than one burns through normal daily activities and exercise, to include family inheritance and influences, lifestyle choices, and medications, that must also be considered in order to make a determination as to whether the Veteran's service-connected disabilities had any contribution to any weight gain and eventual obesity; however, in the instant case, he found that the available objective information is insufficient to make such delineation.   

As Dr. Z.M. and VA examiner are both medical professionals with the appropriate expertise to address the etiology of OSA, considered all relevant facts and applicable medical principles, and provided a rationale for their conclusions, their opinions are entitled to equal probative weight. Thus, the Board resolves all doubt in the Veteran's favor and finds that his currently diagnosed OSA is proximately due to his service-connected psychiatric and knee disabilities. Therefore, service connection for such disorder is warranted. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

 

 

A. JAEGER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	A. Sharrocks-Marchione

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.