Citation Nr: A25032477
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 221109-293496
DATE: April 8, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to an increased rating, in excess of 20 percent, for diabetes mellitus, type II (diabetes) is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Air Force from August 1965 to December 1968.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a March 2022 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In a March 2023 decision, the Board denied an increased rating claim for diabetes mellitus II (diabetes).  The Veteran appealed to the U.S. Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) and, in an August 2024 Memorandum Decision, the Court set aside the March 2023 Board decision and remanded the increased rating claim for diabetes for further development, including a new examination.

The Veteran's representative previously requested that this appeal remain in the legacy review system.  All appeals of post-February 2019 rating decisions are subject to the modernized review system pursuant to the Appeals Modernization Act.  The Veteran is appealing a March 2020 rating decision.  Therefore, the representative's request to maintain this appeal in the legacy review system is denied.  See generally 38 C.F.R. ยง19.2.

Entitlement to an increased rating, in excess of 20 percent, for diabetes is remanded.

The Veteran seeks an increased rating for his diabetes contending his condition is condition is worse than contemplated by his currently assigned rating. The Board finds a remand is necessary to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error related to the claim.

As an initial matter, there has not been substantial compliance with the Board's previous remand directives regarding the issue of entitlement to an increased rating for diabetes.  Although the Board regrets the additional delay, another remand is required.  Stegall v. West, 11 Vet. App. 268, 271 (1998).  Specifically, the November 2021 Board remand requested information concerning the effect of diabetes on the Veteran's occupational functioning.  However, the December 2021 VA examiner did not address any effects of his diabetes on his occupational functioning.

Furthermore, once VA undertakes the effort to provide an examination or medical opinion when developing a service-connection claim, it must provide an adequate one or, at a minimum, notify the claimant why one will not or cannot be provided.  Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 312 (2007).

Here, the examiner made conflicting and incomplete statements related to the Veteran's diabetes treatment and failed to address medical evidence of record which do not permit the Board to make an informed decision and renders the opinion inadequate.  See Miller v Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 249 (2020). As such, the Board still requires an adequate VA examination to determine the nature and severity of the Veteran's diabetes.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for an examination by an appropriate clinician to determine the current severity of his diabetes mellitus, type II (diabetes).

2.  To the extent possible, the examiner should identify any symptoms and functional impairments due to the Veteran's diabetes and discuss the effect of the diabetes on any occupational functioning and activities of daily living.

The examiner should indicate whether the Veteran requires the usage of insulin, a restricted diet, and any regulation of activities.  It would also be helpful to the Board for the examiner to address any ketoacidosis or hypoglycemic reactions which required hospitalization, or visits to a diabetic care provider and explain any complications the Veteran has as a result of his diabetes.

 

 

B.T. KNOPE

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	K. Miller, Associate Counsel