Citation Nr: A25032804
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 230224-328140
DATE: April 9, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to revision of the January 1996 rating decision, in which entitlement to service connection for neck disability was denied, on the basis of clear and unmistakable error (CUE), is denied.

Entitlement to revision of the January 1996 rating decision, in which a noncompensable rating (0 percent) was assigned for bilateral exertional compartment syndrome, on the basis of CUE, is denied.

Entitlement to revision of the January 1996 rating decision, in which a 10 percent rating was assigned for bilateral knee chondromalacia, on the basis of CUE, is granted; entitlement to a 10 percent rating for left knee chondromalacia is granted from January 15, 1994.

Entitlement to revision of the January 1996 rating decision, in which a 10 percent rating was assigned for bilateral knee chondromalacia, on the basis of CUE, is granted; entitlement to a 10 percent rating for right knee chondromalacia is granted from January 15, 1994.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. Pertaining to the issue of entitlement to service connection for neck disability (neck pain), the correct facts, as they were known at the time, were before the adjudicators, and statutory and regulation provisions extant at the time were correctly applied; to the extent that there was any error in the January 1996 rating decision, it is not absolutely clear that a different result would have ensued if the error had not been made.

2. Pertaining to the rating assigned for bilateral exertional compartment syndrome, the correct facts, as they were known at the time, were before the adjudicators, and statutory and regulation provisions extant at the time were correctly applied; to the extent that there was any error in the January 1996 rating decision, it is not absolutely clear that a different result would have ensued if the error had not been made.

3. Pertaining to the assignment of a singular rating for both knees, the laws, statutory and regulatory provisions extant at the time of the January 1996 rating decision were incorrectly applied to the facts; the result of that decision would have been manifestly different but for error in the application of law.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for entitlement to revision of the January 1996 rating decision, in which entitlement to service connection for neck disability was denied, on the basis of CUE, have not been met. 38 U.S.C. § 5109A, 7105 (2024); 38 C.F.R. § 3.105 (2024).

2. The criteria for entitlement to revision of the January 1996 rating decision, in which a noncompensable rating was assigned for bilateral exertional compartment syndrome, on the basis of CUE, have not been met. 38 U.S.C. § 5109A, 7105 (2024); 38 C.F.R. § 3.105 (2024).

3. The criteria for entitlement to revision of the January 1996 rating decision, in which a 10 percent rating was assigned for bilateral knee chondromalacia, on the basis of CUE, have been met. 38 U.S.C. § 5109A, 7105 (2024); 38 C.F.R. § 3.105 (2024).

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from April 1989 to January 1994. The Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) sincerely thanks the Veteran for his service.

This appeal to the Board arose from July 2022 and January 2023 rating decisions by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In the February 2023 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal, the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  The Board cannot consider evidence submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was added to the claim file that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

The Board reminds that new evidence cannot be considered in deciding the claims seeking revision or reversal of prior final decisions based on CUE, as such CUE claims must be based upon the facts and law that existed at the time of the prior decision. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(a)(1)(iii).

Clear and Unmistakable Error (CUE)

CUE is a very specific and rare kind of error. It is the kind of error of fact or law that when called to the attention of later reviewers compels the conclusion to which reasonable minds could not differ that the result would have been manifestly different but for the error. Even where the premise of error is accepted, if it is not absolutely clear that a different result would have ensured, the error complained of cannot be CUE. Fugo v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 40, 43-44 (1993).

There is a three-part test to determine whether a prior decision was based on CUE: (1) either the correct facts, as they were known at the time, were not before the adjudicator (i.e., more than a simple disagreement as to how the facts were weighed or evaluated) or the statutory or regulatory provisions extant at that time were incorrectly applied; (2) the error must be undebatable and of the sort which, had it not been made, would have manifestly changed the outcome at the time it was made; and (3) a determination that there was CUE must be made on the record and law that existed at the time of the prior adjudication in question. See Damrel v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 242, 245 (1994); Russell v. Principi, 3 Vet. App. 310, 313-14 (1992) (en banc).

A manifest change in the outcome of an adjudication means that, absent the alleged CUE, the benefit sought would have been granted at the outset. King v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 433, 441 (2014). The standard is not whether it is reasonable to conclude that the outcome would have been different. Id. at 442

1. Entitlement to revision of the January 1996 rating decision, in which entitlement to service connection for neck disability was denied, on the basis of CUE.

The Veteran asserts that the AOJ committed CUE when it denied entitlement to service connection for neck disability in January 1996. In the March 2022 CUE motion, the Veteran, through his representative, stated that the AOJ ignored evidence of in-service diagnosis of narrow disc space of the cervical spine and involvement in a motor vehicle accident. 

Turning now to the relevant evidence extant at the time of the January 1996 rating decision, in May 1994, the Veteran filed a claim seeking entitlement to service connection for multiple disabilities, to include a neck disability. See May 1996 VA Form 21-526 (Veterans Application for Compensation or Pension).

Pertaining to the neck, a review of the service treatment records only reveal that the Veteran expressed wanting to remove a mole from the back of his neck. See August 1994 STR - Medical.

A VA examination was provided to the Veteran in August 1994. The Veteran reported an injury to his neck in 1991 while doing some calisthenics. He never had surgery or good work-up on the neck but complained of chronic neck pain. The examination of the neck revealed range of motion (ROM) that was full, with questionable tenderness in posterior neck. A radiology report noted normal bony alignment. The vertebral heights and disk spaces were maintained. No bony fracture or bony destruction was identified. It was a normal study of the cervical spine. The diagnosis or assessment rendered by the examiner was that the neck was questionably tender in posterior cervical spine, i.e. degenerative joint disease (DJD). See August 1994 VA Examination.

In the January 1996 rating decision, the AOJ denied entitlement to service connection for neck disability. In the narrative, the AOJ stated that the service treatment records did not show treatment for, or diagnosis of, chronic neck disorder during service. The narrative continued that the VA examination showed range of motion that is full, with questionable tenderness in the posterior neck in the mid-lower area of the back. X-rays of cervical spine were normal. The AOJ concluded that the evidence failed to show that a chronic neck disorder was incurred in or aggravated by service. See January 1996 Rating Decision. 

The Board now turns to pertinent laws and regulations extant at the time of the January 1996 rating decision. A Veteran is granted service connection where evidence shows that an injury or disease that results in a current disability was incurred during service or was aggravated by service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. §3.303(a). To be entitled to service connection, the evidence must support (1) a current disability; (2) an in-service injury or event; and (3) a nexus between the current disability and the in-service injury or event.  38 C.F.R. §3.303(a).

After a thorough consideration of the evidence, laws, and regulations extant at the time of the January 1996 rating decision, the Board finds that the AOJ did not commit CUE in denying entitlement to service connection for neck disability, or chronic neck disorder.

Pertaining to the allegation that the AOJ ignored evidence pertaining to a neck injury sustained during a motor vehicle accident and in-service diagnosis of narrow disc space of the cervical spine, a review of the service treatment records is absent any notations pertaining to a diagnosis of narrow disc space of the cervical spine and motor vehicle accident. The allegation does not specify at which time these events occurred during service. Furthermore, the Veteran did not report injuring his neck during a motor vehicle accident at the August 1994 VA examination. It was also reported that there was no work up done pertaining to his neck, pertaining to an in-service diagnosis. Additionally, the X-ray performed at the August 1994 examination revealed normal results. 

In arguendo, even if it could be said that the AOJ ignored evidence pertaining to in-service injury or diagnosis, still, it would not have resulted in CUE. Again, the Veteran himself reported that he injured his neck performing exercise. He did not state that he was involved in a motor vehicle accident, and he injured his neck as a result. Accordingly, there was conflicting evidence pertaining to an onset of the Veteran's neck disability. 

Therefore, even if an in-service event of a motor vehicle accident or diagnosis was considered, there was other evidence, specifically from the Veteran, that was inconsistent. With this, essentially the argument becomes a disagreement as to how the facts were weighed or evaluated by the adjudicator. However, "[i]t is the prerogative of the factfinder . . . to interpret the evidence and draw reasonable inferences from it." Evans v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 180, 187 (citing Kahana v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 428, 435 (2011); Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49, 52 (1990)). A disagreement as to how the facts were weighed does not support a finding of CUE. Fugo, 6 Vet. App. at 43-44.

Again, in order to establish entitlement to service connection, the evidence must show a current diagnosis, an in-service injury or event, and a nexus between the current diagnosis and in-service injury or event. The record at the time of the January 1996 rating decision was not clear regarding any of these elements. 

The evidence has to clearly show that it is undebatable that the outcome would have been different but for the error in order for CUE to be found. See King, supra. Since there is evidence to support the AOJ's determination, the rating decision, by law, cannot be considered a clear and undebatable error.

The Board is sympathetic to the Veteran's claim. However, based on the laws, regulations, and evidence, entitlement to revision of the January 1996 rating decision pertaining to the denial of entitlement to service connection for neck disability must be denied. 

2. Entitlement to revision of the January 1996 rating decision, in which a noncompensable rating was assigned for bilateral exertional compartment syndrome, on the basis of CUE.  

The Veteran asserts that the AOJ committed CUE when assigning an initial noncompensable rating (0 percent) for his bilateral exertional compartment syndrome. It is alleged that the AOJ failed to apply 38 C.F.R. § 4.55 and § 4.56 pertaining to the evaluation of muscle injuries. The Veteran, through his representative, stated that based on the regulations, and the evidence of the record, the Veteran should have received a rating for at least a moderate muscle injury. 

Turning now to the relevant evidence extant at the time of the January 1996 rating decision, again, in May 1994, the Veteran filed a claim seeking entitlement to service connection for a shin disability.

The service treatment records document treatment of compartment syndrome. It was reported that the Veteran had multiple masses located on his lower legs. In a November 1992 Naval Hospital note, it was documented that there were normal motor and sensory examinations and normal dorsalis pedis and posterior tibial pulses, with exercise muscle bulges through these fascial defects. X-ray showed possible mild anterior cortical thickening of the tibias bilaterally. The ankles were normal. The impression provided was symptomatic fascial defect in the anterior tibial fascia with question of a chronic compartment syndrome. The plan was to perform an anterior tibial compartment fasciotomy on the left side, then after three (3) months, if the Veteran wished, to perform the procedure on the right side. The surgical procedure was performed in December 1992. In the same month, he complained of bilateral exertional leg pain. In February 1993, the Veteran expressed wanting surgical treatment for his right leg, which was scheduled and performed in March 1993. In an October 1993 hospital report, the diagnosis provided was exertional compartment syndrome of both legs, surgically treated. Treatment consisted of bilateral anterior and lateral compartment release, as well as anti-inflammatory medications and short-arc quadriceps exercise with improvement in the ischemic pain. The Veteran expressed having other lower extremity pain and anterior knee pain. It was opined that the Veteran was now "handicapped" in that he was not able to perform certain physical activities, such as sit for more than one hour, walk more than two (2) blocks, run more than 100 yards, or climb more than 3 flights due to bilateral knee pain.

On the August 1994 VA examination report, it was reported that the Veteran developed shin splints in 1989. He was treated conservatively for a while, then ended up having fasciotomies in both lower legs for anterior compartment syndrome. He stated that he had pain in his legs from previous surgery. Upon examination, surgical scars were noted on the Veteran's calves. There was muscle hernia present where the fasciotomy was performed. Muscle hernia was approximately 7x3 inches. There was no tenderness in these fasciotomy sites. There was no presence of atrophy of the calf or thigh. The radiology report indicated a normal study for both tibias and fibulas. 

In the January 1996 rating decision, the AOJ awarded entitlement to service connection for bilateral exertional compartment syndrome. The AOJ reported the in-service and VA examination findings. The AOJ continued that disabilities of the musculoskeletal system result in anatomical damage, functional loss, and evidence of disuse and/or abnormal excursion of movement. The AOJ stated that regarding the evaluation for a disability due to muscle injury, consideration will be given to the degree to which the ability of a muscle or muscle group to perform its full work is impaired. The principal symptoms of muscle injuries are weakness, undue fatigue and/or pain, and uncertainty or incoordination of movement. Muscle injuries are evaluated from slight to severe depending on the overall impairment demonstrated by objective evidence. 

The AOJ determined that slight impairment was demonstrated by the evidence, warranting a noncompensable evaluation (0 percent). The AOJ found that the evidence did not demonstrate moderate impairment to warrant a 10 percent evaluation. The Veteran's condition was evaluated under DC 5399-5312. See January 1996 Rating Decision.

The laws and regulations pertinent to this matter concerns the rating criteria for disabilities due to residuals of muscle injuries, as a result of gunshot wounds or other trauma. The regulations were essentially the same as they are currently, albeit some changes.

38 C.F.R. § 4.56 governs the factors to be considered in evaluating disabilities residual to healed wounds involving muscle groups due to gunshot or other trauma. As noted by the AOJ in the January 1996 rating decision, muscle injuries are evaluated based on the level of severity: slight, moderate, moderately severe, and severe. 

(a) Slight (insignificant) disability of muscles. Type of Injury: Simple wound of muscle without debridement infection or effects of laceration. History and complaint: Service department record wound of slight severity or relatively brief treatment and return to duty. Healing with good functional results. No consistent complaint of cardinal symptoms of muscle injury or painful residual. Objective findings: Minimum scar; slight, if any, evidence of fascial defect or atrophy or of impaired tonus. No significant impairment of function and no retained metallic fragments.

(b) Moderate Disability of Muscles. Type of injury: Through and through or deep penetrating wounds of relatively short track by single bullet or small shell or shrapnel fragment are to be considered as of at least moderate degree. Absence of explosive effect of high velocity missile and of residuals of debridement or of prolonged infection. History and complaint: Service department record or other sufficient evidence of hospitalization in service for treatment of wound. Record in the file of consistent complaint on record from first examination forward, of one or more of the cardinal symptoms of muscle wounds particularly fatigue and fatigue-pain after moderate use, affecting the particular functions controlled by injured muscles. Objective findings: Entrance and (if present) exit scars linear or relatively small, and so situated as to indicate relatively short track of missile through muscle tissue; signs of moderate loss of deep fascia or muscle substance or impairment of muscle tonus, and of definite weakness or fatigue in comparative tests. (In such tests the rule that with strong efforts, antagonistic muscles relax is to be applied to insure validity of tests). 

(c) Moderately severe disability of muscles. Type of injury: Through and through or deep penetrating wound by high velocity missile of small size or large missile of low velocity, with debridement or with prolonged infection or with sloughing of soft parts, intermuscular cicatrization. History and complaint: Service department record or other sufficient evidence showing hospitalization for prolonged period. In service for treatment of wound of severe grade. Record in the file of consistent complaint of cardinal symptoms of muscle wounds. Evidence of unemployability because of inability to keep up to production standards is to be considered, if present. Objective findings: Entrance and (if present) exit scars relatively large and so situated as to indicate track of missile through important muscle groups. Indications on palpation of moderate loss of deep fascia, or moderate loss of muscle substance or moderate loss of normal firm resistance of muscles compared with sound side. Tests of strength and endurance of muscle groups involved (compared with sound side) give positive evidence of marked or moderately severe loss.

(d) Severe disability of muscles. Type of injury: Through and through or deep penetrating wound due to high velocity missile, or large or multiple low velocity missiles, or explosive effect of high velocity missile, or shattering bone fracture with extensive debridement or prolonged infection and sloughing of soft parts, intermuscular binding and cicatrization. History and complaint: As under moderately severe (paragraph (c) of this section), in aggravated form. Objective findings: Extensive ragged, depressed, and adherent scars of skin so site- ated as to Indicate wide damage to muscle groups in track of missile. X-ray may show minute multiple scattered foreign bodies indicating spread of intermuscular trauma and explosive effect of missile. Palpation shows moderate or extensive loss of deep fascia or of muscle substance. Soft or flabby muscles in wound area. Muscles do not swell and harden normally in contraction. Tests of strength or endurance compared with the sound side or of coordinated move ment show positive evidence of severe impairment of function. In electrical tests, reaction of degeneration Is not present but a diminished excitability to Faradism com- pared with the sound side may be present. Visible or measured atrophy may or may not be present. Adaptive contraction of opposing group of muscles, if present, indicates severity. Adhesion of scar to one of the long bones, scapula, pelvic bones, sacrum or vertebrae, with epithelial sealing over the bone without true skin covering, in an area where bone is normally protected by muscle, indicates the severe type. Atrophy of muscle groups not included in the track of the missile, particularly of the trapezius and serratus in wounds in the shoulder girdle (traumatic muscular dystrophy), and in- duration and atrophy of an entire muscle following simple piercing by a projectile (progressive sclerosing myositis), may be included in the severe group if there Is sufficient evidence of severe disability.

The type of disability pictures are based on the cardinal symptoms of muscle disability (weakness, fatigue-pain, uncertainty of movement) and on the objective evidence of muscle damage and the cardinal signs of muscle disability (loss of power, lower threshold of fatigue, and impairment of coordination). 38 C.F.R. § 4.54 (1996). the Board notes that § 4.54 is not present in current time. In present time, the cardinal symptoms are listed in 38 C.F.R. § 4.56.

38 C.F.R. § 4.55 discusses the principles of combined ratings of muscle injuries in the same anatomical segment or of muscle injuries affecting the movements of a single joint. 

38 C.F.R. § 4.73 governs the ratings for muscle injuries and provides the diagnostic codes. Diagnostic Code (DC) 5311 contemplates disabilities for muscle group XI, which include the posterior and lateral crural muscles and muscles of the calf, including the triceps surae (gastrocnemius and soleus), tibialis posterior, peroneus longus, peroneus brevis, flexor hallucis longus, flexor digitorum longus, popliteus, and plantaris. The functions of these muscles are propulsion, plantar flexion of the foot, stabilization of the arch, flexion of the toes, and flexion of the knee. 

DC 5312 contemplates disabilities to muscle group XII, the anterior muscles of the leg, which include tibialis anterior, extensor digitorum longus, extensor hallucis longus, and peroneus tertius. The function of these muscles are dorsiflexion, extension of toes, and stabilization of arch.

After a thorough consideration of the evidence, in conjunction with the laws and regulations, extant at the time of the January 1996 rating decision, the Board finds that CUE was not committed when the AOJ failed to assign a 10 percent rating for bilateral compartment syndrome. 

First, regarding the allegation that the AOJ failed to apply § 4.55, again, this regulation concerns multiple muscle injuries in the same anatomical segment or affecting the movements of a single joint. This was not the case for this Veteran. Therefore, it would not have been applicable. 

The Board acknowledges the Veteran's symptoms of his condition limited his ability to perform miliary duty. The Board also acknowledges he received surgical treatment for his condition. However, the record does not show that the AOJ overlooked the evidence when considering the evaluation or severity of the condition. As extensively outlined above, the regulations provide various factors to consider when assigning a rating and determining severity of a muscle injury. Severity can be determined by type of injury, history and complaint of injury, and objective findings pertaining to that injury. Again, at the time of the January 1996 rating decision, § 4.54 stated that the type of disability pictures are based on the cardinal symptoms of the disability, objective evidence of muscle damage, and the cardinal signs of a muscle disability. 

Based on the evidence, the Board can see how some evidence may support the factors considered for moderate disability. However, the Board can also see how some evidence can support or be contemplative of factors considered for slight disability. The in-service record indicated a symptomatic fascial defect in the anterior tibial fascia with question of a chronic compartment syndrome. Presence of "fascial defect", is noted for the slight severity criteria. There was no clear determination that the fascial defect noted was classified as signs of moderate loss of deep fascia or muscle substance or impairment of muscle tonus, which would be contemplative of moderate disability. While there was presence of muscle hernia at the August 1994 VA examination, there was no clear determination regarding whether it constituted signs of moderate loss of muscle substance or impairment of muscle tonus. There were no signs of muscle atrophy. The radiological report revealed a normal study for the tibias and fibulas. Again, in addition to history and complaint, objective evidence of muscle damage is a consideration in assigning a rating. 

The Board acknowledges the Veteran's constant symptoms of pain. Specific to the rating criteria for muscle injuries, the cardinal symptoms of muscle injury are weakness, fatigue-pain, and uncertainty of movement. For moderate severity, the evidence has to show reports of one or more of the cardinal symptoms, particularly fatigue and fatigue-pain after moderate use. The record does not show reports of fatigue or pain characterized as such due to his muscle disability. Additionally, the Board notes that some of his limitations and pain symptoms were attributed to his knees. The Veteran was service connected for his knees and compensated for those associating symptoms.  

Pertaining to the allegation that the AOJ did not consider evaluating his disability under DC 5311, the assessment provided in service specified anterior. So, there is evidence to support the AOJ's determination in evaluating under DC 5312, which evaluates the muscles of the anterior leg. 

The argument is essentially a disagreement as to how the facts were weighed or evaluated by the adjudicator. Again, it is the factfinder's prerogative to interpret evidence and draw reasonable inferences from it. See Evans, supra. Again, a disagreement as to how the facts were weighed does not support a finding of CUE. Fugo, 6 Vet. App. at 43-44. The record at the time of the January 1996 rating decision did not unilaterally and definitively support the presence of a moderate disability pertaining to the Veteran's muscle injury. Where there is evidence to support the AOJ's determination, it cannot, by law, be considered CUE.

The Board is sympathetic to the Veteran's claim. However, based on the laws, regulations, and evidence, entitlement to revision of the January 1996 rating decision pertaining to the assignment of an initial noncompensable rating for bilateral exertional compartment syndrome is denied.

3. Entitlement to revision of the January 1996 rating decision, in which a 10 percent rating was assigned for bilateral knee chondromalacia, on the basis of CUE.

The Veteran contends that the AOJ committed CUE when the AOJ failed to assign separate ratings for his knee conditions. He asserts that the evidence at the time showed that he should have been assigned separate 10 percent ratings for right knee and left knee. The Board notes that in January 2022, the AOJ awarded entitlement to separate 10 percent ratings for left knee disability and right knee disability. Essentially, the Veteran is seeking an earlier effective date for these ratings on the basis of CUE in the January 1996 rating decision. 

Turning now to the relevant evidence extant at the time of the January 1996 rating decision, in the May 1994 claim, the Veteran expressed that he was seeking entitlement to service connection for a disability affecting his knees.

The service treatment records document treatment of bilateral knee pain. The records show that the Veteran has complained multiple times regarding both right and left knee pain. Popping and crepitus were noted as symptoms. The Veteran was assessed to have bilateral anterior knee pain syndrome. In October 1993, due to bilateral knee pain, it was opined that the Veteran was now "handicapped" in that he was not able to perform certain physical activities, such as sit for more than one hour, walk more than 2 blocks, run more than 100 yards, or climb more than 3 flights.

At the August 1994 VA examination, the Veteran reported crepitation on motion and pain when he has crepitation. He complained of pain in the knees all the time. None were observed to be swollen, and the examiner noted that the Veteran had no real complaints of pain at the present time. Physical examination of the knees revealed that crepitation was only present on movement when he puts it in certain position and moves his knee. The crepitation was in the patellofemoral. No swelling or ligamentous laxity was noted at the time for his knees. Knee ROM was within normal limits. The diagnosis rendered was chondromalacia of the patella, both knees, mild. 

In January 1996, the AOJ awarded entitlement to service connection for bilateral knee chondromalacia. The AOJ reiterated the in-service and VA examination findings. The AOJ specified that the service medical records showed a diagnosis of bilateral anterior knee pain syndrome during service and the VA examination showed complaints of pain in the knees. The AOJ continued that a joint affected by chondromalacia is evaluated based on limitation of motion and/or painful motion. The AOJ awarded a 10 percent singular rating for both knees, under DC 5003. The AOJ indicated that the evidence did not show moderate subluxation, moderate lateral instability, flexion limited to 30 degrees, extension limited to 15 degrees, dislocated cartilage with frequent episodes of, locking, pain and effusion of the knee joint, or impairment of the tibia and/or fibula with moderate knee disability to warrant an increase to the next higher evaluation of 20 percent. See January 1996 Rating Decision.

The Board now turns to the laws and regulations extant at the time of the January 1996 rating decision. The pertinent regulations and laws regard the rating criteria for musculoskeletal disabilities, specifically the knee. 

For the Veteran's chondromalacia, the AOJ awarded a rating under DC 5003. DC 5003 evaluates degenerative arthritis, hypertrophic and osteoarthritis. It was essentially the same in 1996 as it is currently, albeit small changes not relevant in this matter. Degenerative arthritis established by x-ray findings will be rated on the basis of limitation of motion under the appropriate diagnostic codes for the specific joint or joints involved (DC 5200 etc.). When however, the limitation of motion of the specific joint or joints involved is noncompensable under the appropriate diagnostic codes, a rating of 10 percent is for application for each such major joint or group of minor joints affected by limitation of motion, to be combined, not added under DC 5003. Limitation of motion must be objectively confirmed by findings such as swelling, muscle spasm, or satisfactory evidence of painful motion. In the absence of limitation of motion, arthritis is rated as follows: a 10 percent rating would be warranted for x-ray evidence of involvement of 2 or more major joints or 2 or more minor joint groups. A 20 percent rating would be warranted for x-ray evidence of involvement of 2 or more major joints or 2 or more minor joint groups, with occasional incapacitating exacerbations. See 38 C.F.R. 4.71a (1996).

38 C.F.R. § 4.45(f) stated, as it does currently, that for the purpose of rating disability from arthritis, the shoulder, elbow, wrist, hip, knee, and ankle are considered major joints; multiple involvements of the interphalangeal, metacarpal and carpal joints of the upper extremities, the interphalangeal, metatarsal and tarsal joints of the lower extremities, the cervical vertebrae, the dorsal vertebrae, and the lumbar vertebrae, are considered groups of minor joints, ratable on a parity with major joints. The lumbosacral articulation and both sacroiliac joints are considered to be a group of minor joints, ratable on disturbance of lumbar spine functions.

38 C.F.R. § 4.59 discusses the consideration of painful motion when evaluating disabilities. It read as follows: with any form of arthritis, painful motion is an important factor of disability, the facial expression, wincing, etc., on pressure or manipulation, should be carefully noted and definitely related to affected joints. Muscle spasm will greatly assist the identification. Sciatic neuritis is not uncommonly caused by arthritis of the spine. The intent of the schedule is to recognize painful motion with joint or periarticular pathology as productive of disability. It is the intention to recognize actually painful, unstable, or malaligned joints, due to healed injury, as entitled to at least the minimum compensable rating for the joint. Crepitation either in the soft tissues such as the tendons or ligaments, or crepitation within the joint structures should be noted carefully as points of contact which are diseased. Flexion elicits such manifestations. The joints involved should be tested for pain on both active and passive motion, in weight-bearing and non-weight-bearing and, if possible, with the range of the opposite undamaged joint.

After a thorough consideration of the evidence, laws, and regulations extant at the time of the January 1996 rating decision, the Board finds that the AOJ committed CUE when it failed to assign separate 10 percent ratings for right and left knee chondromalacia.

The regulations dictate that the knee is a major joint. DC 5003 states that a joint affected is assigned an evaluation based on limitation of motion. Limitation of motion can be evidenced by painful motion. Also, when the limitation of motion of the specific joint would be noncompensable under the appropriate diagnostic code, a rating of 10 percent is for application for each such major joint, to be combined, not added, under DC 5003. Per § 4.59, it is the intention to recognize painful, unstable, or malaligned joints, due to healed injury, as entitled to at least the minimum compensable rating for the joint. Crepitation should be noted as points where joints are disease, and flexion elicits such manifestations. 

DCs 5256 through 5263 address disability ratings for the knee. Specifically, DC 5260 evaluates limited flexion and DC 5261 evaluates limited extension.

The AOJ determined that the Veteran experienced pain in his knees. The AOJ also awarded a rating based on limitation of motion. The Veteran experienced pain with crepitation, which occurred when he moved his knees. The October 1993 in-service record indicated that the Veteran was limited in performing military duties due to bilateral knee pain. Accordingly, as the knee is a major joint, and he objectively experienced painful or limited motion for each knee, based on the governing regulations at the time, a rating should have been assigned for each knee, not one.

Per the regulations, the Veteran should have been assigned 10 percent rating for each knee under the appropriate diagnostic code evaluating limited motion of the knee and combine it under DC 5003.  As it was noted that he experienced crepitation, and flexion can elicit such, the Veteran should have received 10 percent rating under DC 5260-5003, for each knee separately. 

The AOJ incorrectly applied the provisions and case law pertaining to ratings for musculoskeletal disabilities, specifically the knee. If the AOJ would have correctly applied the law and considered the correct facts in this matter, the outcome would have been different.

The Board notes that in the April 2023 Codesheet, it states that a 10 percent rating is assigned for left knee disability from January 15, 1994. However, review of the record shows that there has been no determination by the AOJ regarding entitlement to an earlier effective date. Therefore, the Board finds that this must have been a typographical error.

							(Continued on next page)

Accordingly, as CUE has been found, revision of the January 1996 rating decision pertaining to the rating assigned for bilateral knee chondromalacia is warranted. Therefore, from January 15, 1994, entitlement to a 10 percent for left knee disability, and entitlement to a 10 percent rating for right knee disability under DC 5260-5003 is granted. 

 

 

E. I. VELEZ

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	S. Middleton, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.