Citation Nr: A25032911
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 241219-499914
DATE: April 9, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for fatty liver is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for gallbladder disease with gallstones is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from October 1951 to April 1955, from February 1957 to August 1960 and from October 1961 to October 1974.  

This matter comes before the Board on appeal from a July 2023 Appeals Modernization Act (AMA) rating decision and a December 2023 higher level review by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Rating Office (RO), the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ), that denied service connection for fatty liver and gallbladder disease with gallstones.  

In December 2024, the Veteran initiated this appeal to the Board with the filing of a Decision Review Request (VA Form 10182), requesting the Evidence Submission docket.  In?a January 2025 correspondence, the Board acknowledged the appeal and informed the Veteran and his representative that the appeal had been placed on the Board's Evidence Submission docket.  Under the Evidence Submission docket, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the July 2023 rating decision, which was subsequently subject to higher level review, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or his representative with the December 2024 VA Form 10182 or within 90 days of receipt of the December 2024 VA Form 10182.  38 C.F.R. § 20.303.  Evidence submitted outside of this evidence period cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.303, 20.801.    

? 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of service connection for fatty liver and gallbladder disease with gallstones (GB Condition), any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

The Board observes that there appears to be an outstanding Privacy Act request regarding VA examinations that took place in April 2023.  See July 2023 VA Form 20-10206.  Typically, those requests would have to be fulfilled before the Board can adjudicate an appeal.  However, because this appeal has been advanced on the docket due to the Veteran's age, and because remanding at this stage will not prejudice the Veteran, the Board will adjudicate this appeal and remand the claims to obtain adequate medical opinions.  The Board notes that these claims were the subject of a previous Board remand to obtain adequate medical opinions regarding direct and secondary service connection for the Veteran's fatty liver and GB Condition.  See February 2023 BVA Decision.  It is the hope of the Board that due to the Veteran's advanced age, adequate medical opinions are obtained by the AOJ in a timely fashion.         

Fatty Liver and Gallbladder Disease with Gallstones

Under the AMA, the Board may only?remand?an issue for the correction of (1) duty to assist errors occurring prior to the date of the AOJ decision on appeal (i.e., pre-decisional duty to assist errors) and (2) AOJ errors in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty, if correction of such error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the appellant's claim.? See?38C.F.R. § 20.802?(a).?? 

The Board has identified pre-decisional duty to assist errors, requiring?remand.?? 

The Board remands the service connection claims for fatty liver and GB Condition to obtain adequate medical opinions.? See 38 U.S.C. § 5103A (d); 38?C.F.R. §§ 3.159 (c)(4),?20.802.? When VA undertakes to provide an examination or obtain an opinion, it must ensure that the examination or opinion is adequate.? See Barr v. Nicholson, 21?Vet. App.?303, 311-12 (2007).? 

There are four medical opinions of record for the Veteran's fatty liver condition and his GB Condition: one for direct and secondary service connection for his fatty liver condition, one for direct and secondary service connection for his GB Condition, one opinion for service connection for his fatty liver condition based on his in-service toxic exposure risk activities (TERA), and the fourth and final opinion for service connection for his GB Condition based on his in-service  participation in TERA.

Direct and Secondary Service Connection Opinions

The Veteran was afforded VA examinations for his fatty liver condition and his GB Condition in April 2023.  The examiner was asked to provide both direct service connection and secondary service connection opinions.   

A.	Direct Service Connection

The examiner was asked to opine whether the Veteran's fatty liver condition and GB Condition were at least as likely as not related to service, including his exposure to Agent Orange.  See April 2023 Medical Opinion Disability Benefits Questionnaires (DBQ).  In both instances the examiner opined that "[t]he literature shows the committee concluded that there is inadequate or insufficient evidence to determine whether there is an association between exposure to" Agent Orange and the Veteran's liver condition and GB Condition.  These opinions are inadequate, as they both rely solely on a lack of medical literature discussing the relationship between exposure to Agent Orange and subsequent liver and gallbladder diseases, and do not discuss any facts pertaining to the Veteran's conditions.  See Bailey v. O'Rourke, 30 Vet. App. 54, 60-61 (2018) (holding that a medical opinion was inadequate as a matter of law because the rationale was based solely on general articles and did not discuss any facts pertaining to Veteran's condition or individual circumstances).  The Board rejects these inadequate opinions.   

B.	Secondary Service Connection

The April 2023 VA examiner was also asked to opine as to whether the Veteran's fatty liver condition and GB Condition were proximately due to his service-connected diabetes mellitus type II (DM II) or were aggravated beyond their natural progression by his DM II.  See April 2023 Medical Opinion DBQs.  In both instances, the examiner opined that risk factors for DM II and fatty liver disease/GB Condition "have overlapping underlying pathway of metabolic syndrome, which includes obesity and hyperlipidemia."  Id.  The examiner further opined that while DM II and fatty liver disease/GB Condition may co-exist, it is less likely than not that the DM II caused either the fatty liver disease or the GB Condition.  Id.  These opinions are conclusory and fail to discuss the particular facts of the Veteran's case.  See Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 124-25 (2007) (stating that a medical opinion must support its conclusion with an analysis that the Board can weigh, and a mere conclusion by a medical doctor is insufficient to allow the Board to make an informed decision); Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008) (stating that "The Board must be able to conclude that a medical expert has applied valid medical analysis to the significant facts of the particular case in order to reach the conclusion submitted in the medical opinion.").  Additionally, the opinions fail to address whether the Veteran's fatty liver disease and GB Condition were aggravated by the Veteran's service-connected DM II.  See El-Amin v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 136, 140-41 (2013) (stating that a secondary service connection medical opinion was inadequate because it did not discuss aggravation).  The Board also rejects these inadequate opinions.  

Failing to obtain an adequate examination or opinion and relying on an inadequate examination or opinion is a pre-decisional duty to assist error, which must be remedied on remand by obtaining additional medical opinions addressing direct and secondary service connection for the Veteran's fatty liver and GB Condition.? 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a); Barr, supra.  Additionally, the Board notes that the AOJ requested secondary service connection opinions to determine whether the Veteran's service-connected DM II caused his fatty liver and GB Condition or were aggravated beyond their natural progression by his DM II.  This directive also constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error, as Congress did not limit 38 U.S.C. § 1110 to aggravation beyond the natural progression of a disease.  See Spicer v. McDonough, 61 F.4th 1360 (Fed. Cir. 2023).  Thus, on remand, the examiner will be directed to determine if the Veteran's DMII aggravated his fatty liver disease or GB Condition.     

TERA Opinions 

In June 2023, the Veteran was afforded VA TERA examinations for his fatty liver condition and his GB Condition.  The examiner was asked to opine as to whether the Veteran's fatty liver condition and GB Condition were at least as likely as not caused by the Veteran's service in the Republic of Vietnam, to include herbicide exposure.  See June 2023 Medical Opinion DBQs.  In both instances, the examiner opined that "[a] review of literature supports no medical or scientific evidence available that provides any indication of a relationship between the development of" either the Veteran's fatty liver disease or his GB Condition and TERA exposure.  Like before, these opinions are wholly inadequate, as they are both solely based on a lack of medical or scientific literature linking fatty liver disease or gallbladder disease with TERA exposure and did not discuss any facts pertaining to the Veteran's condition or individual circumstances.  See Bailey, 30 Vet. App. at 60-61.  The Board rejects these opinions as well.       

Failing to obtain an adequate examination or opinion and relying on an inadequate examination or opinion is a pre-decisional duty to assist error, which must be remedied on remand by obtaining TERA medical opinions addressing direct service connection for the Veteran's fatty liver and GB Condition.? 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a); Barr, supra.?   

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. BACKGROUND FOR AOJ ADJUDICATORS: 

This matter is being remanded because the AOJ has not complied with the Board's previous directive to obtain adequate medical opinions addressing direct and secondary service connection for the Veteran's fatty liver disease and gallbladder disease with gallstones.  

The Board directed the AOJ to obtain secondary service opinions discussing whether the Veteran's service-connected diabetes mellitus type 2 aggravated his fatty liver disease and his gallbladder disease with gallstones, specifically addressing the studies of record submitted by the Veteran.  See February 2023 BVA Decision.  

The Board emphasizes that the medical opinions obtained in the development of the Veteran's claims have been rendered in adequate due, in part, to the AOJ's noncompliance with this development.  See Barr, 21?Vet. App.at 312 (holding that when VA undertakes to provide an examination or obtain an opinion, it must ensure that the examination or opinion is adequate).  The AOJ's noncompliance with the Board's request for this development is in contravention of the Board's remand directives and the Court's holding in Stegall v. West, 11?Vet. App.?268, 271 (1998) that a remand confers on the claimant, as a matter of law, the right to compliance with a remand order. 

2. Obtain an addendum VA medical opinion from an appropriately qualified VA clinician as to the nature and etiology of the Veteran's diagnosed fatty liver disease and diagnosed gallbladder disease with gallstones.  The claims file, including a copy of this Remand, must be made available to, and be reviewed by, the clinician.? 

After a complete review of the claims file, the clinician is asked to:?

(a.) Direct Service Connection

Provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's currently diagnosed fatty liver disease and gallbladder disease with gallstones had their onset during service or are otherwise etiologically related to service, including the Veteran's exposure to Agent Orange.  

(b.) Secondary Service Connection

i. Provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's currently diagnosed fatty liver disease and gallbladder disease with gallstones were caused by or the result of the Veteran's service-connected diabetes mellitus type II. 

ii. Provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's currently diagnosed fatty liver disease and gallbladder disease with gallstones were AGGRAVATED by the Veteran's service-connected diabetes mellitus type II. 

In forming the requested secondary service connection opinions, the clinician MUST specifically address the articles submitted by the Veteran in October 2022 entitled: 

"	Spectrum of Liver Disease in Type 2 Diabetes and Management of Patients with Diabetes and Liver Disease;

"	Diabetes Increases the Risk of Acute Hepatic Failure;

"	Obesity, Type 2 Diabetes, Lifestyle Factors, and Risk of Gallstone Disease: A Mendelian Randomization Investigation; and 

"	The gallbladder in diabetes.  

(c.) TERA consideration  

Provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not that the currently diagnosed fatty liver disease and gallbladder disease with gallstones are related to potential toxic exposures during the Veteran's service, including in the Republic of Vietnam.? In forming the opinion, consider the: 

"	Total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments; and,? 

"	Synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities.? 

A full and thorough rationale must be provided for all opinions, referencing relevant medical and lay evidence where appropriate.?  

 

 

S. B. MAYS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Pawlowski, E. Jennifer

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.