Citation Nr: A25032061
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240819-466430
DATE: April 8, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an earlier effective date of March 16, 2021, for the award of service connection for hypertension due to exposure to herbicide agents, is granted.

Entitlement to service connection for a heart disability (claimed as cardiovascular problems), to include as due to exposure to herbicide agents, is denied.

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 30 percent for service-connected posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) with depressive disorder, is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to an initial compensable rating for service-connected hypertension is remanded. 

Entitlement to a total disability rating based on individual unemployability due to service-connected disabilities (TDIU) is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran was exposed to herbicide agents in service.

2. The Veteran's hypertension was caused by his in-service exposure to herbicide agents on a facts-found basis. 

3. The Veteran filed an original disability claim for service connection for hypertension on March 16, 2021. 

4. The weight of the most persuasive evidence of record is against finding that the Veteran has had a heart disability at any time during or approximate to the pendency of the claim.

5. The severity, frequency, and duration of the Veteran's psychiatric symptoms do not more closely approximate occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for hypertension on a facts-found basis from March 16, 2021, are met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303. 3.400

2. The criteria for service connection for a heart disability have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

3. The criteria for a disability rating in excess of 30 percent for PTSD with depressive disorder have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.126, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from August 1967 to November 1971.  

In May 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR), and requested review of a June 2022 decision in which the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) denied entitlement to service connection for a heart condition and hypertension and entitlement to a rating in excess of 30 percent for PTSD with depressive disorder.  Attached to the May 2023 VA Form 20-0996 was a statement from the Veteran's attorney also claiming entitlement to earlier effective dates (no specific disabilities identified) and entitlement to TDIU. In August 2023, the AOJ issued an HLR decision, which considered the evidence of record at the time of the June 2022 decision and continued the denials of service connection for a heart disability and increased rating for PTSD.  The AOJ also granted service connection for hypertension as presumptively due to herbicide exposure pursuant to the Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxics Act of 2022 (PACT Act). An initial noncompensable rating effective August 10, 2022, the date the PACT Act was enacted.  

In the August 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Hearing docket. The Veteran's representative attached an almost identical statement to the May 2023 claims for entitlement to earlier effective dates and entitlement to a TDIU. Although the claims were not adjudicated by the AOJ in the first instance, the Board finds that it has jurisdiction over these issues and therefore they will be addressed in the instant appeal. 

A September 26, 2024, notification letter advised the Veteran that a hearing was scheduled for December 6, 2024. The Veteran did not appear for the scheduled Board hearing and did not provide good cause. In correspondence dated December 6, 2024, the Veteran's representative stated that he was unable to contact the Veteran and therefore the representative would not be attending the hearing scheduled for that day.  See December 2024 Hearing Related. 

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the June 2022 initial AOJ decision which was subject to higher-level review, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or his representative within 90 days following the date of the scheduled hearing. 38 C.F.R. § 20.302(c). If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the June 2022 decision and prior to the date of the scheduled Board hearing, or (2) more than 90 days following the date of the scheduled hearing, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.302(c), 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the issue of entitlement to an increased rating for hypertension and TDIU, any evidence the Board could not consider in this matter will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

The record indicates that a Privacy Act request was submitted in March 2025 by the Veteran for copies of his November 2008 VA examinations. In March 2025, VA acknowledged the Veteran's request.  To date, the record shows that the Veteran's Privacy Act request has not been fulfilled.  A review of the record shows that VA examinations were not conducted in November 2008. Rather, the Veteran underwent a VA PTSD examination in February 2009 and General Medical Examination in March 2009. Because the examinations the Veteran has specified in conjunction with the Privacy Act request are not relevant to the adjudication of the present appeal, the Board finds it may proceed to address the merits of the appeal. Consequently, any prejudice to the Veteran in not receiving the specific evidence underlying the outstanding Privacy Act request would be harmless.  Additionally, fulfillment of any outstanding Privacy Act request would only cause unnecessary delay in the resolution of the appeal which is contrary to the Veteran's request for an expedited decision as the present appeal has been advanced on the Board's docket.

Lastly, as above, the Board finds that TDIU has been expressly raised by the Veteran's representative in connection with the increased rating claim for PTSD and must be adjudicated by the AOJ in the first instance following completion of additional development as discussed in the remand section of this decision. A claim for TDIU due to a service-connected disability can be either expressly raised by a Veteran or reasonably raised by the record and such a claim can be part of a veteran's request for an increased rating.   Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447 (2009).  

Service Connection and Effective Dates

Service connection may be granted for disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303. The three elements required to establish service connection are: (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166-67 (Fed. Cir. 2004). Service connection may be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge, when the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disability was incurred in service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).

Additionally, where certain chronic diseases become manifest to a degree of 10 percent or more within one year after the date of separation from such service, such disease shall be presumed to have been incurred in service, even though there is no evidence of such disease during the period of service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 1110, 1112, 1113; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307, 3.309(a).

Veterans who served in the Republic of Vietnam during the period beginning on January 9, 1962, and ending on May 7, 1975, shall be presumed to have been exposed to an herbicide agent unless there is affirmative evidence to establish that the Veteran was not exposed to any such agent during that service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.307(a)(6)(iii). If a Veteran was exposed to an herbicide agent during active military, naval, or air service, certain enumerated diseases shall be service connected if the requirements of 38 U.S.C. § 1116, 38 C.F.R. § 3.307(a)(6) are met, even though there is no record of such disease during service, provided further that the rebuttable presumption provisions of 38 U.S.C. § 1113; 38 C.F.R. § 3.307(d) are also satisfied. 38 C.F.R. § 3.309(e). Here, the Veteran's personnel records confirm that he had service in the Republic of Vietnam during the applicable period, and he is presumed to have been exposed to herbicide agents during that service.

The list of diseases associated with exposure to herbicide agents includes ischemic heart disease, which includes, but is not limited to, acute, subacute, and old myocardial infarction; atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease including coronary artery disease (including coronary spasm) and coronary bypass surgery; and stable, unstable and Prinzmetal's angina. 38 C.F.R. § 3.309(e).

Except as otherwise provided, the effective date of an evaluation and award of compensation based on an initial claim or supplemental claim will be the date of receipt of the claim or the date entitlement arose, whichever is later. 38 U.S.C. § 5110(a); 38 C.F.R. § 3.400. An initial claim includes a new claim requesting service connection and a claim for increase in a disability evaluation rating. 38 C.F.R. § 3.1(p). 

In making all determinations, the Board must fully consider the lay assertions of record. A layperson is competent to report on the onset and recurrence of symptoms. See Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 470 (1994) (a Veteran is competent to report on that of which he or she has personal knowledge). When considering whether lay evidence is competent the Board must determine, on a case by case basis, whether the Veteran's particular disability is the type of disability for which lay evidence may be competent. Kahana v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 428 (2011); see also Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d at 1377 (Fed. Cir. 2007) (holding that "[w]hether lay evidence is competent and sufficient in a particular case is a factual issue to be addressed by the Board").

Once evidence is determined to be competent, the Board must determine whether such evidence is also credible. See Layno, supra (distinguishing between competency, "a legal concept determining whether testimony may be heard and considered;" and credibility, "a factual determination going to the probative value of the evidence to be made after the evidence has been admitted"). 

Entitlement to an effective date prior to August 10, 2022, for the award of service connection for hypertension due to in-service herbicide exposure is granted. 

As above, service connection for the Veteran's hypertension due to herbicide exposure in Vietnam was granted effective August 10, 2022, based on the passage of the PACT Act.  The Veteran contends that an effective date earlier than August 10, 2022, is warranted for the award of service connection for hypertension.

Upon careful consideration of the evidence, the Board concludes that an effective date of March 16, 2021, for the award of service connection for hypertension due to herbicide exposure is warranted on a facts-found basis.

The Veteran's personnel records document that he served in Vietnam from July 1970 to April 1971.  Moreover, the AOJ has made a favorable finding that the Veteran was exposed to herbicide agents and the Board is bound by this favorable finding. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).

As above, the evidence establishes the Veteran's actual exposure to herbicide agents. Additionally, VA treatment records show that the Veteran was diagnosed with hypertension in December 2009. See March 2021 CAPRI. Thus, if the evidence establishes that the Veteran's hypertension is directly attributable to this exposure, service connection for hypertension is warranted. Along these lines, the Board notes that the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering & Medicine's (NAS) report, Veterans and Agent Orange: Update 11 (2018) (NAS Update 2018) reflects that the NAS found sufficient evidence of an association between hypertension and exposure to Agent Orange, i.e., tactical herbicide agents. Saliently, previous NAS studies had found only limited or suggestive evidence of an association between hypertension and Agent Orange Exposure.

The Board finds that the Veteran's hypertension is due to his exposure to herbicide agents during his service in Vietnam. The NAS Update 2018 reflects a profound departure from the previous NAS studies by concluding that there is now sufficient evidence of an association between hypertension and herbicide exposure. As such, the Board concludes that the study sufficiently proves a direct nexus in this case. Consequently, the correct effective date for the award of service connection for hypertension is March 16, 2021, the date VA received the Veteran's original disability claim for hypertension. 

Because the evidence weighs in favor of the claim for an earlier effective date prior to August 10, 2022, for the award of service connection for hypertension as directly due to the Veteran's in-service exposure to herbicides, the claim is granted.

Entitlement to service connection for a heart disability, to include as due to herbicide exposure, is denied.

The Veteran contends that he has a cardiovascular disability, construed by the AOJ as a heart disability, due to herbicide exposure in Vietnam. See March 16, 2021, VA 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim.

The Board concludes that the Veteran does not have a heart disability and has not had such at any time during the pendency of the claim or recent to the filing of the claim. Romanowsky v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 289, 294 (2013); McClain v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 319, 321 (2007).

The Veteran's service treatment records (STRs) reflect no complaints or findings for cardiac pathology. An October 1974 Report of Medical Examination (ROME) conducted at separation shows no abnormal pathology of the heart, and clinical evaluation of the heart (thrust, size, rhythm sounds) was normal with no remarks pertaining to the heart. Moreover, a chest x-ray was within normal limits. 

The Veteran presented for a VA heart conditions examination in June 2021. However, while he was diagnosed with hypertension for which he has been awarded service connection, the examiner found no other heart conditions. The Veteran was found to found hypercholesterolemia which is a laboratory finding and not a disability for which VA disability benefits may be awarded.  Upon physical examination, the Veteran had a heart rate of 86, point of maximal impact was not palpable, heart sounds were normal, and there was no jugular-venous distension.  There was clear auscultation of the lungs, peripheral pulses were normal and there were no findings of peripheral edema. The Veteran underwent an EKG, chest x-ray, and echocardiogram in connection with the claim.  The examiner checked off that the June 2021 EKG and echocardiogram results were normal, and the examiner stated the chest x-ray showed no evidence of acute cardiopulmonary abnormality. The Veteran's left ventricular ejection fraction was 55 to 59 percent. An interview based METs test noted the Veteran had dyspnea, weakness and a METs level that was greater than 3-5 consistent with activities such as light yard work (weeding), mowing lawn, brisk walking. The VA examiner stated that this METs level was due solely to the Veteran's hypertension. Lastly, the examiner remarked that the Veteran denied chest pain, shortness of breath, dyspnea, dizziness, chest tightness/fullness or other symptoms during the examination. 

A review of the Veteran's VA treatment reports shows that he is diagnosed as having hypertension and high cholesterol.  In June 2022, the Veteran was seen for complaints of chest pain and pressure. An EKG showed normal sinus rhythm (NSR) with heart rate of 67. The Veteran's blood pressure was 211/97 and he agreed to go to ER for examination and workup. Upon examination, the heart exhibited regular rate, regular rhythm and no murmurs or extra sounds were noted.  Another June 2022 VA treatment note stated there was no evidence of chest pain, shortness of breath, palpitations, or dyspnea.  See June 2022 CAPRI. The Board acknowledges the Veteran's complaints of chest pain and tightness for which he was treated in June 2022. However, the totality of the evidence reflects no findings related to a cardiac condition indicative of a heart disability during the applicable appeal period on review.

The competent, credible evidence of record does not show that the Veteran has a current disability of his heart or that he had such at any time during or approximate to the filing of this claim. The Board accepts that the Veteran is competent to report he has a cardiovascular disability he believes is related to his service. See Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465 (1994). However, the record contains no lay or medical evidence demonstrating the presence of any heart disability. In the absence of proof of a present disability due to disease or injury, there can be no valid claim. Brammer v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 223, 225 (1992). See McClain v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 318, 321 (2007) (The current disability requirement for a service connection claim is satisfied if the claimant has a disability at the time the claim is filed or during the pendency of that claim).

The Veteran has not identified or presented competent evidence, within the applicable evidentiary window, demonstrating that he has any current disabilities of the heart aside from those already discussed. In this instance, the record contains only the Veteran's assertion that he has a heart/cardiovascular condition related to in-service herbicide exposure. A mere conclusory generalized lay statement that a service event or injury caused a current heart condition. The Board recognizes that VA has a duty to assist the Veteran in substantiating his claims. However, the duty to assist is not a one-way street and claimants are expected to cooperate in the development of their claims. See Woods v. Gober, 14 Vet. App. 214, 224 (2000); see also Hurd v. West, 13 Vet. App. 449, 452 (2000).

As the evidence of record shows that the Veteran has not had a heart disability at any time during the appeal period, the Board concludes that service connection is not warranted, and no further discussion of the remaining elements is necessary. See Watson v. Brown, 4 Vet. App. 309, 314 (1993) ("A determination of service connection requires a finding of the existence of a current disability and a determination of a relationship between that disability and an injury or a disease incurred in service."); see also Coburn v. Nicholson, 19 Vet. App. 427, 431 (2006) (finding that the absence of any one element will result in denial of service connection). 

Accordingly, the claim is denied. As the evidence of record persuasively weighs against the claim, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

Increased Ratings

Disability evaluations are determined by the application of VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities (Rating Schedule), 38 C.F.R. Part 4. The percentage ratings contained in the Rating Schedule represent, as far as can be practicably determined, the average impairment in earning capacity resulting from diseases and injuries incurred or aggravated during military service and the residual conditions in civil occupations. See 38 U.S.C. § 1115; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.321(a), 4.1, 4.21. Disability evaluations are based upon the ability of the body as a whole, or of the psyche, or of a system or organ of the body to function under the ordinary conditions of daily life, including employment. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.10.

Where there is a question as to which of two evaluations shall be applied, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating; otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned. See 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.21, 4.7. When, after careful consideration of all procurable and assembled data, a reasonable doubt arises regarding the degree of disability, such doubt will be resolved in favor of the claimant. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.3.

Where the question for consideration is the propriety of the initial rating assigned, as in this case for hypertension, evaluation of the medical evidence since the effective date of the grant of service connection and consideration of the appropriateness of the assignment of different ratings for distinct periods of time, based on the facts found, is required. Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119, 126 (1999); Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505, 509-10 (2007). Where entitlement to compensation has already been established, as in this case for PTSD, and an increase in the disability rating is at issue, the present level of disability is of primary importance. Francisco v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 55, 58 (1994).

In determining the severity of a disability, the Board is required to consider the potential application of various other provisions of the regulations governing VA benefits, regardless of whether they were raised by the Veteran, as well as the entire history of the Veteran's disability. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.1, 4.2; Schafrath, 1 Vet. App. at 595.

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 30 percent for service-connected PTSD is denied. 

The Veteran contends that a higher rating is warranted for his service-connected PTSD with depressive disorder which is currently evaluated as 30 percent disabling. 

An April 2009 rating decision granted service connection for PTSD and assigned an initial 30 percent evaluation effective January 31, 2008, the date VA received the Veteran's original claim for service connection for a psychiatric disorder.  On February 16, 2021, the Veteran submitted a claim requesting an increased disability rating for PTSD. See February 2021 VA Form 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim (Compensation). Accordingly, the relevant appeal period begins one year before that request for an increased evaluation. See 38 U.S.C. § 5110(b)(3). The Board will therefore consider the relevant evidence from February 16, 2020, until the June 2022 rating decision.

The Board concludes that the Veteran's psychiatric symptoms do not cause the level of impairment required for a disability rating of 50 percent or higher. The Veteran's symptoms more closely approximate the symptoms associated with a 30 percent rating resulting in a level of social and occupational impairment associated with a 30 percent rating.

As a preliminary matter regarding VA's duty to assist the Veteran in substantiating his claim for an increased rating, the Board is aware that there may be outstanding medical records stemming from the Veteran's incarceration at Diboll Correctional Center, Texas, from April 2016 to November 2020. See Bureau of Prisons Match.  As relevant to this appeal, the Veteran was incarcerated for several months during the one year look back period spanning from February 16, 2020, to February 16, 2021.  At the March 2021 VA examination, the Veteran reported that while in prison, he sought counseling for PTSD and was prescribed several psychotropic medications that did not help manage his symptoms, but the record contains contradictory evidence insofar as the Veteran told his VA mental health treatment provider in March 2021 that he did not receive any mental health treatment during the six years he was in prison. However, the Veteran stated that he participated in VA mental health counseling and was prescribed psychotropic medication until around 2013 when he stopped attending counseling and taking his medication, and instead self-medicated with crystal meth which led to his imprisonment in 2014. See March 2021and March 2022, CAPRI. Indeed, VA treatment records show that prior to his incarceration in 2014, the Veteran was followed at VA Mental Health Psychology Outpatient Services for diagnosed PTSD, depressive disorder, and bipolar II disorder and prescribed Zoloft and Abilify. Id.  

In this case, the Board finds that the Veteran's statements at the VA examination with respect to psychiatric treatment during his six-year incarceration are not consistent with other contemporaneous lay statements that indicate the Veteran was not treated for any psychiatric problems while in prison. In this instance, the Board affords greater probative weight to the Veteran's statements made to his VA treatment providers than his statement to the March 2021 VA examiner as to his history of psychiatric treatment. See Rucker v. Brown, 10 Vet. App. 67, 73 (1997) (lay statements found in medical records when medical treatment was being rendered may be afforded greater probative value; statements made to physicians for purposes of diagnosis and treatment are exceptionally trustworthy because the declarant has a strong motive to tell the truth in order to receive proper care). 

Therefore, given the Veteran's statements to his VA treatment providers that his mental health treatment preceded his incarceration and stopped around 2013 when he began to self-medicate with drugs, along with VA treatment records showing the Veteran resumed VA mental health treatment in 2021 shortly after his release from prison, the Board finds that remanding the claim to attempt to obtain any outstanding medical records from Diboll Correctional Center dated from February 16, 2020 onward would not impact the rating for PTSD.  Thus, the Board may proceed with adjudication of the claim based on the evidence already of record dated during the relevant review period. 

The Veteran's psychiatric disability is rated under 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, DC 9411 (General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders), which provides that:

A 30 percent disability rating is warranted when a psychiatric disorder causes occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks (although generally functioning satisfactorily, with routine behavior, self-care, and conversation normal), due to such symptoms as: depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks (weekly or less often), chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss (such as forgetting names, directions, recent events).

A 50 percent disability rating is warranted when a psychiatric disorder causes occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to such symptoms as: flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short- and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships.

A 70 percent disability rating is warranted when a psychiatric disorder causes occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a worklike setting); inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.

A 100 percent disability rating is warranted when a psychiatric disorder causes total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name.

When determining the appropriate disability evaluation to assign, the Board's primary consideration is the Veteran's symptoms, but it must also make findings as to how those symptoms impact the Veteran's social and occupational impairment. Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 118 (Fed. Cir. 2013); Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436, 442 (2002). The use of the term "such symptoms as" in the rating criteria demonstrates that the symptoms following that phrase are not intended to constitute an exhaustive list, and therefore the Board need not find the presence of all, most, or even some of the enumerated symptoms to award a specific rating. See Mauerhan, 16 Vet. App. at 442. Nevertheless, as all ratings in the general rating formula are also associated with objectively observable symptomatology, and the plain language of the regulation makes it clear that the Veteran's impairment must be "due to" those symptoms, a Veteran may only qualify for a given disability by demonstrating the symptoms expressly associated with that percentage or by demonstrating other symptoms with a similar severity, frequency, and duration. Vazquez-Claudio, 713 F.3d at 118.

Turning to the evidence, the Veteran presented for a VA PTSD examination in March 2021. The examiner diagnosed PTSD and no other psychiatric disorders. The Veteran was assessed with occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks, although generally functioning satisfactorily, with normal routine behavior, self-care and conversation.  This level of impairment is consistent with a 30 percent evaluation. 38 C.F.R. § 4.130. The examiner based this finding on the Veteran's depressed mood and anxiety. During the interview, the Veteran reported he was "ok" and felt mildly depressed and was also angry about politics. He experienced some social anxiety, loneliness, and guilt about his prior drug use and loss of a friend in Vietnam. 

The examination report reflects that, socially, the Veteran had been married and divorced twice, was currently living with his sister but planned to move to Arizona to live closer to his son. He had been imprisoned several times, most recently for illicit drug use and was currently on parole for the next eight years. The Veteran completed Kilgore Junior College and obtained a degree in HVAC.  He reported that he was not currently working because it was difficult to find a job with his prison record.  However, his prior jobs included working in construction and HVAC.  During the interview, the VA examiner observed the Veteran's affect was normal range and control. His appearance was good, and his level of engagement was good. 

VA treatment reports show that after his release from prison in November 2020, the Veteran underwent a Mental Health Assessment in March 2021 for the purposes of reestablishing psychiatric care through VA for medication management and individual psychotherapy. The VA clinician found the Veteran's reported symptoms may be consistent with moderate to severe anxiety. The Veteran reported symptoms of panic attacks, anxiety, exaggerated startled response, sleep impairment, being fidgety, and avoiding crowds. A functional assessment noted the Veteran was unemployed, lived with his younger sister and helped her with house tasks. At the time, the Veteran was working with his attorney in applying for Social Security Administration (SSA) disability benefits. With regards to hobbies, he reported that he watched TV, and either walked or drove around the community or a lake to calm himself down when feeling anxious and fidgety. A mental status examination was within normal limits, and the Veteran was verbal, made good eye contact and denied suicidal and homicidal ideation or thoughts. An April 2021 Mental Health telephone note stated the Veteran resumed PTSD treatment after his release from prison and reported symptoms of decreased sleep, increased anxiety and depression.  He denied suicidal and homicidal ideation and psychosis. A March 2022 VA Primary Care Mental Health Integration telephone call summary noted the Veteran conveyed that adjusting to life outside of prison had been particularly difficult because of the COVID-19 pandemic. He also found it increasingly difficult to remain clean from illegal substances, so he requested his parole be transferred from Texas to Arizona where he lived close to his son and daughter-in-law who he reported were very supportive. The Veteran reported struggling with increased stress that was triggered and exacerbated by current events and the pandemic. Also, he denied taking any illegal substances since his release from prison and wished to manage his stress to prevent relapse. The clinician observed that the Veteran did not report/endorse any acute mental health symptoms that warranted immediate or more aggressive mental health intervention. A mental status examination showed the Veteran's speech was within normal limits, he exhibited logical and goal-directed thinking, and his insight and judgment were grossly intact. There were no reports or evidence of homicidal ideation or self-directed violence. See June 2022 CAPRI. 

The Board finds the severity, frequency, and duration of the Veteran's psychiatric disability more closely approximate the symptoms contemplated by a 30 percent rating. VA treatment records and the March 2021 VA examination show that the Veteran's psychiatric disability is manifested by symptoms of depression and anxiety and VA treatment reports indicate the Veteran has difficulty sleeping which meet the 30 percent rating criteria. Notably, the March 2021 VA examiner determined that a review of the Veteran's claims file and in-person examination, shows the Veteran's psychiatric symptoms cause social and occupational impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks, although generally functioning satisfactorily, with normal routine behavior, self-care and conversation which approximates the criteria for a 30 percent rating. 

Occupationally, the Veteran had been incarcerated for six years prior to filing his claim for an increased rating for PTSD and has not been gainfully employed since his release from prison in November 2020.  However, the record shows that the Veteran has been awarded SSA disability benefits during the pending appeal period. The issue of entitlement to a TDIU is addressed in the remand section of this decision. Socially, the Veteran has not been shown to have social impairment that more nearly approximates the criteria for a higher rating. Although the Veteran reported that he avoids crowds, he reported good relationships with his sister with whom he lived after his release from prison and reported that he wanted to move closer to his son and daughter in law who have been supportive of the Veteran. 

The Veteran has not demonstrated a level of impairment consistent with the 50 percent rating criteria as he has not been shown to have flattened affect, circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech, panic attacks more than once a week, difficulty in understanding complex commands, impaired memory, judgment, or abstract thinking, disturbances of motivation and mood, or difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships. As above, mental status examinations performed during the appeal period show the Veteran's appearance was appropriate, he made good eye contact and exhibited normal speech and thought content. Further, there is no evidence of suicidal or homicidal ideation, delusions, hallucinations, or near-continuous panic or depression affecting his ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively. 

Accordingly, the Board finds that the competent and credible evidence of record does not show that the Veteran's psychiatric disability has met or more nearly approximated the criteria for a higher rating at any time during the relevant appeal period. As such, the claim for entitlement to an increased initial rating higher than 30 percent is denied.

As the evidence of record persuasively weighs against the claim, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

REASONS FOR REMAND

Entitlement to an initial compensable rating for hypertension is remanded. 

The Veteran contends that he is entitled to an initial compensable rating for his service-connected hypertension because of multiple changes in his medications and highly elevated blood pressure readings.

An August 2023 rating decision granted service connected for hypertension due to herbicide exposure and assigned an initial noncompensable rating under 38 C.F.R. § 4.104, Diagnostic Code 7101, effective August 10, 2022. However, by reason of the grant of an earlier effective date in the present decision, the Veteran's new effective date for hypertension is March 16, 2021.  Because the Board has granted an earlier effective date, a remand is necessary to allow the AOJ to assign, in the first instance, an initial rating for the period that was not previously considered, i.e., from March 16, 2021, to August 9, 2022.  See 38 U.S.C. § 7104.  As such, remand is required due to error by the AOJ in satisfying a statutory duty.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

Entitlement to a TDIU is remanded.

The Veteran's representative contends the Veteran is entitled to a TDIU because his service-connected disabilities preclude him from securing and maintaining gainful employment. 

The issue of TDIU was expressly raised during the appeal of the Veteran's disability ratings for service-connected PTSD and hypertension and is thus a component of those increased rating claims. See Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447, 454-455 (2009). Moreover, the Board notes that VA treatment records and VA PTSD examination reflect the Veteran has been unemployed during the period on appeal. 

In view of the foregoing, remand is necessary to provide adequate notice of the requirements to substantiate a claim for TDIU. 

As the Board has identified a pre-decisional duty to assist error that must be corrected, remand for entitlement to a TDIU is required. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

1. As the grant for service connection for hypertension is now effective March 16, 2021, the AOJ must accordingly assign an initial rating for the portion of the appellate period where hypertension is not yet rated.

2. Send the Veteran VA Form 21-8940, Application for Increased Compensation Based on Unemployability, and an appropriate notification letter.

 

 

Jenna Brant

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Krunic, Susan

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.