Citation Nr: A25032552
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240801-459486
DATE: April 8, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for a separate compensable disability manifested by anxiety, is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for a separate compensable disability manifested by insomnia, is denied.  

Entitlement to service connection for a lumbar spine disability, to include lumbosacral strain (claimed as back pain), is denied. 

Entitlement to service connection for a right knee disability, to include right knee strain (claimed as right knee pain), is denied. 

Entitlement to service connection for a left knee disability, to include left knee strain (claimed as left knee pain), is denied. 

FINDINGS OF FACT

1.  At no time during, or prior to, the pendency of the claim does the Veteran have a current diagnosis of a separate compensable disability manifested by anxiety.

2.  At no time during, or prior to, the pendency of the claim does the Veteran have a current diagnosis of a separate compensable disability manifested by insomnia.

3. A lumbar spine disability, to include lumbosacral strain, is not shown to be causally or etiologically related to any disease, injury, or incident during service, and arthritis did not manifest within one year of the Veteran's discharge from active service.

4.  A right knee disability, to include right knee strain, is not shown to be causally or etiologically related to any disease, injury, or incident during service, and arthritis did not manifest within one year of the Veteran's discharge from active service.

5.  A left knee disability, to include left knee strain, is not shown to be causally or etiologically related to any disease, injury, or incident during service, and arthritis did not manifest within one year of the Veteran's discharge from active service.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1.  The criteria for service connection for a separate compensable disability manifested by anxiety have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1116, 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.307, 3.309.

2. The criteria for service connection for a separate compensable disability manifested by insomnia have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1116, 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.307, 3.309.

3. The criteria for service connection for a lumbar spine disability, to include lumbosacral strain, have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 101 (24), 1101, 1110, 1112, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.1 (d), 3.6(a), 3.102, 3.303, 3.307, 3.309.

4.  The criteria for service connection for a right knee disability, to include right knee strain, have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 101 (24), 1101, 1110, 1112, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.1 (d), 3.6(a), 3.102, 3.303, 3.307, 3.309.

5.  The criteria for service connection for a left knee disability, to include left knee strain, have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 101 (24), 1101, 1110, 1112, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.1 (d), 3.6(a), 3.102, 3.303, 3.307, 3.309.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from December 2004 to May 2006, and from March 2009 to June 2010.  The rating decision on appeal was issued in August 2023 following an April 2023 Higher-Level Review request of an April 2022 rating decision.  In August 2024, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) and elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the April 2022 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision, which was subsequently subject to Higher-Level Review.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

The Board must discuss all theories of entitlement raised by the Veteran or by the evidence of record.  Robinson v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 545 (2008).

Accordingly, the Board has recharacterized the claims on appeal, as indicated above to afford the Veteran the broadest possible scope of review.  See Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1, 5-6 (2009).

Service Connection Claims 

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (a).  Service connection may also be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge, when all of the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (d).

Direct service connection may not be granted without evidence of a current disability; in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and a nexus between the claimed in-service disease or injury and the present disease or injury.  Id.; also Caluza v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 498, 506 (1995) aff'd, 78 F.3d 604 (Fed. Cir. 1996) [(table)].

Where a Veteran served for at least 90 days during a period of war or after December 31, 1946, and manifests certain chronic diseases to a degree of 10 percent within one year, from the date of termination of such service, such disease shall be presumed to have been incurred or aggravated in service, even though there is no evidence of such disease during the period of service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 1112, 1137; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307, 3.309.

Alternatively, when a disease at 38 C.F.R. § 3.309 (a) is not shown to be chronic during service or the one-year presumptive period, service connection may also be established by showing continuity of symptomatology after service. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (b).  However, the use of continuity of symptoms to establish service connection is limited only to those diseases listed at 38 C.F.R. § 3.309 (a) and does not apply to other disabilities which might be considered chronic from a medical standpoint.  See Walker v. Shinseki, 708 F.3d 1331 (Fed. Cir. 2013).

Pertinent to a claim for service connection, such a determination requires a finding of current disability that is related to an injury or disease in service.  See Brammer v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 223, 225 (1992).  The requirement of a current disability is satisfied when the Veteran has a disability at the time, he files his service connection claim or during the pendency of that claim, even if the disability resolves prior to adjudication of the claim.  McClain v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 319, 321 (2007).  However, when the record contains a recent diagnosis of disability prior to the Veteran's filing of a claim for benefits based on that disability, the report of the diagnosis is relevant evidence that the Board must address in determining whether a current disability existed at the time the claim was filed or during its pendency.  Romanowsky v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 289 (2013). Under applicable regulation, the term "disability" means impairment in earning capacity resulting from diseases and injuries and their residual conditions.  38 C.F.R. § 4.1; see also Hunt v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 292 (1991).

When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding the merits of an issue material to the determination of the matter, the benefit of the doubt in resolving each such issue shall be given to the claimant.  38 U.S.C. § § 5107 (b); 38 C.F.R. § § 3.102.  When all of the evidence is assembled, VA is responsible for determining whether the evidence supports the claim or is in relative equipoise, with the Veteran prevailing in either event, or whether a fair preponderance of the evidence is against the claim, in which case the claim is denied.  Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49, 55 (1990).

Entitlement to service connection for separate compensable disabilities manifested by anxiety and insomnia, are denied.  

The Veteran generally contends that he suffers from multiple acquired psychiatric disabilities, to include his service-connected posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), as well as separate disabilities manifested as anxiety and insomnia as a result of his service.  

The Veteran's service treatment records are silent for any complaints, treatment or diagnoses of anxiety and/or insomnia.  While the Veteran was diagnosed with PTSD and his post-service treatment records reflect his reports of anxiety and sleep disturbance, they are silent for diagnoses of separate compensable disabilities of anxiety and insomnia. 

The Board notes that in regard to the Veteran's claimed separate compensable disabilities manifested as anxiety and insomnia, the Veteran has claimed that such began during or were caused by his active service.  However, the evidence of record while confirming that the Veteran suffers from and is service connected for an acquired psychiatric disability, namely PTSD, it does not support diagnoses for the Veteran's other claimed conditions.  The Board notes that after an exhaustive review of the record, there is simply no indication of separate diagnoses of anxiety and/or insomnia.  Consequently, the Board finds that VA is under no obligation to provide the Veteran with examinations in connection with his claims for such.  See McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006) (recognizing that 38 C.F.R. § 3.159 (c) (4) presents a low threshold for the requirement of a VA examination). Regardless of the lack of obligation, the Veteran was provided with a VA Mental Health examination in January 2022. 

In January 2022 the Veteran underwent a VA Initial PTSD examination with an accompanying disability benefits questionnaire (DBQ).  The examiner found that the Veteran met the DSM-V diagnostic criteria for PTSD. In addition, he noted that the Veteran did not have any other mental health diagnoses. The examiner reported that the Veteran's PTSD caused symptoms of suspiciousness, mild memory loss, disturbances of mood and motivation, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, as well as anxiety and chronic sleep impairment.  In conclusion, the examiner stated that the Veteran's PTSD caused a variety of symptoms, to include sleep disturbance and anxiety, and that those symptoms were subsumed under the Veteran's PTSD diagnosis. The examiner provided an etiological opinion finding that the Veteran's symptoms of insomnia and anxiety were at least as likely as not incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness.  However, he noted in his rationale that the Veteran's anxiety and insomnia were not separate diagnoses, but rather symptoms of the Veteran's PTSD and subsumed under the PTSD diagnosis. 

Throughout the appeal, the Veteran has submitted statements indicating his belief that his anxiety and insomnia are separate diagnoses which were caused by or began during his active service. 

The Board finds that service connection is not warranted for the Veteran's claimed separate compensable disabilities manifested by anxiety and insomnia, as the probative evidence of record fails to demonstrate current disabilities related to the Veteran's military service.

In the instant case, the probative evidence of record fails to demonstrate current diagnoses of separate compensable disabilities manifested by anxiety and insomnia.  While the Board has also considered the Court's holding in Romanowsky, supra, there is also no probative evidence of recent diagnoses of these disabilities prior to the Veteran's claims.  And while the record reflects that the Veteran suffers from anxiety and sleep disturbances, and the January 2022 VA examiner found that such were incurred during or caused by the Veteran's active service, he also found that such were not separate diagnoses, but symptoms of and subsumed by the Veteran's service-connected PTSD.  Ultimately, the Board notes the Veteran's service treatment records and post-service treatment records are entirely silent for any complaints, treatment or diagnoses of separate compensable disabilities manifested by anxiety and insomnia. 

In this regard, the Board notes that the Veteran is competent to report his own symptoms or matters within his personal knowledge.  See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372 (Fed. Cir. 2007); Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331 (Fed. Cir. 2006).  In addition, laypersons may, in some circumstances, opine on questions of diagnosis and etiology.  See Davidson v. Shinseki, 581 F.3d 1313, 1316 (Fed. Cir. 2009) (the Board's categorical statement that 'a valid medical opinion' was required to establish nexus, and that a layperson was 'not competent' to provide testimony as to nexus because she was a layperson, conflicts with Jandreau).

However, the matter of medical diagnoses for disabilities not capable of lay observation, such as those at issue here, are matters within the province of trained medical professionals.  See Jones v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 134, 137-38 (1994). Specifically, the diagnosis of separate compensable disabilities manifested by anxiety and insomnia involves medical subjects concerning internal physical processes extending beyond an immediately observable cause-and-effect relationship and requires the administration and interpretation of specialized testing.  In the instant case, there is no suggestion that the Veteran has had any medical training.  Therefore, as the Veteran does not have the appropriate medical training and expertise to competently self-diagnose separate compensable disabilities manifested by anxiety and insomnia, the lay assertions in this regard have no probative value.  Jandreau, supra at 1377 n.4 ("[s]ometimes the layperson will be competent to identify the condition where the condition is simple, for example a broken leg, and sometimes not, for example, a form of cancer"); see also Woehlaert v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 456 (2007) (although the claimant is competent in certain situations to provide a diagnosis of a simple condition such as a broken leg or varicose veins, the claimant is not competent to provide evidence as to more complex medical questions).

The Board emphasizes that Congress has specifically limited entitlement to service connection for disease or injury to cases where such incidents have resulted in disability.  See 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.30, 3.310.  Thus, where, as here, the probative evidence indicates that the Veteran does not have current diagnoses of separate compensable disabilities manifested by anxiety and insomnia for the entire appeal period, there can be no valid claims for service connection.  See Gilpin v. West, 155 F.3d 1353 (Fed. Cir. 1998); Brammer, supra.

In reaching this decision, the Board has considered the applicability of the benefit of the doubt doctrine.  However, the evidence of record is against the Veteran's claims of entitlement to service connection for separate compensable disabilities manifested by anxiety and insomnia.  As such, that doctrine is not applicable in the instant appeal, and his claims must be denied.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Gilbert, supra.

Entitlement to service connection for a lumbar spine disability, to include lumbosacral strain, and bilateral knee disabilities, to include bilateral knee strain, are denied. 

The Veteran contends that he suffers from lumbar spine and bilateral knee disabilities as a result of his active-duty service.  Specifically, the Veteran alleges that during his service he engaged in combat and had to carry heavy ruck sacks and that such strain caused his current disabilities. 

The Veteran's service treatment records are silent for any complaints, treatment, or diagnoses for back and/or knee disabilities.  In addition, there are no records of any injuries or incidents related to the Veteran's back or knees.  Furthermore, the Veteran's discharge examination in March 2010 was silent for any reports of back and/or knee problems.  Post-service treatment records reflect the Veteran's reports of back and bilateral knee pain.  Furthermore, while the Veteran was diagnosed with lumbosacral and bilateral knee strain, the post-service treatment records are silent as to the etiology of the Veteran's disabilities.

In April 2024 the Veteran underwent VA Knee and Lower Leg and Back Conditions examinations with accompanying DBQs.  During the examinations, the examiner confirmed the Veteran's diagnoses of bilateral knee and lumbosacral strain.  The Veteran stated that his knee and back pain began during his service after "carrying heavy rucksacks and during combat."  The Veteran further stated that his pain worsened after his discharge.  In addition to the examinations, the examiner provided a medical opinion finding that the Veteran's lumbosacral and bilateral knee strain were less likely than not incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness.  The examiner provided the rationale that although back and knee pain would be expected after carrying heavy ruck sacks and combat, there was no evidence of complaints of back or knee pain in the Veteran's service records or during his separation examination.  The examiner further stated that there were no records of any treatment following the Veteran's discharge from service.  Therefore, the examiner found that the evidence of record did not support a causal connection to any in-service injury or event.  

Throughout the appeal, the Veteran has submitted statements indicating his belief that his lumbar spine and bilateral knee disabilities either were caused by or began during his active-duty service. 

The Board notes that the Veteran has diagnoses of a lumbar spine disability and bilateral knee disabilities, to include lumbosacral and bilateral knee strain.  Therefore, the first element of service connection, either presumptive or direct, has been met.

As for presumptive service connection and service connection based on continuity of symptomatology, while arthritis is a chronic disease subject to such forms of service connection under 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.307, 3.309, there is no indication that the Veteran suffers from such nor that such manifested to a compensable degree within one year of the Veteran's discharge from service.  Furthermore, lumbosacral and bilateral knee strain are not chronic diseases subject to such forms of service connection.  38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.307, 3.309.  Therefore, presumptive service connection or service connection based on continuity of symptomatology is not warranted.

As far as direct service connection, the Board notes that the Veteran's service treatment records are silent for any complaints, treatment or diagnoses of lumbar spine and/or bilateral knee disabilities.  However, the Veteran has alleged strain which is in keeping with the duties of his service.  Therefore, even though the Veteran did not exhibit symptoms of or was diagnosed with chronic lumbar spine and/or bilateral knee disabilities within one year of service discharge, in the light most favorable to the Veteran, he has met the in-service requirement of direct service connection.

As for the nexus requirement for direct service connection, the April 2022 VA examiner found that the Veteran's lumbar spine and bilateral knee disabilities were not incurred in or caused by any in-service injury, event, or illness.  As the examiner provided sound medical explanations and rationales for his opinions, the Board finds them very probative.  See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295 (2008); Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 124 (2007) ("[A]medical opinion... must support its conclusion with an analysis that the Board can consider and weigh against contrary opinions").  The Board notes there are no contrary medical opinions of record.  As such, direct service connection is not warranted.

The Board has also considered the Veteran's statements that his lumbar spine and bilateral knee disabilities are related to his active service.  In this regard, a layperson is competent to report on that of which he or she has personal knowledge.  See Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 469 (1994).  A lay person may speak to etiology in some limited circumstances in which nexus is obvious merely through observation, such as a fall leading to a broken leg.  Jandreau, 492 F.3d at 1376-77.

However, the question of causation of a lumbar spine and/or bilateral knee disabilities, to include lumbosacral and bilateral knee strain, involves medical subjects concerning internal physical processes extending beyond an immediately observable cause-and-effect relationship.  In this regard, such opinions require specialized knowledge of the musculoskeletal system.  There is no indication that the Veteran possesses such specialized knowledge.  As such, the question of etiology in this case may not be competently addressed by lay evidence, and the Veteran's opinion regarding the etiology of his lumbar spine and bilateral knee disabilities is non-probative evidence.  See Jandreau, supra; Woehlaert, 21 Vet. App. at 456.

Moreover, the Veteran and his representative have offered only conclusory statements regarding the relationship between his lumbar spine and bilateral knee disabilities and his service.  In contrast, the VA examiner took into consideration all the relevant facts in providing his opinions.  Therefore, the Board accords great probative weight to the VA examiner's opinions.

Consequently, the Board finds that the Veteran's lumbar spine and bilateral knee disabilities, to include lumbosacral and bilateral knee strain, are not shown to be causally or etiologically related to a disease or injury incurred in or aggravated during active service.  Therefore, service connection for such claimed disabilities is not warranted.

In reaching this decision, the Board has considered the applicability of the benefit of the doubt doctrine.  However, the evidence of record is against the Veteran's claims of entitlement to service connection for a lumbar spine disability, to include lumbosacral strain, and bilateral knee disabilities, to include bilateral knee strain.  As such, that doctrine is not applicable in the instant appeal, and his claims must be denied.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Gilbert, supra.

 

 

L. M. BARNARD

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	J. Unger, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.