Citation Nr: A25032871
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240416-524710
DATE: April 9, 2025

ORDER

Readjudication of a previously denied claim for service connection for sleep apnea is warranted.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a disability of the left hip is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a claimed disability manifested by headaches is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a bilateral hearing loss disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for tinnitus is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

New evidence, received after the December 2021 denial of the claim, is relevant to the claim for service connection for sleep apnea.  

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for readjudicating the previously denied claim for service connection for sleep apnea have been met.  38 C.F.R. § 3.156(d).  

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the Marines from September 1976 to September 1979.  He served in the Army National Guard with many periods of active duty for training (ADT) and inactive duty for training (IDT) between January 1989 and October 2005.  This case comes to the Board from a January 2023 decision of the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).  Because the AOJ issued its decision after February 19, 2019, the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA) applies to this case.  See 38 C.F.R. §§ 19.2, 20.4.

Before proceeding further, the Board will consider two threshold questions concerning the timeliness of this appeal and the potential need for new and relevant evidence before the issues listed above may be considered on their merits.  As noted, the AOJ issued its decision in January 2023.  The Veteran did not file his VA Form 10182 ("Notice of Disagreement" or "NOD") until April 2024, more than one year later.  But according to a letter prepared by the AOJ in February 2024, there was a long and unexplained delay in the preparation of an explanatory letter notifying the Veteran of the January 2023 decision.  The AOJ finally mailed the necessary letter to the Veteran in March 2024.  Because the Veteran filed his NOD in April 2024, this appeal is timely.  

The AOJ denied the Veteran's initial claim for service connection for sleep apnea in August 2006 and denied his initial claims for service connection for tinnitus, hearing loss, and for a left hip disability in March 2019.  In July 2021, the Veteran filed a supplemental claim pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501 seeking readjudication of the hearing loss, tinnitus, left hip, and sleep apnea issues.  At the same time, he filed his initial claim for service connection for headaches.  In December 2021, the AOJ issued a decision continuing to deny the sleep apnea, left hip, hearing loss, and tinnitus claims.  For all four issues, the December 2021 decision included this finding: "In support of your claim, new and relevant evidence has been received and your claim is now reconsidered."  According to 38 C.F.R. § 20.801(a), favorable findings by the AOJ are binding on the Board unless they are clearly and unmistakably erroneous.     

In January 2022, the AOJ denied service connection for headaches.  In March 2022, the Veteran filed a supplemental claim application in which he continued to seek service connection for hearing loss, tinnitus, headaches, sleep apnea, and a left hip disability.  While the headaches issue was initially addressed separately, since March 2022 all the decision documents have addressed the five issues on the title page together.  In its subsequent August 2022 decision, the AOJ concluded that, with respect to all five claims, new and relevant evidence had not been received to support readjudication.  The Veteran responded to the August 2022 decision in October 2022 by filing a request for a higher-level review (HLR) pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 3.2601.  The January 2023 decision - the decision the Veteran appealed to the Board - was the result of the Veteran's HLR request.

One potential interpretation of 38 C.F.R. § 2501, as applied to this case, would be that, since the August 2022 decision found that the Veteran did not submit new and relevant evidence sufficient to reopen his claims, the Board cannot now consider the issues in this appeal on their merits unless, with respect to the sleep apnea, hearing loss, tinnitus, and left hip claims, new and relevant evidence was received between the dates of the  December 2021 decision the August 2022 decision and, with respect to the headaches claim, unless new and relevant evidence was received between January 2022 and August 2022.  

It is significant, however, that the AOJ received the Veteran's HLR request in October 2022 - before either the December 2021 decision (with its favorable findings on the new and relevant evidence question) or the January 2022 initial decision on the headaches claim had become final.  See 38 C.F.R. § 20.1103.  An HLR request requires de novo review of a decision if it is received within one year of the date of VA's issuance of the notice of decision, see 38 U.S.C. § 5104B, 38 C.F.R. § 3.2601.  The duty of the higher-level adjudicator to undertake this review does not depend on the receipt of new and relevant evidence.  Because it avoids potential prejudice to the Veteran by preserving the binding character of the December 2021 favorable findings and by permitting de novo review of the initial headaches claim, the Board will treat the October 2022 HLR request as seeking review of the December 2021 denial of the left hip, hearing loss, and tinnitus claims and the January 2022 denial of the Veteran's initial headaches claim.  

Treating the October 2022 HLR request as seeking review of the December 2021 decision would potentially prejudice the Veteran only with respect to his sleep apnea claim.  The evidentiary record in an HLR is limited to "the evidence of record in the agency of original jurisdiction decision being reviewed."  38 U.S.C. § 5104B(d).  If the evidentiary record excludes evidence received after December 2021, then the Board could not consider the written statement the Veteran submitted in support of his sleep apnea claim in March 2022.  To avoid prejudice to the Veteran, the Board will treat the October 2022 HLR as seeking review of the August 2022 denial of his sleep apnea claim.

In his NOD, the Veteran selected the option of direct review without the submission of additional evidence and without a hearing.  Following an HLR a subsequent appeal to the Board is generally limited to evidence in the claims file at the time of the decision which was the subject of the HLR.  See 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.2601(f); 20.301.  For the reasons explained above, the Board's review of the hearing loss, tinnitus, and left hip claims is limited to the evidence available at the time of the December 2021 decision; review of the headaches claim is limited to the evidence available at the time of the January 2022 decision; and review of the sleep apnea claim is limited to the evidence available at the time of the August 2022 decision.  

Readjudication of Previously Denied Sleep Apnea Claim

VA will readjudicate a previously denied claim if it receives new and relevant evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.156(d).  Relevant evidence is evidence that tends to prove or disprove a matter in issue.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  Because this definition of relevant does not require the evidence to relate to an unestablished fact necessary to substantiate the claim or to raise a reasonable possibility of substantiating the claim, the requirement of receipt of new and relevant evidence is a lower standard than the "new and material" evidence standard applied in legacy claims.

In its December 2021 decision, the AOJ acknowledged that the Veteran had been diagnosed with sleep apnea, satisfying the current disability requirement of his claim.  The claim was denied because, according to the AOJ, "the evidence of record still does not show that your [sleep apnea] was incurred or caused by service..."  At the time of the December 2021 decision, the claims file did not include any information suggesting that the Veteran's sleep apnea was caused or aggravated by a separate service-connected disability.

In his March 2022 statement, the Veteran wrote that, because of his service-connected back disability with radiculopathy, "I am unable to exercise, walk or practice any sport."  For this reason, he wrote, "my sleep apnea is related to my back condition and radiculopathy with obesity as an intermediate step."  This statement is new because it was not available to the AOJ in December 2021.  It is relevant because it tends to favor a theory of secondary service connection with obesity as an intermediate step between a service-connected disability and the claimed disability.  See VAOPGCPREC 1-2017.  For these reasons, new and relevant evidence was received to reopen the previously denied sleep apnea claim.  

REASONS FOR REMAND

Although the Board regrets the need for further delay, it must remand all five claims for further development.  Under AMA procedures, the Board must remand claims when further development is necessary to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  See C.F.R. § 20.802(a).  

In a written brief, submitted with the HLR request in October 2022, the Veteran's attorney argues that the AOJ erred by failing to seek a medical opinion addressing whether the Veteran's sleep apnea is the secondary result of a service-connected disability with obesity as an intermediate step.  

Although obesity is not considered a disability for which compensation may be granted, VA's General Counsel has concluded that, under certain circumstances, obesity may be an intermediate step between a service-connected disability and a current disability that may be service-connected on a secondary basis under 38 C.F.R. § 3.310.  For example, according to the General Counsel, some veterans could potentially be eligible for service connection for hypertension on a secondary basis if a service-connected back disability causes obesity due to lack of exercise, which then leads to hypertension.  VAOPGCPREC 1-2017, at 9.

The opinion suggests that a successful claim for service connection with obesity as an intermediate step requires affirmative answers to the following questions: (1) Is it at least as likely as not that a service-connected disability caused the Veteran to become obese? (2) Is it at least as likely as not that obesity was a substantial factor causing the claimed disability? (3) Is it at least as likely as not that the claimed disability would not have occurred or would not have been aggravated beyond its natural progression without obesity?  See Id.

As noted, the Veteran suggested that his service-connected back disability caused obesity, leading to sleep apnea.  In August 2006, the AOJ granted service connection for the Veteran's back disability based on the documented injury he sustained on June 12, 2005, during a period of inactive duty for training (IDT).  It is implausible that this back injury was a "but for" cause of the Veteran's sleep apnea because, according to his medical records, his sleep apnea was diagnosed on November 26, 2004, before his back injury.

In Walsh v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 300 (2020), the Court explained, "there is no permissible basis in the relevant regulation for concluding that obesity may be an 'intermediate step' in a secondary-service-connection analysis when service-connected disability causes it, but not when service-connected disability aggravates it."  Id. at 306.  The General Counsel's opinion, the Court explained, "properly construed... does not purport to prohibit inquiry into whether a service-connected disability aggravates a veteran's obesity.  And for good reason, as this would contradict VA's aggravation regulation.  So, to be clear: Despite the. . . opinion's silence regarding aggravation, the Board, in accordance with [38 C.F.R.] § 3.310, must consider aggravation in this context when the theory is explicitly raised by the veteran or reasonably raised by the record."  Id. at 307.

In this case, the Veteran has explicitly raised the theory of secondary service connection for sleep apnea with obesity as an intermediate step.  His medical records indicate that he weighed 216 pounds in November 2004, at the time of his initial sleep apnea diagnosis.  In March 2006, approximately nine months after his in-service back injury, he weighed 242 pounds.  Under these circumstances, the AOJ should have obtained an opinion addressing whether a service-connected disability aggravated the Veteran's obesity and whether the resulting increase in obesity aggravated his sleep apnea.  The evidence of a post-injury weight increase and the Veteran's March 2022 statement were both part of the record when the AOJ issued its August 2022 decision, which means the failure to seek such an opinion requires a remand.  See C.F.R. § 20.802(a).  

Before issuing its January 2022 denial of the Veteran's headaches claim, the AOJ obtained an opinion rejecting the Veteran's suggestion that his headaches are the secondary result of his service-connected back disability.  In his October 2022 brief, the Veteran's attorney argues that the AOJ erred by failing to address a theory of direct service connection - specifically, "whether his headaches ... [were] caused by the in-service personal assault. . ."  The "in-service personal assault" likely refers to an incident the Veteran described in March 2020 during a mental health appointment at his local VA Medical Center (VAMC).  According to his VAMC records, which were associated with the claims file in June 2020, the Veteran described being attacked "by a group of men" when stationed in Okinawa during his 1976-1979 service in the Marines.   The VAMC records did not specifically attribute the Veteran's headaches to this incident.  But on a report of medical history form, dated January 1989 and prepared at the time of his enlistment in the Army National Guard, the Veteran marked "yes" to indicate that he previously experienced a head injury.  Because this form and the March 2020 mental health record were part of the claims file before January 2022, the Board agrees that an opinion addressing direct service connection for headaches was necessary.  

For reasons that are unclear, in October 2021, the AOJ obtained an apparently favorable headaches opinion based on an unspecified "exposure event experienced by [the Veteran] in Southwest Asia as evidenced by [service treatment records]..."  The Board has considered granting the headaches claim based on this opinion.  But it seems clear that the AOJ requested this opinion in error.  None of the records concerning the Veteran's Marine Corps or Army National Guard service indicate that he ever went to Southwest Asia.  And none of the written statements and claim applications prepared by the Veteran or by his representatives claim that he performed such service.  If he had served in the Southwest Asia theater of operations at the relevant time, it would be necessary to consider whether this is an appropriate case for service connection on a presumptive basis pursuant to 38 U.S.C. § 1120 and 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.317, 3.320.  But these presumptions do not apply to the facts of this case.

In January 2019, the AOJ arranged an examination of the Veteran's hips and obtained an opinion from the examiner.  The diagnosis was osteoarthritis of the left hip.  The examiner rejected the Veteran's theory that his left hip disability was the secondary result of his service-connected lumbar spine disability.  To explain this opinion, the examiner wrote that the left hip disability was "[m]ost likely due to aging and normal wear and tear on the body."  

The Veteran's attorney argues that the quoted opinion is inadequate because the examiner did not address medical evidence suggesting that the Veteran's back disability resulted in an abnormal gait.  The evidence cited by the Veteran's attorney was not part of the record in December 2021.  There are, however, other sources of medical evidence which were associated with the claims file before December 2021, and which potentially undermine the rationale for the January 2019 opinion.  Most significantly, in February 2021, the AOJ obtained private medical records which expressly suggest the theory that the Veteran's left hip pain may be related to his back disability.  According to a September 2011 internal medicine note, discussing the Veteran's "continued left hip discomfort", the assessment was "Left hip pain with pinpoint tenderness lateral aspect of trochanter... Question whether this is referred pain from his [lumbosacral] spine or whether it is gait related.  Will order MRI of [lumbosacral] spine/left hip and refer to ortho.  Suspect it may be trochanteric bursitis."  

The private medical records also identify diagnoses associated with left hip pain in addition to the osteoarthritis identified by the January 2019 examiner.  According to a January 2014 note, there was a "torn labrum of [left] hip about 2010..."  In September 2011, an MRI of the left hip identified: "marrow edema along the lateral margin of the femoral head, neck and intratrochanteric region, likely related to trabecular stress injury..."  In January 2012, an orthopedic specialist examined the Veteran's left hip and reported both hip arthritis and trochanteric tendinitis.  

The Veteran's claim is not necessarily limited to the osteoarthritis identified by the January 2019 VA examiner but includes a claim for compensation for any current disability of the left hip which may be related to service.  See Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1, 5 (2009).  If osteoarthritis were the only left hip diagnosis, it is possible that the January 2019 examiner's opinion, attributing this condition to the natural aging process, might be sufficient to support an unfavorable decision.  But under these circumstances an adequate opinion would consider whether the previously identified trabecular stress injury, torn labrum, trochanteric bursitis, and/or trochanteric tendinitis are related to the service-connected lumbar spine disability, including gait changes associated with that disability.  Because the evidence described above was available to the AOJ in December 2021, the AOJ committed a pre-decisional duty to assist error by denying the left hip claim without seeking a new medical opinion.  

When denying the claim for bilateral hearing loss and tinnitus, the AOJ relied on a January 2019 audiologist's report.  This report identified disabling hearing loss in both ears.  For each ear, the examiner considered and rejected the theory that the current hearing loss was related to in-service noise exposure.  To explain this conclusion, the examiner emphasized, "Normal audiograms in [service treatment records] 1976, 1978 and 1989. No significant thresholds noted."  From the quoted note it appears that the examiner neglected to consider the Veteran's post-1989 National Guard service, which did not end until 2005.  The treatment records associated with National Guard service include auditory threshold tests results dated February 1994 and August 2000.  The last set of results reflect thresholds of 30 decibels at 500 Hertz in the right ear and 25 decibels at 4000 Hertz also in the right ear.  Although these measurements do not satisfy the criteria for disabling hearing loss in 38 C.F.R. § 3.385, they seem significantly higher than the February 1994 and January 1989 figures in the same ear at the same frequencies, potentially undermining the suggestion that there were no "significant' threshold shifts.  For these reasons, the rationale for the January 2019 examiner's opinion is inadequate.  Because that opinion was associated with the claims file before December 2021, the AOJ committed a pre-decisional duty to assist error by denying the hearing loss claim without seeking an addendum opinion.  

The January 2019 examiner's tinnitus opinion seems significantly stronger than the hearing loss opinion, relying on statements from the Veteran indicating that his tinnitus only began recently.  If this appeal did not include a potentially related hearing loss claim, the opinion might be sufficient to support a decision denying connection for tinnitus.  However, the tinnitus opinion also purports to rely on the auditory threshold test results from the 1970s and from 1989, without reference to the subsequent tests, suggesting that the Veteran's tinnitus could potentially be related to the remanded hearing loss claim.  Under these circumstances, the hearing loss and tinnitus claims are inextricably intertwined.  The appropriate remedy when a pending claim is inextricably intertwined with an issue on appeal is to defer adjudication of the claim on appeal pending the adjudication of the inextricably intertwined claim.  See Smith v. Gober, 236 F.3d 1370, 1372 (Fed. Cir. 2001); Henderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 11, 20 (1998).

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for an examination with a qualified medical professional for the purpose of determining the nature and etiology of the Veteran's sleep apnea.  The examiner should review the claims file and, after his or her records review and examination are complete, should prepare a report which responds to the following questions:

(a)	Is it at least as likely as not (a likelihood that is approximately evenly balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that a service-connected disability (including the posttraumatic injury of the lumbar spine with degenerative joint disease at L4-5) aggravated the Veteran's obesity (for example, by preventing regular exercise) beyond its natural progression?

(b)	Is it at least as likely as not (a likelihood that is approximately evenly balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's sleep apnea would not have been aggravated beyond its natural progression without the obesity which was itself aggravated by a separate service-connected disability or disabilities?

If aggravation is found, the examiner must attempt to establish a baseline level of severity prior to the onset of the aggravation.  

The examiner should prepare a clear rationale fully explaining the medical reasons for his or her opinion.  In this opinion, the examiner should discuss the Veteran's March 2022 written statement, in which he attributes obesity to a lack of exercise associated with his service-connected back disability.  The examiner should consider medical records indicating that the Veteran weighed 216 pounds at the time of his initial sleep apnea diagnosis and 246 pounds in March 2006, approximately nine months after his service-connected back injury.  Does this information support a finding that the Veteran's service-connected back injury aggravated his obesity?  Why or why not?  

2. Schedule the Veteran for an examination with a qualified medical professional for the purpose of determining the nature and etiology of his claimed disability manifested by headaches. The examiner should review the claims file and, after the records review and examination are complete, should prepare a report which responds to the following question:

Is it at least as likely as not (a likelihood that is approximately evenly balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's disability manifested by headaches had its initial onset or resulted from any injury, illness, or event during his active-duty service (September 1976 to September 1979) or during any period of active duty for training (ADT or ACDUTRA) or resulted from any injury which occurred during any period of inactive duty for training (IDT or INACDTURA)?  

The examiner should provide a clear rationale fully explaining the medical reasons for his or her opinion. This rationale should discuss the March 2020 mental health note, in which the Veteran described being attacked by a group of men on Okinawa during his active Marine Corps service (September 1976 to September 1979) and the January 1989 medical history report form, on which he marked "yes" to indicate that he previously experienced a head injury.   

3. Schedule the Veteran for an examination with a qualified medical professional for the purpose of determining the nature and etiology of any current disability of the left hip (including the osteoarthritis identified by the January 2019 VA examiner and also the trabecular stress injury, torn labrum, trochanteric bursitis, and/or trochanteric tendinitis identified in private post-service treatment records). The examiner should review the claims file and, after the records review and examination are complete, prepare a report which responds to the following questions:

(a)	Identify all current disabilities of the left hip (including osteoarthritis, torn labrum, trochanteric bursitis, and/or trochanteric tendinitis).

(b)	For each disability identified in response to part 3(a), was the disability the result of or aggravated by the Veteran's service-connected lumbar spine disability?  The examiner is advised that an affirmative answer to this question is appropriate if gait changes associated with the service-connected lumbar spine disability caused or aggravated any current left hip disability.

The examiner should prepare a clear rationale thoroughly explaining the medical reasons for his or her opinion.  This explanation should address the April 2008 VAMC note indicating a "mildly antalgic" gait; the November 2010 VA spine examination report, which described the Veteran as walking "with a limp" and "a pelvic tilt"; the September 2011 MRI summary reporting "marrow edema along the lateral margin of the femoral head, neck, and trochanteric region, likely related to trabecular stress injury" in addition to degenerative changes; a reference to "Labral tear and maceration" in the "IMPRESSION" section of the same report; the September 2011 note raising the "Question [of] whether this is referred pain from his LS spine or whether it is gait related"; the January 2012 orthopedist's note indicating both "Hip arthritis" and "Trochanteric tendinitis"; the March 2021 private primary care note questioning whether the Veteran's left hip pain was "an exacerbation of underlying degenerative hip arthritis or could be trochanteric bursitis"; and a June 2021 note which summarizes a statement from the Veteran indicating that another medical professional told him his left hip pain "was related to his back versus hip."  

4. Schedule the Veteran for an examination by an appropriate clinician to determine the nature and etiology of his bilateral hearing loss disability.  After examining the Veteran and reviewing the electronic claims file, the examiner must opine whether it is at least as likely as not (a likelihood that is approximately evenly balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's current bilateral hearing loss disability is related to an in-service injury, event, or disease, including the Veteran's exposure to loud noises during his active duty service (September 1976 to September 1979) or during his subsequent periods of active duty for training (ADT or ACDUTRA) or inactive duty for training (IDT or INACDUTRA) in the Army National Guard.

The examiner must prepare a clear rationale explaining his or her opinion. The examiner is advised that the previous opinion, dated January 2019, seems to have considered only the auditory threshold tests reports prepared during the Veteran's 1976-1979 service and at the time of his enlistment in the Army National Guard in January 1989, and did not discuss the auditory threshold test results dated February 1994 and August 2000, both prepared during his National Guard service.  The August 2000 test results indicate thresholds of 30 decibels at 500 Hertz in the right ear and 25 decibels at 4000 Hertz also in the right ear.  Both measurements are higher than the February 1994 results.  Do they demonstrate a threshold shift indicating the onset of hearing loss during a period of National Guard service?  Why or why not?    

5. The AOJ must ensure that the requested examination reports and opinions comply with these instructions. If 

?

any report is insufficient, the AOJ should return it to the examiner for any necessary corrective action.

 

 

DAVID L. WIGHT

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	M. Nye, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.