Citation Nr: A25032557
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240905-470831
DATE: April 8, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for endometriosis is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

Resolving all reasonable doubt in favor of the Veteran, her endometriosis was caused by or incurred in service. 

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to service connection for endometriosis have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.304.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from October 1988 to June 1992. 

In the September 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the August 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

At the outset, the Board notes that the issue of entitlement to service connection for endometriosis was granted in a subsequent docket and the Veteran in that docket seems to be contesting the effective date. Since this instant appeal stream may have originated prior to the one in which the entitlement has been already been granted, the Board is readjudicating and regranting the issue herein.

Entitlement to service connection for endometriosis is granted. 

The Veteran contends that her currently diagnosed endometriosis was caused by or incurred in service. Specifically, she contends that her service treatment records show chronic gynecological issues that progressed into endometriosis. See June 2023 Correspondence.

A Veteran who served after December 31, 1946, is presumed to be in sound condition when examined, accepted, and enrolled for service, except as to defects, infirmities, or disorders noted at entrance into service, or where clear and unmistakable (obvious and manifest) evidence demonstrates that an injury or disease existed prior thereto and was not aggravated by such service. Only such conditions as are recorded in the examination reports are to be considered as noted. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1111, 1137; 38 C.F.R. § 3.304.

The presumption of soundness attaches only where there has been an induction examination in which the later complained-of disability was not detected. See Bagby v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 225, 227 (1991). The provisions of 38 C.F.R. § 3.304 (b) clarify that the term "noted" denotes "[o]nly such conditions as are recorded in the examination reports" and that "[h]istory of pre-service existence of conditions recorded at the time of examination does not constitute a notation of such conditions." See Crowe v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 238, 245 (1994); see also Cotant v. Principi, 17 Vet. App. 116 (2003).

When no preexisting condition is noted upon entry into service, a Veteran is presumed to have been found sound upon entry. The burden then falls on the Government to rebut the presumption of soundness by clear and unmistakable (obvious or manifest) evidence that the Veteran's disability was both preexisting and not aggravated (i.e., increased in severity beyond its natural progression) by service. If this burden is met, then the Veteran is not entitled to service connection benefits. However, if the Government fails to rebut the presumption of soundness under 38 U.S.C. § 1111, the Veteran's claim is one for service connection. See Wagner v. Principi, 370 F.3d 1089, 1096 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

The clear-and-unmistakable-evidence standard is a much more formidable evidentiary burden to meet. See Vanerson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 254, 258 (1999) (noting that the clear-and-unmistakable-evidence standard is more demanding than the clear-and-convincing-evidence standard). It is an "onerous" and "very demanding" evidentiary standard, requiring that the evidence be "undebatable." See Cotant v. West, 17 Vet. App. 116, 131 (2003) (citing Laposky v. Brown, 4 Vet. App. 331, 334 (1993)).

Service connection may be granted for a current disability arising from disease or injury incurred or aggravated by active service. 38 U.S.C. § 1110. Service connection may be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d). Service connection generally requires (1) medical evidence of a current disability; (2) medical or, in certain circumstances, lay evidence of in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) medical evidence of a nexus between the claimed in-service disease or injury and the current disability. See Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

VA is responsible for determining whether the evidence persuasively favors one side or another. 38 C.F.R. § 4.3. When there is an approximate or nearly equal balance of positive and negative evidence regarding the merits of an issue material to the determination of the matter, the benefit of the doubt in resolving each such issue shall be given to the Veteran and the claim will be granted on the merits. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b). When the evidence persuasively favors against the claim of the Veteran, the benefit of the doubt doctrine is inapplicable and the claim will be denied on its merits. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 781 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc).

On the Veteran's January 1988 entrance examination, it was noted that her periods were regular and that she suffered from dysmenorrhea. 

The Veteran's service treatment records (STRs) note that in April 1989, she had vaginal/vulval pruritis with mild discharge. Her April 1989 STRs also note bilateral pelvic pain, mild bilateral adnexal area tenderness, and that she had severe pelvic pain with intercourse. 

May 1989 STRs noted nausea and vomiting with mild tenderness to the abdominal area. 

March 1990 STRs noted headache/stomach pain, lower left quadrant (LLQ) pain, and nausea/vomiting.

April 1990 STRs noted LLQ pain for one month and yellow discharge for two-three months. They also noted probable vaginitis. 

October 1990 STRs noted cramping abdominal pain, nausea, and vomiting.

January 1991 STRs noted amenorrhea secondary to birth control. 

February 1991 STRs noted nausea and vomiting with positive bowel sounds.

March 1991 STRs noted a tender right upper quadrant. 

June 1991 STRs noted abdominal pain that had been off and on for several months with nausea.

September 1991 STRs noted abdominal cramps with frequent urination.

January 1992 STRs noted a gynecological examination that was within normal limits with noted inflammation. 

February 1992 STRs noted vaginal itching and tenderness.

May 1992 STRs noted a pelvic area cyst.

The Veteran was diagnosed with endometriosis in December 2008 during a diagnostic laparoscopy. 

In June 2023, the Veteran argued that the STRs show the beginning of a chronic history of gynecological issues ultimately leading to the development of endometriosis. 

A September 11, 2023, VA examination diagnosed the Veteran with endometriosis. The examiner opined that it was less likely than not that the Veteran's endometriosis was incurred in or caused by service because "the Veteran does not have any records prior to 2008 involving endometriosis and/or evaluation for dyspareunia." The Board finds this opinion inadequate as it ignores the Veteran's STRs stating that she had severe pelvic pain during intercourse. 

On September 19, 2023, VA requested another examination and, in the request, stated that the Veteran's endometriosis existed prior to service.

On September 28, 2023, an examiner found that it was less likely than not that the Veteran's endometriosis, which they stated clearly and unmistakably existed prior to service, was aggravated by service. The examiner stated that "endometriosis occurs when tissue similar to lining of the uterus grows in the pelvic cavity outside the uterus. The condition can cause severe pelvic pain and lead to infertility. Causes of endometriosis are retrograde menstruation, transformation of peritoneal cells, embryonic cell transformation, surgical scar implantation, endometrial cell transport, and immune system disorder. Risk factors are never giving birth, starting menses at an early age, going through menopause at a later age, short menstrual cycles, heavy menstrual periods lasting longer than 7 days, high estrogen levels, low BMI, family history, disorders of the reproductive tract. No noninvasive diagnostic testing is available for diagnosis of endometriosis. Gold standard for diagnosis is laparoscopy with histologic confirmation preferably. The Veteran was not diagnosed with endometriosis until 2008. The Veteran reported dysmenorrhea on entrance exam. Dysmenorrhea is menstrual cramps. An individual can have menstrual cramps or dysmenorrhea without having endometriosis. Treatment for endometriosis is birth control which the Veteran was treated while in service. As the Veteran was not diagnosed with endometriosis until 12/2008 with report of dyspareunia (painful intercourse) with deep penetration for 1-2 years. A nexus for aggravation beyond natural progression is not established." 

In October 2023, the Veteran submitted correspondence directing VA to look at her STRs which showed ongoing gynecological issues. 

In March 2024, VA obtained another opinion. The examiner stated that the Veteran's endometriosis "is less likely than not (less than 50 percent probability) proximately due to or the result of service. Endometriosis is a chronic medical condition characterized by the growth of endometrial-like tissue outside the uterus, typically on pelvic organs such as the ovaries, fallopian tubes, or lining of the pelvis. This misplaced tissue responds to hormonal changes in the menstrual cycle, leading to inflammation, scarring, and the formation of adhesions. The exact cause of endometriosis remains unclear, but factors such as retrograde menstruation, genetic predisposition, hormonal imbalances, and immune system dysfunction are thought to play a role. As found in the 01/29/1988 Report of Medical Exam for enlistment, the vet entered the service with symptoms of dysmenorrhea. Dysmenorrhea, which refers to painful menstrual cramps, can be a common symptom of endometriosis. In fact, it is one of the hallmark symptoms of the condition. During menstruation, if endometrial-like tissue that has grown outside the uterus becomes inflamed and sheds along with the lining of the uterus, it can cause significant pain and discomfort. Whether or not the Veteran was diagnosed with endometriosis before service is irrelevant. The Veteran clearly had symptoms of endometriosis prior to service, and therefore, the endometriosis condition is most likely a progression of the pre-existing condition of dysmenorrhea." 

VA obtained another opinion in August 2024. The examiner stated that "There is no medical evidence the Veteran's Endometriosis incurred in or was caused by her service. The Veteran has multiple risk factors for the development of Endometriosis such as Dysmenorrhea (pre-existing military service), alcohol use, significant smoking history (1 PPD for 30+ years), caffeine intake, abnormal menstrual cycles, being childless and genetics. It is not likely that the Veteran's Endometriosis is due to a single risk factor and more likely due to his multiple risk factors as noted above." Additionally, the examiner provided an aggravation opinion, finding that the Veteran's endometriosis clearly and unmistakable pre-existed service. The examiner stated that "After review of the available medical records, The Veteran's endometriosis, which clearly and unmistakably existed prior to service, was clearly and unmistakably not aggravated beyond its natural progression by an in-service injury, event or illness. The Veteran's diagnosis of PID was due to a bacterial infection most likely caused by an STD such as chlamydia, gonorrhea or mycoplasma genitalium. PID does not result in endometrium tissue growing outside of the uterus. The most likely cause of the Veteran's  Endometriosis is her multiple risk factors of Dysmenorrhea (pre-existing military service), alcohol use, significant smoking history (1 PPD for 30+ years), caffeine intake, abnormal menstrual cycles, being childless and genetics." 

After reviewing the medical evidence of record, the Board finds that there is not clear and unmistakable evidence that the Veteran had endometriosis that pre-existed service. The Veteran's entrance examination noted dysmenorrhea, which is not the same thing as endometriosis - the September 2023 examiner stated that "dysmenorrhea is menstrual cramps. An individual can have menstrual cramps or dysmenorrhea without having endometriosis." While dysmenorrhea can be a symptom of endometriosis, as noted by the March 2024 examiner, they are not the same diagnosis. Accordingly, the Board finds that the presumption of soundness has not been rebutted in this case, as the evidence that the Veteran had endometriosis prior to service is not undebatable. Therefore, the Veteran's claim reverts to one of service connection. 

Returning to the medical opinions of record, the Board finds that the September 2023 opinion is inadequate for the purposes of deciding the claim because the examiner did not note that the Veteran had severe pelvic pain with intercourse during service. Further, the Board finds the August 2024 opinions inadequate as the examiner failed to consider any of the Veteran's STRs in the rationale. 

The Board again notes the March 2024 examiner's opinion that the Veteran "clearly had symptoms of endometriosis prior to service, and therefore, the endometriosis condition is most likely a progression of the pre-existing condition of dysmenorrhea." Having established that there is not clear and unmistakable evidence that the Veteran's endometriosis pre-existed service, even if she had symptoms of endometriosis pre-existing service, the Board finds that this opinion supports the Veteran's claim of service connection. The examiner stated that "the endometriosis condition is most likely a progression of the pre-existing condition of dysmenorrhea." 

Therefore, resolving all reasonable doubt in favor of the Veteran, the Veteran's claim for service connection for endometriosis is granted. 

 

 

J. JACK

Acting Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	R. Eisenberg

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.