Citation Nr: A25032888
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240329-429520
DATE: April 9, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for a nose condition is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for right lower extremity neuropathy as secondary to a lumbar spine disability is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder is granted.

Entitlement to an effective date prior to December 12, 2022, for the grant of a 20 percent disability rating for left lumbar radiculopathy is denied.

Entitlement to a rating higher than 20 percent for left lumbar radiculopathy is denied.

Entitlement to an initial compensable rating for allergic rhinitis is denied.

Entitlement to an initial disability rating higher than 30 percent for chronic sinusitis is denied.

Entitlement to an initial disability rating higher than 10 percent for bilateral plantar fasciitis is denied.

Entitlement to an initial rating higher than 10 percent for chronic urticaria is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for gallbladder condition is remanded.

Entitlement to a rating higher than 40 percent for a lumbar spine disability is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. A current nose condition other than the service-connected chronic sinusitis and allergic rhinitis is not shown.

2. A current diagnosis of right lower extremity neuropathy and/or radiculopathy is not shown.

3. The Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder had its onset during service.

4. VA received the Veteran's claim for increased rating on December 12, 2022, and there is no other claim or evidence within a year of this claim that can be construed as a claim for increased rating for left lumbar radiculopathy.

5. The Veteran's left lumbar radiculopathy does not more nearly approximate moderately severe incomplete paralysis of the sciatic nerve.

6. The Veteran's allergic rhinitis was not manifested by nasal polyps, greater than 50 percent nasal obstruction on both sides without polyps, or complete obstruction on one side.

7. The Veteran's chronic sinusitis is not manifested by chronic osteomyelitis following radical surgery or near constant sinusitis characterized by purulent discharge or crusting after repeated surgeries.

8. The Veteran has a diagnosis of bilateral plantar fasciitis without relief from non-surgical treatment, but he did not undergo any surgical treatment and was not recommended for surgical treatment.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria to establish service connection for a nose condition are not met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

2. The criteria to establish service connection for right lower extremity neuropathy are not met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

3. The criteria to establish service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder are met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

4. The criteria for entitlement to an effective date prior to December 12, 2022, for the grant of a 20 percent disability rating for left lumbar radiculopathy are not met.  38 U.S.C. § 5110; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.400, 3.2500.

5. The criteria for a rating higher than 20 percent for left lumbar radiculopathy are not met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.1, 4.2, 4.7, 4.123, 4.124, 4.124a; DC 8520.

6. The criteria for an initial compensable rating for allergic rhinitis are not met or approximated.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 4.3, 4.97, Diagnostic Code 6522.

7. The criteria for an initial disability rating higher than 30 percent for chronic sinusitis are not met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7, 4.14, 4.97, DC 6512.

8. The criteria for an initial disability rating higher than 10 percent for bilateral plantar fasciitis are not met.  38 U.S.C. § 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.6, 4.7, 4.10, 4.40, 4.45, 4.71a, DC 5269.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from August 1998 to August 2002; from July 2004 to January 2006; from April 2013 to May 2014; from November 2014 to November 2015; from November 2015 to May 2016; from July 2016 to January 2018; from January 2020 to December 2020; and from February 2021 to September 2021, to include service in Afghanistan, Djibouti, Qatar, and Kuwait.

As pertinent here, a March 2023 rating decision granted service connection for plantar fasciitis, sinusitis, allergic rhinitis, and chronic urticaria.  The decision reconsidered and denied service connection for nose condition and denied service connection for right leg neuropathy.  The decision denied a rating higher than 40 percent for a lumbar spine disability and left lumbar radiculopathy.  Lastly, a decision regarding the claimed gallbladder removal was deferred.

The Veteran submitted an April 2023 VA Form 20-0996 Request for Higher-Level Review. 

Thereafter, a June 2023 rating decision denied a rating higher than 40 percent for a lumbar spine disability, increased the rating for lumbar radiculopathy to 20 percent, and denied service connection for insomnia.  A decision regarding the claimed gallbladder removal was again deferred.

A July 2024 rating decision denied service connection for a gallbladder removal. 

Thereafter, a July 2023 rating decision reconsidered and denied the claims for right lower extremity neuropathy and nose condition.  The decision also denied a rating higher than 40 percent for a lumbar spine disability, a rating higher than 20 percent for left lumbar radiculopathy, a compensable rating for allergic rhinitis, a rating higher than 30 percent for sinusitis, a rating higher than 10 percent for chronic urticaria, and a rating higher than 10 percent for plantar fasciitis.

The Veteran submitted a July 2023 VA Form 20-0996 Request for Higher-Level Review with the denial-of-service connection for gallbladder removal, and a December 2023 rating decision reconsidered and denied the claim.

In the March 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2023 and July 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decisions, which were subsequently subject to higher-level review.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

Service Connection

Service connection will be granted if the evidence demonstrates that a current disability resulted from an injury or disease incurred in or aggravated by active service.  38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a).  Service connection may also be granted for any injury or disease diagnosed after discharge, when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease or injury was incurred in service.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).  

Establishing service connection generally requires three things: (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship, i.e., a nexus, between the claimed in-service disease or injury and the current disability.  Holton v. Shinseki, 557 F.3d 1362, 1366 (Fed. Cir. 2009).

Congress has specifically limited entitlement for service-connected disease or injury to cases where such incidents have resulted in a disability.  In the absence of proof of a present disability there can be no valid claim.  Brammer v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 223, 225 (1992).

The requirement that a current disability exists is satisfied if the Veteran had a disability at the time the claim for VA disability compensation was filed or during the pendency of the claim.  McClain v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 319, 321 (2007).  See also Romanowsky v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 289, 293 (2013) (Board erred in failing to address pre-claim evidence in assessing whether a current disability existed, for purposes of service connection, at the time the claim was filed or during its pendency).

In Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356 (Fed. Cir. 2018), the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit essentially found that pain alone resulting in functional impairment is in fact a disability and should not be summarily discounted as a bar to benefits based on a finding of no current diagnosis.

The Board must analyze the credibility and probative value of the evidence, account for the evidence that it finds persuasive or unpersuasive and provide the reasons for its rejection of any material evidence favorable to the claimant.? Kahana v. Shinseki, 24?Vet. App.?428, 433 (2011).? This includes weighing the credibility and probative value of lay evidence against the remaining evidence of record.? See King v. Shinseki, 700 F.3d 1339 (Fed. Cir. 2012); Kahana, 24?Vet. App.?at 433-34.? 

A claimant bears the evidentiary burden to establish all elements of a service connection claim, including the nexus requirement.  Fagan v. Shinseki, 573 F.3d 1282, 1287 (Fed. Cir. 2009).? 

VA is responsible for determining whether the evidence supports the claim or is in relative equipoise, with a claimant prevailing in either event.? 38?U.S.C. §?5107(b); 38?C.F.R. §?3.102.? The claimant is entitled to the benefit of the doubt when there is an "approximate" (meaning nearly equal) balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any material determination.? See?Lynch v. McDonough, 999 F.3d 1391 (2021); Ortiz?v.?Principi, 274 F.3d 1361 (Fed. Cir. 2001).

Nose Condition

The Veteran asserts that service connection for a nose condition is warranted.

The Board finds that the threshold element of the claim for service connection, i.e., a current disability, is not met.  In this regard, the Veteran has not presented competent evidence showing he has a diagnosis of a nose condition independent of his already service-connected sinusitis and allergic rhinitis.  That is, there is no competent evidence of a nose condition diagnosis from the date of this claim and during the pendency of the appeal.

The available medical treatment records throughout the pendency of the claim fail to show complaints, treatment, or diagnosis of a nose condition independent of the already service-connected sinusitis and allergic rhinitis.  

The Veteran underwent a VA sinusitis/rhinitis and other conditions of the nose, throat, larynx, and pharynx examination in February 2023.  The examiner diagnosed sinusitis and rhinitis.  The examiner opined that the Veteran did not have any structural abnormalities of the nasal bone or other nasal structures that would cause any of his current sinus issues.

The Board concludes that the Veteran has not presented competent evidence showing that he has a current diagnosis of a nose condition independent of the already service-connected sinusitis and allergic rhinitis.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5107 (a) ("[A] claimant has the responsibility to present and support a claim for benefits."); Fagan v. Shinseki, 573 F.3d 1282, 1287 (Fed. Cir. 2009) (holding that it is the claimant's general evidentiary burden to establish all elements of the claim).

Although the Veteran, as a lay person, is competent to report symptoms he experiences firsthand, he is not competent to diagnose a nose condition because such requires medical expertise and falls outside the realm of common knowledge of a lay person.  See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1376, n. 4 (Fed. Cir. 2007). 

Given the absence of competent, current evidence of a diagnosis of a nose condition, there is no valid claim.  Brammer v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 223, 225 (1992).  In addition, the evidence does not show any symptoms of a nose condition independent of the already service-connected sinusitis and allergic rhinitis, let alone any resulting in functional impairment of earning capacity.  See Saunders, supra.  In other words, the Veteran's symptoms of postnasal drip, sinus infections, and congestion are contemplated by the already service-connected sinusitis and allergic rhinitis.  See Esteban v. Brown, 6?Vet. App.?259, 261-62 (1994).

The evidence is persuasively against the claim; therefore, the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine is not for application.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.  The appeal is therefore denied.

Right Lower Extremity Neuropathy

The Veteran asserts that service connection for a right lower extremity neuropathy as secondary to his lumbar spine disability is warranted.

The Board finds that the threshold element of the claim for service connection, i.e., a current disability, is not met.  In this regard, the Veteran has not presented competent evidence showing he has a diagnosis of a right lower extremity disability (neuropathy and/or radiculopathy).  That is, there is no competent evidence of right lower extremity neuropathy/radiculopathy diagnosis from the date of this claim and during the pendency of the appeal.

The available medical treatment records throughout the pendency of the claim fail to show complaints, treatment, or diagnosis of right lower extremity disability.

The Veteran underwent a VA back examination in February 2023.  Muscle strength, reflex, and sensory examinations were all normal.  The Veteran did not report any right lower extremity symptoms.  Straight leg raising test was negative. 

The Veteran underwent a VA peripheral nerves conditions examination in June 2023.  The Veteran reported symptoms only related to the left lower extremity.  No symptoms relevant to the right lower extremity were documented or reported.  The examiner diagnosed only left lumbar radiculopathy.    

The Board concludes that the Veteran has not presented competent evidence showing that he has a current diagnosis of right lower extremity disability (neuropathy and/or radiculopathy).  See 38 U.S.C. § 5107 (a) ("[A] claimant has the responsibility to present and support a claim for benefits."); Fagan v. Shinseki, 573 F.3d 1282, 1287 (Fed. Cir. 2009) (holding that it is the claimant's general evidentiary burden to establish all elements of the claim).

Although the Veteran, as a lay person, is competent to report symptoms he experiences firsthand, he is not competent to diagnose a right lower extremity disability because such requires medical expertise and falls outside the realm of common knowledge of a lay person.  See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1376, n. 4 (Fed. Cir. 2007).  Here, the Veteran has not reported having right lower extremity symptoms.  

Given the absence of competent, current evidence of a diagnosis of a right lower extremity disability, there is no valid claim.  Brammer v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 223, 225 (1992).  In addition, the evidence does not show any symptoms of a right lower extremity condition, let alone any resulting in functional impairment of earning capacity.  See Saunders, supra.

The evidence is persuasively against the claim; therefore, the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine is not for application.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.  The appeal is therefore denied.

Acquired Psychiatric Disorder

Initially, the scope of the Veteran's claim for a disability includes any disability that reasonably may be encompassed by the claimant's description of the claim, reported symptoms, and the other information of record.  Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1 (2009) (per curiam).  Regardless of whether a claimant identifies a particular disorder upon filing the claim, the scope of the claim is not limited to that condition but is considered a claim for any disability that reasonably may be encompassed by several factors - including his description of the claim, the symptoms he describes, and the information he submits or that VA obtains in support of his claim.  See Clemons, supra. 

Here, although the Veteran filed a claim for insomnia, in the course of the appeal he has been diagnosed with generalized anxiety disorder, which included chronic sleep impairment.  The Board, therefore, recharacterized the claim as a claim for an acquired psychiatric disorder.

For the following reasons, the Board finds that service connection is warranted.  Specifically, the Board finds that the onset of symptoms was during service.

Service treatment records contain a June 2002 Report of Medical History, during which the Veteran checked "yes" for depression or excessive worry.  The medical professional noted that the Veteran had anxiety associated with a diagnosis of irritable bowel syndrome (IBS).  Additional service treatment records beginning December 2013 show that the Veteran was diagnosed with adjustment disorder with anxiety and insomnia with rumination.  An April 2014 military licensed clinical social worker (LCSW) documented that the Veteran had been on three deployments and was a Captain in very responsible positions.  The LCSW indicated that the last deployment was very stressful and the Veteran experienced behavioral health symptoms since that time, to include excessive worry, being easily fatigued, and having some muscle tension.  He was able to manage his symptoms.

The Veteran underwent a VA mental disorders examination in April 2023.  The examiner diagnosed generalized anxiety disorder with symptoms such as anxiety, chronic sleep impairment, impaired impulse control, and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, and inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.  The examiner explained that a diagnosis of insomnia was not warranted because the symptoms reported by the Veteran were explained by the diagnosis of generalized anxiety disorder with sleep disturbance as a symptom related to the diagnosis of generalized anxiety disorder.

The examiner noted that during his fourteen years of service, the Veteran relocated every two years and reported having problems with leadership in 2013.  He believed that his leadership wanted to sabotage his military career.   The Veteran reported onset of anxiety, suspiciousness, and trouble sleeping in 2013 while deployed in Djibouti.  He attributed his symptoms at the time to problems with leadership.  While in Djibouti, he requested mental health treatment, and received treatment for four months once a week with a clinical psychologist.  A medical opinion was not provided.

On review, the Board resolves any reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor in finding that his anxiety disorder had its onset during active-duty service.  Although the 2023 VA examiner did not provide a nexus opinion, the examiner documented the Veteran's reports that his anxiety began during service.  These reports are corroborated by the medical evidence during service, which shows treatment and diagnosis of adjustment disorder with anxiety and insomnia with rumination.  The Board finds that the Veteran has been diagnosed with the claimed acquired psychiatric disorder during active-duty service.  For these reasons, the appeal is granted.

Earlier Effective Date for the Award of a 20 Percent Disability Rating for Left Lumbar Radiculopathy

The effective date for an increased rating for disability compensation will be the latest of 1) the date entitlement arose, 2) the earliest date as of which it is factually ascertainable that an increase in disability occurred if a claim is received within one year from such date, or 3) the date of receipt of the claim.  38 U.S.C. § 5110 (b)(3); 38 C.F.R. § 3.400 (o).  This general rule applies equally under the legacy and AMA systems of review.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.2500 (h)(1).

Moreover, under the AMA, an effective date can be preserved if the claim is continuously pursued by filing an appropriate administrative review option to an AMA decision, generally within one year from when the decision was issued.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2500 (c).  If an AMA claim is continuously pursued, it will be considered filed as of the date of the first claim in the continuously pursued chain, not the date the most recent request for review was received.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2500 (h).  For decisions rendered after a Higher-Level Review by the AOJ, continuous pursuit can be established by filing either a supplemental claim or a VA Form 10182.  Id. 

The term "continuous pursuit" only applies to AMA decisions.  Specifically, when a claim filed under AMA is granted in an initial decision, the effective date of an AMA initial decision will be the later of the date of the supplemental claim, or the date of entitlement.  Thus, even if a supplemental claim is received within one year of a legacy decision, the date of receipt of the supplemental claim will be considered the date of claim for effective date purposes.  38 C.F.R. §§ 3.2500 (h), 3.2500 (f).  In the event there were an AMA opt-in from an SOC or SSOC, the resulting AMA decisions (either by the AOJ or Board) would be issued in the AMA.  Therefore, only they, not the claims before the AMA opt-in, would be subject to the rules governing continuous pursuit.  See id. 

Analysis

As discussed above, a March 2023 rating decision denied a rating higher than 10 percent for left lumbar radiculopathy.  Thereafter, a June 2023 rating decision increased the rating for left lumbar radiculopathy, effective December 12, 2022.  The Veteran generally asserts that an earlier effective date is warranted.  Though, the Veteran provided no evidence or argument in support of this assertion.  See March 2024, VA Form 10182 Notice of Disagreement.

Here, a December 2020 rating decision granted service connection for left lumbar radiculopathy and assigned an initial 10 percent rating, effective May 30, 2019.  The Veteran was notified of the decision in December 2020.  The Veteran did not appeal the decision nor submitted any relevant evidence within a year of the decision.

On December 12, 2022, the Veteran filed a claim for increased rating.  Although the March 2023 rating decision denied the claim, the June 2023 rating decision increased the rating to 20 percent for the entire rating period on appeal, from the date of claim on December 12, 2022.  The Veteran did not continuously pursue his claim.  As noted above, there is no evidence within a year of this claim that can be construed as a claim for increased rating.  Here, the Veteran is already in receipt of the earliest possible date, namely, the date of his claim for increased rating, December 12, 2022. 

Consequently, there is no legal basis upon which to award an effective date prior to December 12, 2022, for the award of a 20 percent disability rating for left lumbar radiculopathy.  The Board is bound by the law governing the assignment of effective dates in its determination in this case.  The claim of entitlement to an effective date earlier than December 12, 2022, for the assignment of a 20 percent rating for left lumbar radiculopathy must be denied.

Increased Rating - Applicable Laws and Regulations

Disability evaluations are determined by comparing a veteran's present symptoms with the criteria set forth in the VA Schedule for Rating Disabilities, which is based upon average impairment in earning capacity.? 38?U.S.C. §?1155; 38?C.F.R. Part 4.? When a question arises as to which of two ratings applies under a particular diagnostic code, the higher evaluation is assigned if the disability more closely approximates the criteria for the higher rating; otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned.? 38?C.F.R. §?4.7.? After careful consideration of the evidence, any reasonable doubt is resolved in favor of the Veteran.? 38?C.F.R. §?4.3.?? 

A disability rating may require re-evaluation in accordance with changes in a veteran's condition.? Thus, it is essential that the disability be considered in the context of the entire recorded history when determining the level of current impairment.? See?38?C.F.R. §?4.1.?? 

When a claimant is awarded service connection and assigned an initial disability rating, separate disability ratings may be assigned for separate periods of time in accordance with the facts found.? Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119, 126 (1999).  Where the veteran is appealing the rating for an?already established service-connected condition, the present level of disability is of primary concern.? See Francisco v. Brown, 7?Vet. App.?55, 58 (1994).? Staged ratings are appropriate for an increased rating claim when the factual findings show distinct time periods where the service-connected disability exhibits symptoms that would warrant different ratings.? Hart v. Mansfield, 21?Vet. App.?505 (2007).

Left Lumbar Radiculopathy - Rating Criteria

The Veteran's left lumbar radiculopathy in the sciatic nerve is rated pursuant to DC 8520.

Under DC 8520, disability ratings of 10, 20, and 40 percent are warranted, respectively, for mild, moderate, and moderately severe incomplete paralysis of the sciatic nerve.  38 C.F.R. § 4.124a.  A disability rating of 60 percent is warranted for severe incomplete paralysis with marked muscle atrophy.  An 80 percent rating is warranted for complete paralysis of the sciatic nerve.  38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, DC 8520.

When the involvement is wholly sensory, the rating should be for the mild, or at most, the moderate degree.  38 C.F.R. § 4.124a.  Neither the Rating Schedule nor the regulations provide definitions for descriptive words such as "mild," "moderate," "moderately severe," and "severe."  See Spellers v. Wilkie, 30 Vet. App. 157 (2018).  Rather than applying a mechanical formula, the Board must instead evaluate all the evidence, to the end that its decisions are "equitable and just." 38 C.F.R. § 4.6.

Although the rating criteria do not define "mild," "moderate," and "severe" according to Merriam Webster, "mild" means" gentle in nature or behavior" or "not being or involving what is extreme." "Moderate" means "tending toward the mean or average amount or dimension" or "limited in scope or effect." "Severe" means "very painful or harmful" or "of a great degree."  See www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/severe (last accessed April 8, 2025).

It should also be noted that use of terminology such as "severe" by VA examiners and others, although an element of evidence to be considered by the Board, is not dispositive of an issue.  All evidence must be evaluated in arriving at a decision regarding an increased rating.  38 C.F.R. §§ 4.2, 4.6.

Although the Board is not bound by administrative manuals, it is relevant for guidance as to determining the severity of the Veteran's radiculopathy during the appeal.  See Overton v. Wilke, 30 Vet. App. 257 (2018).  

A VA administrative manual provides guidance on the terms mild, moderate, moderately severe, and severe incomplete paralysis.  See VA's Adjudication Procedures Manual (the "M21-1"), Part V.iii.12.A.2.c.

The M21-1 indicates that "mild" incomplete paralysis may be shown by "a very minimal reflex or motor abnormality" or "sensory deficits that are lower graded, less persistent, or affecting a small area." "Moderate" incomplete paralysis may be shown by "combinations of significant sensory changes and reflex or motor changes of a lower degree," or "motor and/or reflex impairment such as weakness or diminished or hyperactive reflexes (with or without sensory impairment) graded as medically moderate."

"Moderately severe" incomplete paralysis may be shown by "motor and/or reflex impairment (for example, weakness or diminished or hyperactive reflexes) at a grade reflecting a high level of limitation or disability." Atrophy may be present at a level less than "marked muscular atrophy" required for "severe" incomplete paralysis under DC 8520.  "Severe" incomplete paralysis may be shown with motor and/or reflex impairment (for example, atrophy, weakness, or diminished or hyperactive reflexes) at a grade reflecting a very high level of limitation or disability. 

Severe incomplete paralysis may contain signs/symptoms resembling some of those expected in cases of complete paralysis of the nerve.  For the sciatic nerve, marked muscular atrophy is expected.  See DC 8520; see also M21-1, Part V.iii.12.A.2.c.

Left Lumbar Radiculopathy - Evidence and Analysis

The Veteran underwent a VA back examination in February 2023.  The examiner diagnosed left lumbar radiculopathy.  Muscle strength, reflex, and sensory examinations were all normal.  Straight leg raising test was negative.  No signs or symptoms of radiculopathy were documented.  

The Veteran underwent a VA peripheral nerves condition examination in June 2023.  The examiner diagnosed left lumbar radiculopathy.  The Veteran reported having throbbing pain down the left leg.  He could not walk and stand due to this pain.  He took Gabapentin and received epidural injections.  He had a dull throbbing pain radiating down his left leg status post discectomy.  It caused him to move a little slower and had a hard time lifting water bottles at his job and forced him to have to stand up at his desk and stretch.  He had moderate intermittent pain.  He had no constant pain, paresthesias, or numbness.  Muscle strength testing was normal without evidence of muscle atrophy.  Reflex and sensory examinations were normal.  There were no trophic changes.  The Veteran's gait was normal.  The examiner identified moderate incomplete paralysis of the sciatic nerve.

On review, the Board finds that ratings higher than 20 percent are not warranted for the left lumbar radiculopathy.  The medical evidence shows that muscle strength testing of the Veteran's left lower extremity has been normal (5/5) throughout and without evidence of muscle atrophy.  Reflex examinations have also been normal (2+) throughout.  Sensory examination was normal throughout and straight leg raising testing has been negative.  There were no trophic changes in the legs.  The June 2023 examiner reviewed the medical evidence and lay reports and concluded that the Veteran's left lumbar radiculopathy resulted in moderate incomplete paralysis of the sciatic nerve.

The Board recognizes the Veteran's reports of throbbing radiating pain down the left leg and that such pain impacted his ability to stand and walk at times.  However, the only symptom identified is moderate intermittent pain.  He did not have any muscle, reflex, or sensory deficiencies throughout the pendency of the claim.  The Board also notes that there is no evidence of atrophy in the leg muscles, let alone marked atrophy which is a sign of severe impairment of the sciatic nerve as indicated in the M21-1.  Importantly, the involvement is wholly sensory, the rating should be for the mild, or at most, the moderate degree. 

Based on the foregoing, the Board concludes that the evidence is persuasively against the assignment of a rating higher than 20 percent for the left sciatic lumbar radiculopathy at any point during the pendency of the appeal.  The appeal is denied.

Allergic Rhinitis - Rating Criteria

The Veteran's allergic rhinitis is rated pursuant to diagnostic code 6522, which pertains to allergic rhinitis.  Under such code, a 10 percent rating is warranted for allergic or vasomotor rhinitis without polyps, but with greater than 50 percent obstruction of nasal passage on both sides or complete obstruction on one side.  A maximum, 30 percent rating is warranted for allergic or vasomotor rhinitis with polyps.  Further, in every instance where the schedule does not provide a zero percent rating for a diagnostic code, a zero percent rating shall be assigned when the requirements for a compensable rating are not met.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.31.

Allergic Rhinitis - Evidence and Analysis

The Veteran underwent a VA examination in February 2023.  The Veteran reported having postnasal drip, sinus infections, and congestions.  He used Allegra, Sudafed, and nasal wash.  There was not greater than 50 percent obstruction of the nasal passage on both sides due to rhinitis.  There was no complete obstruction of one side due to rhinitis.  There was permanent hypertrophy of the nasal turbinates.  There was no evidence of nasal polyps.

On review, the Board finds that a compensable rating is not warranted.  Notably, the examination report specifically noted that there was no obstruction greater than 50 percent of the nasal passage on both sides or complete obstruction of one side of the nose.  A compensable rating is not warranted.  Additionally, while there was evidence of permanent hypertrophy, there was no evidence of bacterial rhinitis to warrant a 10 percent rating pursuant to DC 6523 for bacterial rhinitis.  The appeal is denied.

Chronic Sinusitis - Rating Criteria

The Veteran's chronic sinusitis has been rated under 38 C.F.R. § 4.97, Diagnostic Code 6512, Sinusitis, frontal, chronic.

Under Diagnostic Code 6512, a 10 percent rating is assigned where one or two incapacitating episodes of sinusitis per year require prolonged (lasting 4 to 6 weeks) antibiotic treatment or where there are three to six non-incapacitating episodes per year of sinusitis characterized by headaches, pain, and purulent discharge or crusting.  A 30 percent evaluation is assigned when there are three or more incapacitating episodes per year of sinusitis requiring prolonged (lasting four to six weeks) antibiotic treatment, or more than six non-incapacitating episodes per year of sinusitis characterized by headaches, pain, and purulent discharge or crusting.  The next and highest schedular rating of 50 percent is assigned following radical surgery with chronic osteomyelitis, or near constant sinusitis characterized by headaches, pain and tenderness of affected sinus, and purulent discharge or crusting after repeated surgeries.  38 C.F.R. § 4.97, Diagnostic Code 6512.  The Board acknowledges that the Veteran diagnosis also includes sinusitis, ethmoid, chronic (DC 6511) and sinusitis, sphenoid, chronic (DC 6514); however, sinusitis is rated the same regardless of its type, and as such, there is no benefit in changing the DC under which the Veteran is rated.

Chronic Sinusitis - Evidence and Analysis

The Veteran underwent a VA sinusitis/rhinitis and other conditions of the nose, throat, larynx, and pharynx examination in February 2023.  The examiner diagnosed chronic sinusitis identified as frontal, ethmoid, and sphenoid.  The Veteran had episodes of sinusitis and pain and tenderness of affected sinus.  He had seven or more non-incapacitating episodes per year.  He also had two incapacitating episodes of sinusitis requiring prolonged use of antibiotics treatment.  He did not have a sinus surgery.  The examiner added that the Veteran had episodic increase in congestion and drainage, with sinus pressure/pain, and headaches. 

On review, the Board find that a rating higher than 30 percent is not warranted.  As discussed, a higher evaluation of 50 percent is not warranted unless there is sinusitis following radical surgery with chronic osteomyelitis or near constant sinusitis characterized by headaches, pain and tenderness of affected sinus, and purulent discharge or crusting after repeated surgeries.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.97. Although the Veteran arguably had near constant sinusitis characterized by headaches and pain and tenderness of affected sinus, there is no evidence of purulent discharge or crusting after repeated surgeries.  The Veteran never had a sinus surgery.  Therefore, a higher 50 percent rating is not warranted.

Plantar Fasciitis - Rating Criteria

Effective February 7, 2021, VA revised the criteria for evaluating musculoskeletal disorders.  The amendments enacted DC 5269 for plantar fasciitis.  DC 5269 provides a 10 percent rating for a diagnosis of plantar fasciitis, a 20 percent rating for unilateral plantar fasciitis with no relief from both non-surgical and surgical treatment, and a 30 percent rating for bilateral plantar fasciitis with no relief from both non-surgical and surgical treatment.  Note (1) also provides a 40 percent rating with the actual loss of use of the foot.

Plantar Fasciitis - Evidence and Analysis

The Veteran underwent a VA foot conditions examination in February 2023.  The examiner diagnosed bilateral plantar fasciitis.  The Veteran reported that initially he had severe pain of the arches of the feet.  He had physical therapy and used orthotics.  He continued to have pain, and he stretched as treatment.  He had soreness and tenderness at the center of the feet.  Flare-ups occurred a few times a week, were moderate, and lasted one to two days.  The Veteran had non-surgical treatment for planar fasciitis, which did not relieve his symptoms.  The Veteran did not have any surgical treatment for his plantar fasciitis.  He was not recommended for a surgical intervention.  Functional loss was described as inability to walk or job for long periods of time.

On review, a rating higher than 10 percent is not warranted.  Although the Veteran has a diagnosis of bilateral plantar fasciitis and no relief from non-surgical treatment, for a higher rating, there must also be evidence that the Veteran had no relief from surgical treatment.  Here, the Veteran never had surgical treatment and was not recommended for surgical treatment.  As such, the evidence is persuasively against a rating higher than 30 percent.  The appeal is therefore denied.

Chronic Urticaria - Rating Criteria

Under the current version of DC 7825 effective August 13, 2018, chronic urticaria is defined as continuous urticaria at least twice per week, off treatment, for a period of six weeks or more.  38 C.F.R. § 4.118, DC 7825.  

A 10 percent rating is contemplated for chronic urticaria that requires first line treatment (antihistamines) for control.  A 30 percent rating is warranted for chronic urticaria that requires second line treatment (e.g., corticosteroids, sympathomimetics, leukotriene inhibitors, neutrophil inhibitors, thyroid hormone) for control.  A 60 percent rating is warranted for chronic refractory urticaria that requires third line treatment for control (e.g., plasmapheresis, immunotherapy, immunosuppressives) due to ineffectiveness with first- and second-line treatments.

Chronic Urticaria - Evidence and Analysis

The Veteran underwent a VA skin diseases examination in February 2023.  The examiner diagnosed chronic urticaria.  The Veteran stated that he received no treatment for the condition.  The examiner documented that the condition was quiescent.  The Veteran had a break in treatment and did not experience symptoms at least twice a week for six weeks or more.  He only had first time treatment with antihistamines and body wash.  He did not have a second or third treatment.  The condition caused no scarring.

On review, the Board finds that a rating higher than 10 percent is not warranted.  The Veteran's condition did not require second line treatment as required by the criteria for the next-higher rating of 30 percent.  Rather, his condition requires only first line treatment of antihistamines and body wash.  Therefore, the appeal must be denied.

Finally, neither the Veteran nor his attorney has raised any other issues, nor have any other issues been reasonably raised by the record.  See Doucette v. Shulkin, 28 Vet. App. 366, 69-70 (2017) (confirming that the Board is not required to address issues unless they are specifically raised by the claimant or reasonably raised by the evidence of record).  

Specifically, although the attorney included generic boilerplate that mentioned individual unemployability (TDIU) along with the VA Forms 10182 Notice of Disagreement, the evidence shows that the Veteran was working full-time throughout the pendency of the claim.  Specifically, he is a contractor with the Department of Defense with a side job in real estate.  He also was enrolled in graduate school pursuing a master's degree in strategic intelligence.  A formal claim for entitlement to a TDIU was not filed, and as such, the issue of entitlement to a TDIU is not raised as part of the increased rating claims on appeal.  See Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447 (2009). 

REASONS FOR REMAND

A remand is necessary because the AOJ failed to obtain adequate medical examinations and/or opinions for the claimed service connection for gallbladder removal and the increased rating claim for lumbar spine disability as discussed below. 

Gallbladder Condition

The Veteran's gallbladder was removed in December 2019, between his January 2018 discharge and reenlistment in January 2020.  The Veteran argues that his gallbladder removal resulted from health problems caused by his service in Southwest Asia. 

Service treatment records dated in November 2001 document complaints of intestinal cramps with a diagnosis of IBS.  In May 2014, the Veteran complained of abdominal pain, which the medical professional documented as possibly related to the Veteran's gallbladder.

The Veteran underwent a VA gallbladder examination in April 2023.  The examiner diagnosed cholecystectomy (removal of the gallbladder).  The examiner documented that the Veteran experienced acute pain in the upper stomach area and went to the emergency room.  His gallbladder was removed on December 31, 2019.  The Veteran further reported that he also had IBS.

In a June 2023 opinion, a VA examiner opined that the gallbladder removal was less likely than not related to the Veteran's toxic exposure risk activity (TERA).  The examiner reasoned that gallbladder removal was a common surgery, and that removal of a gallbladder was not known to be caused by TERAs.  

Nevertheless, the examiner failed to explain with complete rationale whether any of the Veteran's exposures caused his gallbladder problems that led to its removal.   In other words, the examiner focused solely on the removal itself, and not on what caused the health issue in the first place.  

Moreover, the AOJ did not ask the examiner to provide an opinion on direct service despite the diagnosis of IBS during service and other abdominal distress complaints and whether this evidence supports the Veteran's claim that the need for his gallbladder removal resulted from service.

Accordingly, an addendum medical opinion is necessary to correct this pre-decisional duty to assist error.

Increased Rating for Lumbar Spine Disability

Regarding the claimed increased rating for a lumbar spine disability, the Board finds that a retrospective medical opinion is necessary.  During the pendency of the claim, the Veteran underwent a VA back examination in February 2023.  The examination did not estimate loss of function or range of motion after repeated use over time and/or during flare-ups.  Instead, the examiner indicated that the examination report was not conducted immediately after repeated use over time and/or during a flare-up, but the estimated loss of motion was identical to that of the initial range of motion testing during the examination.  There is also no indication that any examiner attempted to elicit relevant information regarding the description of the Veteran's range of motion after repeated use over time and/or during flare-ups contrary to the Court's holding in Sharp v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 26, 34-36 (2017).  This is significant, because initial range of motion testing revealed forward flexion only to 20 degrees, and the examiner did not consider whether there is functional equivalent of ankylosis during flare-ups or after repeated use over time.  See Chavis v. McDonough, 34 Vet. App. 1 (2021).

Accordingly, an addendum medical opinion is necessary to correct this pre-decisional duty to assist error. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain an addendum medical opinion from an appropriate VA examiner to help determine the likely etiology of the Veteran's gallbladder condition.  The claims file and a copy of this remand will be made available to the examiner, who will acknowledge receipt and review of these materials.  The need for another examination is left to the discretion of the medical professional offering the addendum opinion.

After a review of the evidence, the examiner is asked to respond to the following:

(a)	Opine whether the Veteran's gallbladder condition had its onset during service or is otherwise related to it, to include complaints of abdominal distress, intestinal cramping, and a diagnosis of IBS during service.  **In providing this opinion, the examiner must explain the significance, if any, of complaints and treatment for IBS and other abdominal/intestinal symptoms during active-duty service.

(b)	Provide an opinion as to whether there is a nexus between the gallbladder condition and its residuals and one or more of the Veteran's TERAs.  **In providing this opinion, the VA examiner must consider: (i) The total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran; AND (ii) the synergistic, combined effect of all TERAs of the Veteran.

The standard of review to be applied is "as likely as not" (meaning that the likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher).

A full and thorough rationale must be provided for all opinions, referencing relevant medical and lay evidence where appropriate.

2. Obtain an addendum retrospective medical opinion from an appropriate VA examiner to help determine the severity of the service-connected lumbar spine disability during the pendency of this appeal.  The claims file and a copy of this remand will be made available to the examiner, who will acknowledge receipt and review of these materials.  The need for another examination is left to the discretion of the medical professional offering the addendum opinion.

(a)	Provide a retrospective VA medical opinion as to any additional degrees of limitation of motion after repetitive use over time/during flare-ups due to pain, weakness, excess fatigability, and/or incoordination during the pendency of this appeal from December 2022 to March 2023.  If it is not possible to provide such opinion or estimations without resorting to mere speculation, the examiner should provide an explanation as to why this is so and note what, if any, additional evidence would permit such an opinion to be made.  In doing so, utilize the documented range of motion in the February 2023 examination report along with the Veteran's reports as discussed during these examinations.

(Continued on the next page)

?

(b)	Is there a functional equivalent of ankylosis during flare-ups and/or after repeated use over time?

Adequate rationale should be provided for all opinions.

 

 

S. B. MAYS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	A. Yaffe, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.