Citation Nr: A25032897
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 230815-371141
DATE: April 9, 2025

ORDER

Service connection for left shoulder strain is granted.

Service connection for right shoulder strain is granted.

Service connection for lumbosacral strain with degenerative arthritis (hereinafter "low back disability") is granted.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. Resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the left shoulder strain is at least as likely as not related to an in-service injury or event.

2. Resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the right shoulder strain is at least as likely as not related to an in-service injury or event.

3. Resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the low back disability is at least as likely as not related to an in-service injury or event. 

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for service connection for left shoulder strain are met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

2. The criteria for service connection for right shoulder strain are met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

3. The criteria for service connection for a low back disability are met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from September 1973 to September 1976. 

These matters are before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a December 2022 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In October 2022, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR), and requested review of a March 2022 rating decision. In December 2022, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the HLR decision on appeal, which considered the evidence of record at the time of the prior March 2022 decision. 

In the August 2023 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2022 AOJ decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

The Board's grant of service connection for these matters is considered a full grant of the benefits sought on appeal. The AOJ will set the effective dates of service connection. see Evans v. West, 12 Vet. App. 396 (1999) (effective dates are a "downstream matter" to be addressed after the benefit has been granted).

Service Connection 

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from a disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service. See 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303. A veteran seeking compensation under these provisions must establish three elements: "(1) the existence of a present disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service." Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356, 1361 (Fed. Cir. 2018) (quoting Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004)).

1. Service connection for left shoulder strain is granted.

2. Service connection for right shoulder strain is granted.

The Veteran contends that he has left and right shoulder strain which were incurred in, aggravated by, or are otherwise attributable to his active duty service. 

Specifically, he asserts that he injured his left and right shoulders during his active duty service while installing radio receivers, and rewiring and repairing Army helicopters. He also asserts that since his separation from active duty service, he has had varying degrees of shoulder pain, as well as other issues with his shoulders, and that after separation from active duty service, he received treatment from civilian doctors and used the RICE method [which stands for Rest, Ice, Compression and Elevation] when having shoulder flare-ups. See October 2021 VA Forms 21-4138 for the left and right shoulders. 

In the December 2022 rating decision on appeal, the AOJ made favorable findings for both shoulder claims that the Veteran has current left and right shoulder disability diagnoses; and that a qualifying event, injury, or disease had its onset during his service. For the left shoulder strain, the AOJ identified the in-service event or injury as a complaint of left shoulder pain in a September 2, 1975 service treatment record (STR). For the right shoulder strain, the AOJ identified a December 15, 1975 STR noting a complaint of dull pain when the arm is relaxed. The Board is bound by these favorable findings unless rebutted by clear and unmistakable evidence that identifies a clear and unmistakable error in the favorable finding. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c). The Board will not disturb the favorable findings. 

Therefore, the first and second element of service connection are met for these disabilities, and the remaining issue is whether there is a causal relationship between the present disabilities and the in-service events/injuries. 

There are medical opinions in favor of, and against the claims.

The evidence against the claim includes a January 2022 VA Shoulder and Arm Conditions examination report. The report indicates that the examiner conducted an in-person examination of the Veteran and reviewed the claims file. The Veteran reported that his left and right shoulder disability symptoms began in 1975. He explained that during his active duty service, he worked on aircraft, installing wiring and radios and that he could only get one arm into an aircraft at a time, and had hold positions for extended time periods. The evidence reflects that the Veteran's military occupational specialty was avionics mechanic. See DD Form 214. Continuing on, the Veteran reported that the symptoms of his left and right shoulder disabilities have worsened over time, and that certain movements cause sharp pain, that may become dull after a time. The VA examiner opined that the claimed right and left shoulder disabilities are less likely than not incurred in, or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event or illness. The rationale was that during service, the right shoulder injury was acute only, that the claims file does not contain evidence of treatment for a chronic left or right shoulder condition, and that there is no evidence of chronicity of care. The examiner's negative etiological opinion relies solely upon an absence of medical documentation of complaints of, or treatment for, the left and right shoulder during or post-separation. A medical opinion based solely on the absence of medical documentation, without consideration of the Veteran's reports of symptoms and history (even if recorded in the course of the examination) is inadequate. Dalton v. Peake, 21 Vet. App. 23 (2007).Therefore, the Board affords that these opinions are inadequate, and affords them no probative weight. 

The evidence in favor of the claims includes a September 2021 examination report for both the left and right shoulder, written by a private medical examiner. The examiner conducted a complete review of the Veteran's claims file. The examiner opined that it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's left and right shoulder strain is due to, related to, or is a progression of, and/or a continuation of his left and right arm pain complaints during his active duty service. The examiner created a comprehensive report that connects the Veteran's in-service activities as an avionics mechanic and his lay statements regarding the onset and course of his symptoms to his current low back disability. The examiner not only included central portions of relevant medical literature, but highlighted numerous key points in the medical literature in support of the medical opinion. The rationale is essentially that the medical literature supports a connection between this particular Veteran's in-service injuries, re-injuries, and overuse, and his present chronic left and right shoulder strain. These medical opinions are probative because they are factual accurate, thoroughly articulated, and contain clear conclusions grounded in medical literature, with a well-reasoned analysis. See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008). The Board affords the opinions significant probative weight. There is no medical evidence or adequate medical opinion to the contrary. 

Based on the foregoing, after resolving all doubt in favor of the Veteran, the Board finds that service connection for left and right shoulder disabilities is warranted. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; see also Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49, 53 (1990).  

Service connection for a low back disability is granted. 

The Veteran also contends that his low back disability was incurred in, aggravated by, or is otherwise attributable to his service. 

He asserts that he injured his low back during his active duty service in the same manner in which he injured his left and right shoulders, to wit:  while installing radio receivers, and rewiring and repairing Army helicopters. He also asserts that he was sought medical treatment for back pain several times during his active duty service. He further asserts that since his separation from his active duty service, he has had varying degrees of pain, as well as other issues with his back. He also reported that he sought private medical treatment for his low back disability after his separation from service, used over-the-counter medications and performed stretches he learned during his service, and used the RICE method during flare-ups. See October 2021 VA Forms 21-4138 for the low back. 

The Board concludes that the Veteran has a current low back disability that is related to in-service injuries/events. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107(b); Holton v. Shinseki, 557 F.3d 1363, 1366 (Fed. Cir. 2009); 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a).

In the December 2022 rating decision on appeal, the AOJ made pertinent favorable findings that the Veteran has a current low back disability, and that a qualifying event, injury, or disease had its onset during his service. The AOJ identified the in-service event or injury as a complaint of a left lower back ache notated in a January 27, 1975 STR. The Board notes that the STR reflects that the Veteran had had back pain for a month and a half, radiating to his left leg. The Board is bound by these favorable findings unless rebutted by clear and unmistakable evidence that identifies a clear and unmistakable error in the favorable finding. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c). The Board will not disturb the favorable findings. 

Therefore, the first and second element of service connection are met for the low back disability, and the remaining issue is whether there is a causal relationship between the present low back disability and the in-service injury/event.  

There are medical opinions in favor of, and against the claim.

The evidence against the claim is a January 2022 VA Back examination report. The report indicates that the examiner conducted an in-person examination of the Veteran and reviewed the claims file. The examiner found that the Veteran had both lumbosacral strain and degenerative arthritis diagnoses. X-rays were taken that day, and they showed mild to moderate spondylosis with disc narrowing at L4 to L5 and L5 to S1. The Veteran reported that his low back condition symptoms began in 1975 during his active duty service. He explained that when working as an avionics mechanic, performing the tasks described above, he began to feel pain and knots, like cramps, in his back. The pain continued and never improved because he had to continue performing the same tasks that caused the pain. He reported that his symptoms worsened over time, and that he presently has occasional flares ups, but that they were worse during the 20 years prior to that. The VA examiner opined that the claimed low back disability is less likely than not incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event or illness. The rationale was that during service, the back pain was acute only; the claims file does not contain evidence of a link between the Veteran's military service and the diagnosed condition; the first evidence of post-service medical treatment for the back condition is in 2021, and there is no evidence of chronicity of care. Although the examiner recorded the Veteran's report of in-service low back pain which never improved, the examiner's opinion relies solely upon an absence of medical reports during and after service. Dalton at 23. Therefore the opinion is inadequate and the Board affords it no probative weight.  

The evidence in favor of the claim includes a September 2021 examination report for the back written by the same private medical examiner who authored the left and right shoulder medical examination reports. The examiner opined that it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's low back disability is due to, related to, a progression of, and/or a continuation of his low back complaint and injury during his active duty service. As with the etiological opinions for the left and right shoulder disabilities, the examiner created a comprehensive report which connects the Veteran's in-service activities as an avionics mechanic and the onset and course of his symptoms, to his present low back disability. In similar fashion, the examiner not only included applicable portions of relevant medical literature, but emphasized numerous key points in that literature in support of the medical opinion. The rationale is also that the medical literature supports a connection between this particular Veteran's in-service injuries, re-injuries, and overuse, and his present back disability. This medical opinion is also probative because it is factual accurate, thoroughly articulated, and contains clear conclusions grounded in medical literature, with a well-reasoned analysis. See Nieves-Rodriguez at 304. The Board affords this examination significant probative weight. There is no medical evidence or adequate medical opinion to the contrary. 

(Continued on the next page)

?

Based on the foregoing, after resolving all doubt in favor of the Veteran, the Board finds that service connection for the low back disability is warranted. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; see also Gilbert at 53.

 

 

John R. Doolittle, II

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Susan E. Leary

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.