Citation Nr: A25032600
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240607-446613
DATE: April 9, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for acquired psychiatric disorder, to include unspecified depression disorder with anxious distress, as secondary to service-connected idiopathic urticaria (urticaria) and tinnitus is remanded. 

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Navy from April 1980 to April 2000. 

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from June 2023 and July 2023 rating decisions by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO), also known as the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ). In June 2024, the Veteran submitted a timely 10182 VA Form with the June 2023 and July 2023 rating decisions. The Veteran selected the direct review docket. 

By way of history, the June 2023 rating decision denied service connection for anxiety disorder as secondary to service-connected tinnitus and urticaria disabilities. The AOJ made a favorable finding that the Veteran was diagnosed with an unspecified depressive disorder disability.  

Following the filing of a June 2023 supplemental claim, the AOJ issued a July 2023 special review rating decision that denied service connection for anxiety disorder secondary to service-connected urticaria. The AOJ overturned the prior June 2023 rating decision's favorable finding that the Veteran had been diagnosed with an unspecified depression disorder disability as it was not favorable for the anxiety disorder issue. 

Thereafter, the Veteran underwent a new VA examination, and a September 2023 rating decision denied service connection for both anxiety disorder and depression secondary to service-connected urticaria.

In February 2024, the Veteran filed a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review, requesting review of the June 2023, July 2023, and September 2023 rating decisions. 

In the June 2024 higher-level review rating decision that followed, the AOJ continued to deny service connection for anxiety disorder and depression.  

In June 2024 the Veteran submitted his VA Form 10182 and requested an extension of time to file his appeal because the June 2024 higher-level review rating decision had been issued more than one year after the June 2023 and July 2023 rating decisions were issued. The Board finds that the Veteran's June 2024 VA Form 10182 was timely filed.

Given the Veteran's docket selection, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the July 2023 rating decision on appeal. If evidence was submitted during the period after the RO issued the rating decision on appeal, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300(a), 20.301, 20.801. 

Furthermore, in determining the scope of the claim, the Board must consider the Veteran's description of the claim, symptoms described, and the information submitted or developed in support of the claim. See Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1 (2009). The Veteran received a psychiatric disorder diagnosis for an unspecified depressive disorder. To ensure that all potential psychiatric disorders are contemplated, the Board has recharacterized the issue on appeal to entitlement to service connection for acquired psychiatric disorder, to include unspecified depression disorder with anxious distress, as secondary to service-connected tinnitus and urticaria. Id. This will provide the most favorable review of the Veteran's claim in keeping with the holding in Clemons.

Because the Board is remanding the claim of entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of that claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Although the Board regrets the additional delay, a remand is necessary to ensure that due process is followed and that there is a complete record upon which to decide the Veteran's claim so that he is afforded every possible consideration. See 38 U.S.C. § 5103A; 38 C.F.R. § 3.159.

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder.

The Veteran contends that he is entitled to service connection for an anxiety disorder and depression on a secondary basis to his service-connected tinnitus and urticaria disabilities. 

In a May 2023 VA examination, the examiner provided separate opinions and rationales addressing depression and tinnitus and depression and urticaria. In both VA medical opinions, the examiner diagnosed the Veteran with an unspecified depressive disorder with anxious distress. The examiner did not diagnose the Veteran with anxiety disorder.  

For the depression and tinnitus May 2023 VA opinion, the examiner explained that the Veteran's depressive symptoms arose when he separated from his wife in 2013 and, accordingly, his condition was more than likely a result of that psychosocial stressor. The examiner noted that the Veteran did not mention any relationship between his tinnitus and his symptoms of depression during the examination. The examiner concluded that the Veteran's condition was not related to service or to any service-connected condition. As such, the examiner opined that the Veteran's depression was less likely than not (likelihood is less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) proximately due to or the result of the Veteran's service-connected tinnitus condition. 

The Board finds this VA medical opinion is inadequate for the following reasons. First, the examiner failed to provide an aggravation opinion as to whether the Veteran's depression was aggravated by his service-connected tinnitus disability. Second, although the examiner explained that the Veteran did not mention any relationship between tinnitus and his symptoms of depression during the examination, the Veteran submitted medical articles showing an association between tinnitus, depression, and anxiety. The examiner did not address the medical articles submitted by the Veteran in April 2023. Lastly, the examiner failed to consider all the relevant evidence of record, including an April 2022 lay statement from the Veteran's wife that indicated that the Veteran had anxiety and depression because of experiences of witnessing multiple deaths during service. These were pre-decisional duty to assist errors.

For the depression and urticaria May 2023 VA opinion, the examiner provided the same explanation as that for tinnitus, in that the Veteran's depression was due to his separation from his wife in 2013, resulting in a psychosocial stressor.  Additionally, the examiner specifically referred to tinnitus, rather than urticaria, by stating that the Veteran's depressive disorder was less likely than not a result of tinnitus. 

The Board finds this VA medical opinion is inadequate because the examiner failed to provide a rationale as to whether the Veteran's depression was caused or aggravated by his service-connected urticaria disability. Additionally, the examiner the failed to consider all the relevant evidence of record, including an April 2022 lay statement from the Veteran's wife. These were pre-decisional duty to assist errors.

Accordingly, a remand is necessary to obtain an addendum opinion to correct the AOJ's pre-decisional duty to assist errors. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action: 

Obtain an addendum opinion from a VA examiner for the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder. Forward the record, to include a copy of this Remand, to an appropriate VA examiner in order to render the opinion requested. Following a full review of the record, the examiner should address the following inquires: 

(a)	Identify all of the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorders that meet, or have met, the DSM-5 diagnostic criteria.

(b)	For all diagnosed acquired psychiatric disorders, the examiner should offer an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not that any such disorder had its onset in, or is otherwise related to, the Veteran's military service. 

(c)	For all diagnosed acquired psychiatric disorders, the examiner should offer an opinion as to:

(i)	Whether the Veteran's diagnosed acquired psychiatric disorder, was caused or aggravated by the Veteran's service-connected tinnitus disability.

(ii)	Whether the Veteran's diagnosed acquired psychiatric disorder, was caused or aggravated by the Veteran's service-connected urticaria disability. 

In offering such opinion, the examiner should discuss the medical articles submitted in April 2023 and the Veteran's wife's lay statement submitted in April 2022. 

(continued on next page)

A rationale for any opinion offered should be provided.

 

Wendy Daknis

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	V. Ruberto

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.