Citation Nr: A25032801
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240118-409175
DATE: April 9, 2025

ORDER

Severance of service connection for end stage renal failure on dialysis was improper; the appeal is granted.

Entitlement to service connection for hypertension is granted pursuant to the Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxins Act of 2022 (PACT Act).

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for hypertension, on a basis other than pursuant to the PACT Act, is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The grant of service connection for end stage renal failure on dialysis pursuant to a July 2015 rating decision is not clearly and unmistakably erroneous. 

2. The Veteran is presumed to have been exposed to herbicide agents while on active duty in the Republic of Vietnam; and under the PACT Act, hypertension is recognized as presumptively associated with exposure to herbicide agents.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The severance of service connection for end stage renal failure on dialysis was improper; the criteria for restoration of service connection have been met. 38 U.S.C. § 5112; 38 C.F.R. § 3.105.

2. The criteria for an award of service connection for hypertension under the PACT Act have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1116, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.307, 3.309; PACT Act, Pub. L. 117-168, 136 Stat. 1759 (2022).

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the U.S. Marine Corps from January 1960 to September 1979. The Veteran died in August 2022 and the substituted appellant is the Veteran's surviving spouse. 

In September 2022, the appellant submitted a VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, and requested readjudication of entitlement to service connection for hypertension and severance of service connection for renal failure, most recently addressed in a July 2022 rating decision. 

In January 2023, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the supplemental claim decision on appeal, which found that new and relevant evidence had been received for the claim for hypertension but made no finding as to whether new and relevant evidence had been received as to the issue of severance. However, the January 2023 rating decision adjudicated the merits of the claim, which the Board construes as an implicit finding that new and relevant evidence was received as to the issue of severance of service connection. 

In the January 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the appellant elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the January 2023 AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

If the appellant would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the appellant may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of entitlement to service connection for hypertension pre-PACT Act, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

1. Severance of service connection for end stage renal failure on dialysis was improper; restoration of service connection is granted. 

The Veteran asserted that severance of service connection for end stage renal failure on dialysis was incorrect. See VA Form 21-0958, received October 2015; VA Form 20-0995, received December 2021. 

The AOJ granted entitlement to service connection for end stage renal failure on dialysis as secondary to service-connected diabetes in a July 2015 rating decision. 

In a September 2015 rating decision, the AOJ proposed to sever service connection concluding that service connection was granted based on an incomplete May 2015 VA examination and that the renal disease predated the Veteran's diabetes diagnosis. The AOJ further explained that a clarifying medical opinion was received in July 2015 and the examiner determined that it was less likely than not that the Veteran's renal failure was due to or aggravated by his service-connected diabetes mellitus. 

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (a). Service connection may also be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge, when all of the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in active service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (d).

To establish entitlement to service connection on a direct basis, the record must contain competent evidence of (1) the existence of a present disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated in service. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004). 

A Veteran can receive compensation via secondary service connection.  Establishing secondary service connection requires evidence of: (1) a current disability (for which secondary service connection is sought); (2) a service-connected disability; and (3) that the current disability was either caused or aggravated by the service-connected disability.  38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a); see also Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439 (1995).

Previously granted benefits will be severed only where evidence establishes that the award of service connection was clear and unmistakable error (CUE) (the burden of proof being on the Government). 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(d).

When severance is considered warranted, a rating proposing severance will be prepared setting forth all material facts and reasons. The claimant will be notified at his or her latest address of record of the contemplated action and furnished detailed reasons therefor and will be given 60 days for the presentation of additional evidence to show that service connection should be maintained. Unless otherwise provided in paragraph (i) of this section, if additional evidence is not received within that period, final rating action will be taken, and the award will be reduced or discontinued, if in order, effective the last day of the month in which a 60-day period from the date of notice to the beneficiary of the final rating action expires. 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(d).

A change in diagnosis may be accepted as a basis for severance action if the examining physician or physicians or other proper medical authority certifies that, in the light of all accumulated evidence, the diagnosis on which service connection was predicated is clearly erroneous. This certification must be accompanied by a summary of the facts, findings, and reasons supporting the conclusion. 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(d).

To establish that a grant of benefits was the product of CUE, VA must show that (1) either the correct facts as they were known at the time were not before the adjudicator, the adjudicator made an erroneous factual finding, or the statutory or regulatory provisions were incorrectly applied; (2) the alleged error was undebatable, not merely a disagreement as to how the facts were weighed or evaluated; and (3) the error manifestly changed the outcome of the prior decision. See Allen v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 54, 58-59 (2007); Stallworth v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 482, 487-88 (2006); cf. Bustos v. West, 179 F.3d 1378, 1380-81 (Fed. Cir. 1999); Damrel v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 242, 245 (1994); Russell v. Principi, 3 Vet. App. 310, 313-14, 319 (1992) (en banc). A clear and unmistakable error is one about which reasonable minds could not differ. See, e.g., 38 C.F.R. § 20.1403(a).

In most respects, the CUE standard under § 3.105(d) is equivalent to the CUE standard for reversing or revising a prior final decision under 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(a). See Baughman v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 563, 566 (1991). Section 3.105(d) places at least as high a burden of proof on the VA when it seeks to sever service connection as § 3.105(a) places upon an appellant seeking to have an unfavorable previous determination overturned. Id.

However, the determination is not limited to the law and the record that existed at the time of the original decision. VA may consider medical evidence and diagnoses that postdate the original award of service connection to demonstrate that the diagnosis on which service connection was predicated is clearly erroneous. Stallworth, 20 Vet. App. at 488. The Secretary's burden is not to prove clear and unmistakable error in the original decision in the same manner a claimant would show CUE under sections 5109A or 7111. Id.

A decision that is reversed or amended based on CUE is revised to conform to the true state of the facts or the law that existed at the time of the original adjudication. Allen, 21 Vet. App. at 62 (internal quotations omitted).

The initial question for the Board is whether the AOJ followed the due process requirements of 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(d) for severing service connection. The Board finds that it did.

The AOJ issued the proposed severance in a September 2015 rating decision. The Veteran was sent a notification in the same month (September 15, 2015) at his latest address of record of this contemplated action and furnished detailed reasons therefore and was given 60 days for the presentation of additional evidence to show that benefits should be maintained. The notice letter also informed the Veteran that he had the opportunity for a predetermination hearing if such a request for a hearing was received by VA within 30 days from the date of the notice. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(i). The Veteran did not request a hearing.  

The AOJ issued the June 2016 rating decision, which severed service connection for renal failure, effective September 1, 2016. Notification of this rating decision, plus his appeal rights, was sent to the Veteran in the same month. The Veteran appealed from that decision and in a September 2017 statement of the case, the AOJ continued the severance.  The Veteran did not, however, perfect an appeal from that determination.  

The Board finds that the September 1, 2016, effective date was proper as it was greater than the last day of the month in which a 60-day period from the date the September 15, 2015, notice expired. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(d).

The remaining question before the Board is whether the grant of service connection for end stage renal failure on dialysis was CUE. The Board finds that it was not.

The September 2015 rating decision that proposed to severe service connection cited to the May 2015 VA examination report, which showed renal failure predated the Veteran's diabetes diagnosis. The AOJ specifically relied, however, on a July 2015 addendum medical opinion wherein an examiner determined that it was less likely than not that the Veteran's renal failure was due to or aggravated by his service-connected diabetes mellitus. On this basis, the AOJ subsequently found that the grant of service connection was CUE. 

Review of the relevant record shows that the May 2015 VA examiner diagnosed the Veteran with diabetic nephropathy and end stage renal failure on dialysis. The examiner reported the date of onset of symptoms was in 2003. The examiner provided a positive nexus opinion, noting that longstanding diabetes and hypertension both led to the Veteran's end stage renal failure. The examiner explained that diabetes can result in damage to the bundles of capillaries that form the kidneys' filtering system. 

In July 2015, the RO sought a medical opinion regarding whether the Veteran's hypertension was secondary to diabetic nephropathy. This VA examiner reviewed the claims file and opined in the negative. As relevant to this appeal, and in explaining her rationale, the examiner stated that the medical record showed, and the Veteran reported, onset of kidney failure onset prior to onset of diabetes mellitus, type II. The diabetes was diagnosed in 2005 and end stage renal failure on dialysis onset 2003. She opined that it is therefore less likely as not the Veteran has diabetic nephropathy. She also opined that there is no medical documentation found to indicate that his diabetes had aggravated the kidney failure.

Based on this opinion, the AOJ sought to severe service connection for the renal failure disorder.

During the initial appeal of the severance, the AOJ sought an additional medical opinion in September 2017- addressing whether the renal failure was due to the Veteran's service-connected diabetes. The examiner opined,

Unfortunately, with available medical documentation, I am unable to state the cause of the renal disease, or to state if it is aggravated or not by DM. Diabetes mellitus in this veteran was diagnosed in 2005, as per documentation, and nephropathy is diagnosed in 2010 (although onset was before, because already Cr was 3, however there is not medical documentation from before to determine an accurate date of onset based on labs or medical information). Nephropathy progressed rapidly, in 2 years (2012) Cr doubled. However, diabetes is documented as well controlled, with a HgbA1c at and below target. In absence of elevated blood sugar is very unlikely that diabetes causes nephropathy. However, I was unable to find a renal work up to determine the cause of the nephropathy in this veteran. It is very unlikely that DM caused the nephropathy, even if DM preceded onset of nephropathy, I don't think that with a HgA1C at target it will aggravate either, however without the proper nephrology work up to determine cause (that is not of record), I am unable to render an accurate opinion in this case.

Finally, the Board observes that during the initial appeal of the severance, the Veteran asserted that he did not have a diagnosis of renal failure in 2003, but rather was diagnosed in 2010. See VA Form 21-0958, received October 2015 and January 2016. The Veteran also submitted private medical records from his nephrologist, dated March 2010, which stated the Veteran reported that he had recently found out something was wrong with his kidneys. See Medical Treatment Record - Non-Government Facility, received August 2016. 

In analyzing whether severance of service connection for the renal failure was proper, the Board notes that this is not a claim of service connection to be evaluated as to whether the claim should be granted based upon a finding that the evidence is neither evenly nor approximately balanced; nor denied because persuasive evidence would be against the claims. The standard to be employed is whether there is "clear and unmistakable evidence" of an error.

As shown above, at the time of the July 2015 rating decision there was a competent medical opinion indicating the Veteran's renal failure was due to his service-connected diabetes. The subsequent medical opinion received in July 2015 revealed a different examiner's opinion that the service-connected diabetes had neither caused nor aggravated the Veteran's renal failure. The additional VA medical opinion obtained in September 2017 was entirely speculative regarding whether the Veteran's service-connected diabetes mellitus had in fact either caused or aggravated his renal failure. This opinion was of little to no probative value. See Tirpak v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 609, 611 (1992). 

Based on the evidentiary record presented, the Board finds that the grant of service connection on a secondary basis in the July 2015 rating decision was not the product of CUE.  In the context of a severance case, a disagreement as to how to weigh the facts is legally insufficient to establish that the award of service connection was clearly erroneous. In this case, the AOJ's severance appears to have been based not on an undebatable error, but rather merely a disagreement as to how the facts were weighed or evaluated here. Therefore, the Board finds that the severance of service connection for end stage renal failure on dialysis was improper.  The appeal is thus granted.

2. Entitlement to service connection for hypertension, pursuant to the PACT Act, is granted. 

This issue is granted pursuant to the Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxics Act of 2022 (PACT Act).

The Veteran's military personnel records reflect service in the Republic of Vietnam from April 1964 to October 1964. Under applicable law, a Veteran who served on active duty in the Republic of Vietnam during the period beginning on January 9, 1962, and ending on May 7, 1975, is presumed to have been exposed to an herbicide agent, absent affirmative evidence to the contrary. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.307 (a)(6)(iii). Thus, the Veteran is presumed to have been exposed to herbicide agents while on active duty in Vietnam.

VA regulations further provide that service connection is warranted for certain diseases as presumptively due to herbicide exposure. 38 C.F.R. § 3.309 (e). The Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxics (PACT) Act, was enacted on August 10, 2022. Section 404 of the PACT Act added hypertension to the list of diseases, which are presumptively related to exposure to herbicide agents. Thus, a presumption of service connection arises for a Veteran who served in the Republic of Vietnam and who develops hypertension.

In the January 2023 rating decision, the AOJ determined that the Veteran had a current diagnosis. There is factual support for this determination in the May 2015 VA examination. Thus, the Board is bound by this favorable finding. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104 (c). As exposure to herbicide agents has been conceded, a nexus between the Veteran's hypertension and his in-service herbicide agent exposure is presumed under the PACT Act. Accordingly, the criteria for a grant of service connection for hypertension due to conceded herbicide agent exposure are met. Service connection for hypertension is granted.

Prior to the PACT Act, hypertension was not on the list of diseases presumptively associated with exposure to herbicide agents. Therefore, despite this grant, the Board has also considered whether service connection may be granted on a basis other than under the PACT Act, such that an earlier effective date may be assigned; however, the Board finds that there is a duty to assist error prior to the rating decision on appeal. As such, entitlement to service connection for hypertension prior to the PACT Act is addressed in the remand below.

REASONS FOR REMAND

Entitlement to service connection for hypertension on a basis other than pursuant to the PACT Act is remanded. 

The Veteran's claim for service connection for hypertension was pending prior to the enactment of the PACT Act. As such, in order to fully consider his claim, the Board must consider whether there is a basis for granting the claim for all or any portion of the period on appeal prior to enactment of the Act.

Prior to enactment of the PACT Act, hypertension was not among the diseases that had been presumptively linked to exposure to herbicide agents. However, prior to the rating decision on appeal, the National Academy of Sciences (NAS) had upgraded the likelihood of an association between hypertension and exposure to herbicide agents, including Agent Orange, from "limited or suggestive" evidence of an association to "sufficient" evidence of any association. See Veterans and Agent Orange Update 11 (2018). The Veteran's service treatment records reflect treatment for hypertension. The Veteran is presumed to have been exposed to an herbicide agent in service, and his claimed hypertension may be related to such exposure.

Before adjudicating the Veteran's claim, the AOJ should have obtained a medical opinion as to the likelihood that his hypertension was attributable to his conceded in-service exposure to herbicide agents. See, e.g., McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 83 (2006); Euzebio v. McDonough, 989 F.3d 1305 (Fed. Cir. 2021). The theory of entitlement to hypertension based on the Veteran's presumed herbicide agent exposure was constructively before the AOJ, pursuant to the relevance and reasonableness standard. A July 2015 VA medical opinion was only obtained as to secondary service connection and not on a direct basis. Accordingly, remand for a medical opinion is warranted in order to a correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error. 

This matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Provide the Veteran's claims file to a qualified clinician so that an opinion may be provided to determine the nature and etiology of his hypertension. The claims file and a copy of this remand must be made available to the clinician to review. The clinician is asked to opine as to the following:

Whether it is at least as likely as not that his hypertension was incurred in, aggravated by, or etiologically related to his military service to include herbicide agent exposure.

In so doing, the examiner must specifically consider the facts of the Veteran's case as they existed prior to passage of the PACT Act, to include giving consideration to the 2018 Veterans and Agent Orange: Update 11, which cited a NAS report for the proposition that there was at that time "sufficient" evidence of an association between hypertension and herbicide agent exposure.

A rationale should be provided. In doing so, the examiner is advised that it is not sufficient to provide a negative opinion regarding whether the disability was due to herbicide agent exposure solely because it is not on the list of disabilities presumptively associated with herbicide agent exposure.

 

 

D. JOHNSON

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	T. Javed, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.