Citation Nr: A25032717
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 230520-349028
DATE: April 9, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for hypersomnolence, on a secondary basis, is granted.

Entitlement to service connection for chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS) is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for kidney disease is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for left shoulder osteoarthritis is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran's hypersomnolence is caused by his service-connected obstructive sleep apnea.

2. The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran has had CFS or any related disability at any time during or approximate to the pendency of the claim.

3. The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran's kidney disease began during active service, or is otherwise related to an in-service event, injury, or disease.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for service connection for hypersomnolence as caused by service-connected obstructive sleep apnea are met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.310.

2. The criteria for service connection for CFS are not met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

3. The criteria for service connection for kidney disease are not met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Navy from September 1985 to December 1985.  He also served a period of active duty for training in the United States Army from August 1983 to November 1983.  

This matter is on appeal to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from a June 2022 rating decision for the issue of service connection for CFS and kidney disease, August 2022 rating decision for the issue of service connection for hypersomnolence, and January 2023 rating decision for the issue of service connection for left shoulder, issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).  In the May 2023 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran timely appealed the portion of the rating decisions pertaining to the issues above and requested direct review of the evidence considered by the RO.  38 C.F.R. § 20.202.  

Therefore, for the issue of service connection for CFS and kidney disease, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the June 2022 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

For the issue of service connection for hypersomnolence, the August 2022 rating decision was a Higher-Level Review decision that considered the evidence of record at the time of a previous decision by the RO in June 2022.  38 C.F.R. §§ 3.2500(a), 3.2601.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the June 2022 AOJ decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  

For the issue of service connection for left shoulder, in the May 2023 Notice of Disagreement, the Veteran had listed the August 2022 and the January 2023 rating decisions as the decisions on appeal.  However, reading the appeal in a liberal manner, the Board finds that the January 2023 decision is the decision on appeal as it considered the evidence at the time of both decisions.  38 C.F.R. § 20.202.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the January 2023 AOJ decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  

Evidence was added to the claims file during a period of time when new evidence was not allowed.  As the Board is deciding the claims of service connection for CFS, kidney disease, and hypersomnolence, it may not consider this evidence in its decision.  38 C.F.R. § 20.300.  The Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.  

Further, because the Board is remanding the claim of service connection for left shoulder, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).  

Service Connection

Generally, to establish service connection, a claimant must show: (1) a present disability; (2) an in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service, the so-called "nexus" requirement.  See 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303; see also Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004).  A disability that is proximately due to, the result of, or aggravated by a service-connected disease or injury shall be service connected.  38 C.F.R. § 3.310.  

1. Hypersomnolence

The Veteran contends that he has hypersomnolence that was secondary to his service-connected asthma with bronchitis.  See May 2021 Fully Developed Claim.  

The Veteran presented for an April 2022 VA mental disorders examination.  The examiner noted that the Veteran had a diagnosis of PTSD, which was reviewed in the examination, and which includes sleep disturbance as a subsumed symptom.  The examiner opined that the Veteran has sleep apnea which causes hypersomnolence.  Thus, the examiner noted that it was not necessary to diagnose hypersomnolence separately.  Upon review of the record, the probative evidence shows that the Veteran had hypersomnolence that was caused by his sleep apnea.  The Veteran is service connected for asthma with bronchitis and obstructive sleep apnea.  Accordingly, after resolving all doubt in favor of the Veteran, the Board finds that service connection for hypersomnolence as secondary to sleep apnea is warranted, and the claim is granted.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.  

2. Chronic Fatigue Syndrome

The Veteran contends that he has CFS that was caused by his service.  See May 2021 Fully Developed Claim.  Alternatively, he contends that he has CFS that was secondary to his service-connected adjustment disorder and service-connected asthma.  Id.  

The question for the Board is whether the Veteran has a current disability that began during service or is at least as likely as not related to an in-service injury, event, or disease.

The Board concludes that the Veteran does not have a current diagnosis of CFS and has not had one at any time during the pendency of the claim or recent to the filing of the claim.  Romanowsky v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 289, 294 (2013); McClain v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 319, 321 (2007).  

Service treatment records show no complaints, diagnosis, or treatment related to a chronic fatigue syndrome disability.  

VA is authorized to compensate any Persian Gulf Veteran with a chronic disability resulting from an undiagnosed illness, or combination of undiagnosed illnesses, which became manifest either during active duty in the Southwest Asia theater of operations during the Persian Gulf War or to a degree of 10 percent or more within a presumptive period following service in the Southwest Theater of Operations during the Persian Gulf War.  38 U.S.C. § 1117.  Here, the service records do not show that the Veteran served in the Persian Gulf during the Gulf War.  38 U.S.C. § 3.317.  

There is a specific standard for "chronic fatigue syndrome" as a diagnosis.  Applicable VA regulations specifically define "chronic fatigue syndrome" at 38 C.F.R. § 4.88a in terms of identifying characteristics.  A diagnosis of chronic fatigue syndrome requires: (1) new onset of debilitating fatigue severe enough to reduce daily activity to less than 50 percent of the usual level for at least six months; and (2) the exclusion, by history, physical examination, and laboratory tests, of all other clinical conditions that may product similar symptoms; and (3) six or more of the following: (i) acute onset of the condition; (ii) low grade fever; (iii) nonexudative pharyngitis; (iv) palpable or tender cervical or axillary lymph nodes; (v) generalized muscle aches or weakness; (vi) fatigue lasting 24 hours or longer after exercise; (vii) headaches (of a type, severity, or pattern that is different from headaches in a pre-morbid state); (viii) migratory joint pains; (ix) neuropsychologic symptoms; (x) sleep disturbance.  38 C.F.R. § 4.88a.  

Post-service treatment records show some complaints for fatigue.  In a February 2004 private treatment, the Veteran complained of daytime fatigue.  In a January 2014 private treatment, the Veteran reported having fatigue.  In a June 2017 private treatment, the Veteran was assessed as having fatigue.  

During a December 2018 VA treatment, the Veteran reported having fatigue.  In a June 2020 and May 2021 VA treatment, the Veteran was observed as not having any fatigue.  

The Veteran presented for a March 2022 VA examination for CFS.  During the examination, the Veteran reported that he started having symptoms of fatigue and exhaustion in 2013 after his active-duty service in the Army.  He described his current symptoms as constantly tired, low energy, and exhaustion that impacted his activities of daily living.  He reported that his symptoms were secondary to his service-connected adjustment disorder.  

Upon examination, the examiner noted that the Veteran did not require continuous medication for control of any CFS.  The examiner noted that the Veteran has not been evaluated or diagnosed with CFS.  The Veteran did not have an acute onset of CFS, and did not have debilitating fatigue that reduced daily activity level to less than 50 percent of pre-illness level.  The examiner noted that the Veteran did not now have or has had any findings, signs, and symptoms attributable to CFS.  He also did not now have or has had any cognitive impairment attributable to CFS.  The examiner further noted that the Veteran's symptoms as due to the reported CFS did not result in periods of incapacitation.  The examiner noted that the Veteran's reported CFS did not impact his ability to work.  

The examiner remarked that a diagnosis of CFS was not warranted.  The examiner explained that the Veteran's symptoms were only subjective.  There was no objective evidence on physical examination or in the medical records that confirm a current, chronic diagnosis of CFS.  The examiner further opined that no diagnosis of CFS was confirmed due to lack of objective evidence that meet VA criteria for an initial diagnosis of CFS.  

Upon review of the evidence of record, the most persuasive evidence of record does not show that the Veteran has had CFS during the appeal period.  Of note, the Veteran attended a March 2022 examination where he was interviewed and examined by an examiner.  The examiner determined that, while the Veteran experienced subjective symptoms which he believed where a result of his CFS, the Veteran did not have a diagnosis of CFS.  Further, despite the private and VA treatment records where the Veteran did report having fatigue, the treatment records do not contain a diagnosis of CFS.  There were also treatment records where the Veteran denied having any fatigue.  

While the Veteran believes there is a current diagnosis of CFS, the Veteran is not competent to provide a diagnosis in this case. The issue is medically complex, as it requires specialized medical education/knowledge of the interaction between multiple organ systems in the body/the ability to interpret complicated diagnostic medical testing.  Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377, 1377 n.4 (Fed. Cir. 2007).  Consequently, the Board gives more probative weight to the competent medical evidence.  

The Board has considered Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356 (Fed. Cir. 2018), in which the Federal Circuit held that "pain alone, without an accompanying diagnosis of a present disease, can qualify as a disability" if it "reaches the level of a functional impairment of earning capacity."  Id. at 1367-69.  Although the Veteran reported that he had CFS that impacted his activities of daily living, the examiner noted that his reported symptoms were only subjective.  Rather, the examiner concluded that there was no objective evidence on physical examination or in the medical records that confirm a current, chronic diagnosis of CFS.  Furthermore, the examiner concluded that the claimed CFS did not functionally impact the Veteran's ability to work.  

As the evidence does not show a current CFS disability, entitlement to service connection on a direct or secondary basis is not met.  

The Veteran raised new argument in August 2023 regarding the onset of his claimed CFS based on the PACT Act as a result of exposure to hazardous chemical while deployed in Panama.  See August 2023 Fully Developed Claim.  While the Board acknowledges the Veteran's statement, under the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), the Board must only remand to the AOJ to correct pre-decisional duty to assist errors.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802.  In this case, the Board finds that there was not a pre-decisional duty to assist error as this new evidence was not raised prior to the AOJ decision on appeal.  In any event, the evidence of record continues to show no current diagnosis for CFS.  Thus, the competent evidence of record continues to weigh heavily against the claim.  

Accordingly, the Board finds that the most persuasive evidence of record is against the claim of service connection for CFS.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc).  

3. Kidney Disease

The Veteran contends that he has a kidney disease that was caused by his service.  

The question for the Board is whether the Veteran has a current disability that began during service or is at least as likely as not related to an in-service injury, event, or disease.

The Board concludes that, while the Veteran has a diagnosis of kidney disease, the evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that it began during active service, or is otherwise related to an in-service injury, event, or disease.  

As an initial matter, the Board notes that the Veteran reported that he had private treatment by Dr. H.S. for his kidney disease in June 2015.  See October 2021 Fully Developed Claim.  A May 2022 development letter was sent to the Veteran requesting that he complete an authorization release form to allow VA to obtain his private treatment records.  See May 2022 Subsequent Development Letter.  However, the Veteran did not respond to the request, or to provide the necessary release forms.  As such, the Board finds that there was no predecisional duty to assist error by the AOJ in not obtaining the identified private treatment records from Dr. H.S.  

The Veteran has a current kidney disease.  For instance, during a September 2020 VA treatment, he was assessed as having mild kidney disease.  An April 2022 VA treatment note indicated that one of the Veteran's active problems included kidney disease.  As such, the question becomes whether the current kidney disease was related to service.  

Service treatment records show no complaints, diagnosis, or treatment related to a kidney disease disability.  Post-service evidence show that the Veteran did not seek treatment for his kidney disease until many years after service.  For instance, he reported he sought private treatment in 2015 for his kidney disease, and his VA treatment records show kidney disease in 2020.  

During the relevant appeal period, the Veteran has not provided lay evidence explaining how he believes his kidney disease was related to his service.  

The Veteran was not afforded a VA examination in connection with his claim for service connection for kidney disease prior to the rating decision on appeal.  Generally, a VA medical examination or opinion is necessary when there is (1) competent evidence of a current disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability, (2) evidence establishing that an event, injury, or disease occurred in service, or establishing certain diseases manifesting during an applicable presumptive period for which the veteran qualifies, and (3) an indication that the disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability may be associated with the Veteran's service or with another service-connected disability, but (4) there is insufficient competent medical evidence on file for VA to make a decision on the claim.  38?U.S.C. §?5103A(d)(2); 38?C.F.R. §?3.159(c)(4)(i); see also McLendon v. Nicholson, 20?Vet. App.?79, 83 (2006).  The threshold for determining whether the evidence "indicates" that there "may" be a nexus between a current disability and an in-service event, injury, or disease is a low one.  Id.  

In this case, a VA medical examination was not necessary.  While the Veteran believes the claimed kidney disease was related to service, the evidence during the appeal period did not indicate any in-service event, injury, or disease related to the kidney disease to trigger the requirement for a VA examination.  Thus, there was no predecisional duty to assist error in not scheduling an examination for the kidney disease claim.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802.  

Upon review, the Board finds that the most persuasive evidence of record is against the claim of service connection for kidney disease.  While the Veteran believes the claimed condition was related to service, the Board reiterates that the evidence during the appeal period weighs against finding any indication of an in-service injury, event, or disease for the kidney disease.  The lay statements of record do not show any specific instances reported by the Veteran regarding the incurrence of any kidney disease during service.  The service treatment records were silent for any complaints, treatment, or diagnoses for any kidney disease.  There was no report of kidney disease until many years after the Veteran's service.  Consequently, the Board gives more probative weight to the competent medical evidence of record against the claim.  

Accordingly, the most persuasive evidence of record is against finding that service connection for kidney disease is warranted, and the claim is denied.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (2021) (en banc).  

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Service Connection for Left Shoulder Osteoarthritis is Remanded.

The issue of entitlement to service connection for left shoulder disability is remanded to correct a duty to assist error that occurred prior to the January 2023 rating decision on appeal.  

The Veteran contends that his left shoulder disability was caused by his service.  See October 2022 Supplemental Claim.  Alternatively, he also asserted that his left shoulder disability was secondary to his service-connected asthma with bronchitis.  See May 2021 Fully Developed Claim.  

Prior to the rating decision on appeal, the AOJ obtained a March 2022 VA examination where the Veteran was diagnosed with left shoulder osteoarthritis.  In a March 2022 medical opinion, the examiner opined that the left shoulder was not caused by the service-connected asthma.  However, the examiner failed to provide an opinion addressing whether the left shoulder disability was aggravated by the service-connected asthma with bronchitis.  See Atencio v. O'Rourke, 30 Vet. App. 74 (2018).  To correct this predecisional duty to assist error, a remand is warranted to obtain an addendum medical opinion.  

Furthermore, the AOJ failed to obtain an opinion on whether the left shoulder disability was directly related to the Veteran's service.  See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007).  To correct this pre-decisional duty to assist error, a remand is warranted to obtain an addendum medical opinion addressing direct service connection.  

The Board emphasizes that it is not determining whether or not the Veteran's statements that his left shoulder symptoms are due to service are credible at this time, as the additional development set forth in the directives below could impact that determination.  

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. The claims file should be sent to an appropriate examiner to review and to offer an opinion as to the following:

(a.) Whether the current left shoulder disability onset during service or is otherwise related to an in-service injury, event, or disease.

(b.) Whether the current left shoulder disability was caused by the service-connected asthma with bronchitis.

(c.) Whether the current left shoulder disability was aggravated by the service-connected asthma with bronchitis.  

The need for an examination is left to the discretion of the examiner.  A rationale for all opinions offered is requested as adjudicators are precluded from making any medical findings.  

 

 

 

D. Martz Ames

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Mathew, M.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.