Citation Nr: A25032515
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240307-421597
DATE: April 8, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an evaluation in excess of 50 percent for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) with traumatic brain injury (TBI) from July 6, 2018 to May 7, 2020 is denied.

Entitlement to an evaluation in excess of 70 percent for PTSD with TBI from May 8, 2020 is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. From July 6, 2018 to May 7, 2020, the Veteran's PTSD with TBI did not result in occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas.

2. From May 8, 2020, the Veteran's PTSD with TBI did not result in total occupational and social impairment.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for entitlement to an evaluation in excess of 50 percent for PTSD with TBI from July 6, 2018 to May 7, 2020 have not been met. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.7, 4.10, 4.130, Diagnostic Code (DC) 9411.

2. The criteria for entitlement to an evaluation in excess of 70 percent for PTSD with TBI from May 8, 2020 have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.7, 4.10, 4.130, DC 9411.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran had active duty service from December 2002 to December 2006.

A rating decision was issued in October 2018, continuing the 50 percent evaluation for PTSD. The Veteran submitted a timely Notice of Disagreement (NOD) in January 2019.

A May 2020 rating decision increased the evaluation of PTSD from 50 percent disabling to 70 percent effective May 8, 2020.

A Statement of the Case (SOC) was issued in May 2020. 

Thereafter, in July 2020, the Veteran opted into the modernized appeal system by submitting a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR) requesting HLR of the May 2020 SOC. In the resulting October 2020 HLR rating decision, the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) continued the 50 percent evaluation of PTSD prior to May 8, 2020 and the 70 percent evaluation of PTSD from May 8, 2020.

Thereafter, in May 2021, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: HLR, again requesting HLR of the May 2020 SOC.

In November 2021, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim for the issue of an evaluation of PTSD prior to May 8, 2020 and after May 8, 2020. A rating decision was issued in January 2022, continuing the 70 percent evaluation of PTSD with TBI.

Thereafter, in December 2022 and January 2023, the Veteran submitted VA Forms 20-0996, Decision Review Requests: HLRs, requesting HLR of the January 2022 rating decision. In the resulting March 2023 HLR rating decision, the AOJ continued the 70 percent evaluation of PTSD.

In the March 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) (NOD), the Veteran elected the Direct Review option. As the March 2023 rating decision was a HLR of the January 2022 decision, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the January 2022 rating decision. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. The Board cannot consider evidence submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the January 2022 decision. Id.

If evidence was associated with the claims file during a period of time when additional evidence was not allowed, the Board has not considered it in its decision on the claim. 38 C.F.R. § 20.300. If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was added to the claims file that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

Increased Ratings

A disability rating is determined by applying VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities (Rating Schedule), which is based on the average impairment of earning capacity. Individual disabilities are assigned separate DCs. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1. The basis of disability evaluations is the ability of the body as a whole, or of the psyche, or of a system or organ of the body to function under the ordinary conditions of daily life including employment. 38 C.F.R. § 4.10.

If there is a question as to which evaluation to apply to the Veteran's disability, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria for that rating. Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7. When reasonable doubt arises as to the degree of disability, such doubt will be resolved in the Veteran's favor. 38 C.F.R. § 4.3.

Pertinent regulations do not require that all cases show all findings specified by the Rating Schedule, but that findings sufficiently characteristic to identify the disease and the resulting disability and coordination of rating with impairment of function. 38 C.F.R. § 4.21. Therefore, the Board has considered the potential application of various other provisions of the regulations governing VA benefits, whether or not they were raised by the Veteran, as well as the entire history of his disability in reaching its decision. Schafrath v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 589, 595 (1991).

Increased Ratings for PTSD

The schedule for rating psychiatric disabilities provide that a 50 percent rating is warranted for occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to such symptoms as: flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short- and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships. Id.

A 70 percent rating is warranted for occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a worklike setting); inability to establish and maintain effective relationships. Id.

A 100 percent rating is warranted for total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name.

When evaluating a mental disorder, the rating agency shall consider the frequency, severity, and duration of psychiatric symptoms, the length of remissions, and the veteran's capacity for adjustment during periods of remission. The rating agency shall assign an evaluation based on all the evidence of record that bears on occupational and social impairment, rather than solely on the examiner's assessment of the level of disability at the moment of the examination. When evaluating the level of disability from a mental disorder, the rating agency will consider the extent of social impairment but shall not assign an evaluation solely on the basis of social impairment. 38 C.F.R. § 4.126.

The use of the term "such as" in 38 C.F.R. § 4.130 demonstrates that the symptoms after that phrase are not intended to constitute an exhaustive list, but rather are to serve as examples of the type and degree of the symptoms, or their effects, that would justify a particular rating. Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436 (2002).

1. Entitlement to an evaluation in excess of 50 percent for PTSD with TBI from July 6, 2018 to May 7, 2020

The Veteran's PTSD with TBI is rated as 50 percent disabling from July 6, 2018 to May 7, 2020 under DC 9411. The Veteran seeks a higher rating. The period on appeal begins on July 6, 2018, the date of the Veteran's claim for an increased rating.

Having reviewed the evidentiary record thoroughly, the Board finds the evidence persuasively weighs against the assignment of an evaluation in excess of 50 percent. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7. The Board finds that the severity, duration, and frequency of psychiatric symptoms during the appeal period resulted in occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity but do not rise to the level of occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas.

Evidence

In a July 2018 examination for PTSD, the examiner wrote that the Veteran's symptoms had a greater impact on his social and occupational functioning in that they created tension with his wife, he had minimal social contacts, and he was less productive and reliable at work, including avoiding certain duties and calling out sick. The examiner determined that the Veteran had occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity. The Veteran was married in November 2016 and reported that his wife was supportive. He reported that she would get aggravated by his irritability, emotional numbness, and social withdrawal. They had a son together. He spent much of his free time working out because he felt the need "to be prepared" for dangers. He had difficulty relating to non-Veterans and avoided them. He reported two to three friendships that he maintained, but they talked only sporadically. He continued to work as a police officer and reported that he had taken days off from work. He was more likely to call out on a day following a night of poor sleep and nightmares. When he was at work, he tried to take on tasks where he could be isolated because he did not like dealing with people, which lead to reduced productivity since much of police work involved interpersonal interactions. He did not socialize with his coworkers and reported that he was seen as "standoffish." He worked four days on and four days off for a total of about 16 days per month and called out on at least two of those 16 days. He reported angry verbal outbursts. His symptoms made it very difficult for him to do his work as he would like and get along with others, even those close to him. He reported that he frequently lost things like his wallet or keys or would leave the car door open due to poor attention and memory. Symptoms that he currently experienced included anxiety, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss, such as forgetting names, directions or recent events, disturbances of motivation and mood, and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships. At the time of the examination, he was alert, fully oriented, and appropriately groomed. His mood was described as anxious with constricted affect. His thought content was non-bizarre, and his thought processes were coherent. He had fair insight, impulse control, and judgment. He denied suicidal or homicidal ideation. He also denied psychotic or manic symptoms.

Analysis

As the analysis turns on the Veteran's level of occupational and social impairment, primarily whether there are "deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood," the Board will organize its analysis around these areas.

Interpersonal relationships

The rating criteria differentiate between the type and degree of the symptoms, or their effects, that would justify a 50 percent rating (difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships) versus a 70 percent rating (inability to establish and maintain effective relationships).

The evidence persuasively weighs against finding the severity of symptoms which would approximate an inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.

During the July 2018 examination, the examiner wrote that the Veteran's social and occupational functioning created tension with his wife, and he had minimal social contacts. The Veteran was married in November 2016 and reported that his wife was supportive. He also reported that she got aggravated by his irritability, emotional numbness, and social withdrawal. They had a son together. He stated that he had difficulty relating to non-Veterans and avoided them. He reported two to three friendships that he maintained and talked with sporadically. His symptoms made it very difficult for him get along with others, even those close to him.

Throughout the appeal period, the Veteran was married. Although he reported tension with his wife and that she would get aggravated by him, he reported that she was supportive. During the appeal period, he lived with his wife and their son. He also had two to three friendships that he maintained and talked with sporadically.

While the July 2018 examiner found that the Veteran had difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, he did not find that the Veteran exhibited an inability to do so, consistent with a higher 70 percent rating.

During the period on appeal, the Veteran's PTSD with TBI symptoms more nearly approximate difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective relationships but not an inability to do so or total social impairment. Rather, the evidence shows the Veteran does maintain some degree of relationship with family members, including his wife, son, and a few friends, even though he had minimal social contacts.

The Board understands that there is clearly difficulty establishing and maintaining relationships during this stage. However, the weight of the persuasive evidence is against finding an inability to do so. Therefore, the Board does not find a deficiency in the area of interpersonal relations.

Judgment

The rating criteria differentiate between the type and degree of the judgment symptoms, or their effects, that would justify a 50 percent rating (impaired judgment) versus a 70 percent rating (impaired impulse control, such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence).

In the July 2018 examination, the Veteran's insight, impulse control, and judgment were described as fair.

The Veteran reported that his wife would get aggravated by his irritability. He also reported angry verbal outbursts. Therefore, the Board finds impaired judgment consistent with a 50 percent rating.

However, there is no evidence that it rose to the level of impaired impulse control, such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence, as contemplated by a higher 70 percent rating. The rating is not simply based on having the symptom of irritability or angry outbursts; it turns on the frequency, severity, and duration of the symptoms. The irritability and angry verbal outbursts may be severe but are not as severe as committing violence. The Veteran has not reported committing violence.

While the Veteran reported angry verbal outbursts, the medical and lay evidence do not reflect the outbursts result in periods of violence or other manifestations on par with that level of severity. Instead, this symptom fits into the descriptors of impaired judgment or disturbances of mood, in keeping with a 50 percent rating. Thus, the weight of the persuasive evidence is against finding the severity, duration, or frequency of symptoms which would approximate a deficiency in the area of judgment.

Thinking

The rating criteria provide examples of the type and degree of the symptoms, or their effects, that would justify a 70 percent rating versus a 50 percent rating with respect to the area of thinking. A 50 percent rating is warranted for symptoms such as circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short- and long-term memory; and impaired abstract thought. The more severe level of impairment warranting a 70 percent rating is characterized by obsessional rituals that interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; and spatial disorientation.

During this period, the record showed the Veteran was fully oriented. His thought content was described as non-bizarre, and his thought processes were described as coherent. While the Veteran reported that he frequently lost things like his wallet or keys and would leave the car door open due to poor attention and memory, a 50 percent rating contemplates impairment of short- and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks). Thus, the Veteran is already being compensated for these symptoms in his current 50 percent rating. While he may have had poor attention and memory and difficulty losing things, the evidence does not show that these symptoms rose to a severity on par with, for example, spatial disorientation. The evidence did not show the more severe level of thinking impairment, such as speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; and spatial disorientation. Furthermore, the medical evidence of record does not show, and the Veteran does not assert, that he has obsessional rituals that interfere with routine activities.

Thus, the weight of the persuasive evidence is against finding that such symptoms approximated the severity, duration, or frequency of the symptoms specified as warranting a 70 percent rating. Accordingly, the weight of the persuasive evidence is against finding a deficiency in the area of thinking.

Work/School

With respect to the area of work, the rating criteria show that a 50 percent rating is characterized by symptoms that result in reduced reliability and productivity, to include difficulty establishing and maintaining effective work relationships. The more severe level of impairment warranting a 70 percent rating is characterized by difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances including work or a worklike setting or an inability to establish and maintain effective work relationships.

The Board resolves doubt in the Veteran's favor and finds that the evidence approximates a deficiency in the area of work. In the July 2018 examination, the examiner wrote that the Veteran's symptoms had a greater impact on his social and occupational functioning in that he was less productive and reliable at work, including avoiding certain duties and calling out sick. He worked as a police officer and reported that he had been taking days off from work. He was more likely to call out on a day following a night of poor sleep and combat-related nightmares. When he was at work, he tried to take on tasks where he could be isolated because he did not like dealing with people, which led to reduced productivity since much of police work involved interpersonal interactions. He did not socialize with his coworkers and reported that he was seen as "standoffish." He worked four days on and four days off for a total of about 16 days per month and called out on at least two of those 16 days. His symptoms made it very difficult for him to do his work as he would like. Thus, in this case, the Board finds that the evidence approximates a deficiency in the area of work.

Mood

With respect to the area of mood, the rating criteria provide examples of the type and degree of the symptoms, or their effects, that would justify a 70 percent rating versus a 50 percent rating with respect to the area of mood. A 50 percent rating is warranted for symptoms such as flattened affect, panic attacks more than once per week, and disturbances of motivation and mood. The more severe level of impairment warranting a 70 percent rating is characterized by near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately, and effectively, suicidal ideation, neglect of appearance and hygiene, and difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances. 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, DC 9411.

During the appeal period, the Veteran exhibited symptoms including anxiety, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss, such as forgetting names, directions or recent events, disturbances of motivation and mood, and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships. He denied both suicidal and homicidal ideation.

The frequency and duration of mood symptoms consistent with the criteria of a higher 70 percent disability rating are: near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately, and effectively. Here, the Board finds that the Veteran's depression and anxiety do not reach this level of impairment. In this case, in the July 2018 examination, the examiner provided that one of the Veteran's current symptoms included anxiety. There are no reports of panic attacks during the period on appeal.

The Board finds that while the Veteran experienced disturbances of motivation and mood, these events are not near-constant to the point that they affect his ability to function independently, appropriately, and effectively. The Veteran's current 50 percent disability rating considers disturbances of motivation and mood, such as the depression and anxiety that he experiences. His symptoms, however, do not rise to the level of a deficiency in the area of mood.

Summary

As discussed above, during the period on appeal, the Veteran did not experience suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a worklike setting); or an inability to establish and maintain effective relationships consistent with a higher 70 percent rating as evidenced by the medical evidence of record.

In this case, the Veteran was only deficient in one area (work), but his PTSD with TBI did not cause deficiencies in interpersonal relationships, thinking, judgment, or mood. Therefore, as the Veteran does not exhibit deficiencies in most areas during the period on appeal, he does not meet the criteria for a higher 70 percent rating.

The Board acknowledges that in a December 2021 statement, the Veteran wrote that his PTSD seemed to have taken a turn for the worse around 2017 and that his symptoms did not suddenly worsen in 2020. He also wrote that the level of his symptoms were the same in 2017 as they were in 2020 and that his symptoms were not better before 2020. However, as provided above, the evidence of record prior to May 8, 2020 does not show that a higher 70 percent rating is warranted. On the contrary, during this period, the Veteran did not experience suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a worklike setting); or an inability to establish and maintain effective relationships consistent with a higher 70 percent rating as evidenced by both the medical and lay evidence of record. Thus, while the Board acknowledges the Veteran's lay evidence, a higher 70 percent prior to May 8, 2020 is not warranted for the reasons outlined above. 

Based on the foregoing, the Board finds that the competent and credible evidence is neither evenly nor approximately balanced as to whether a 70 percent rating is warranted. Rather, the evidence persuasively weighs against finding his PTSD with TBI symptoms result in social and occupational impairment producing deficiencies in "most areas." The assigned 50 percent disability evaluation contemplates the severity of the Veteran's disability. The benefit of the doubt doctrine does not apply. 38?U.S.C. §?5107(b), Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (holding the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine is not for application when the evidence is persuasively for or against the claim). The claim is denied.

2. Entitlement to an evaluation in excess of 70 percent for PTSD with TBI from May 8, 2020

The Veteran's PTSD with TBI is currently rated as 70 percent disabling under Diagnostic Code 9411 from May 8, 2020. The Veteran seeks a higher rating. 

Having reviewed the evidentiary record thoroughly, the Board finds the evidence persuasively weighs against the assignment of an evaluation in excess of 70 percent from May 8, 2020 under DC 9411.

Evidence

In a May 2020 examination for PTSD, the Veteran reported being socially isolated, irritability with no physical outbursts, difficulty with concentration and sleep, depressed mood, hypervigilance, avoiding crowded areas, and sitting with his back to the wall. The examiner determined that the Veteran had occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking and/or mood. The Veteran had been married since 2016 and had a son, with a second child on the way. He stated that outside of his wife, he did not have any relationships. He reported that his wife was concerned about him and called him cold and heartless. He also reported that he socially withdrew and was easily irritated. He stayed in touch with his family due to his son and upon his wife's insistence; however, he stated that there was a disconnect with others and if it were not for his child and wife, he would probably lose touch with them. At the time of the examination, he was a police officer and stated that he exceled at work. He believed his new position had been very positive for him and had allowed him to stay employed without any issues. Symptoms that he currently experienced included depressed mood, anxiety; panic attacks more than once a week; chronic sleep impairment; mild memory loss, such as forgetting names, directions, or recent events; disturbances of motivation and mood; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships; suicidal ideation; and impaired impulse control, such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence. At the time of the examination, his mood was anxious and his affect with consistent with his mood. He denied homicidal and suicidal ideation, plan, and intent. He also denied hallucinations and delusions. He reported panic attacks described as feeling frozen and idle, being overwhelmed by anxiety, losing a sense of where he was, and feeling nauseous. This occurred one to three times a week. He also reported that crowds bothered him. He stated that, at times, he experienced thoughts that if he did not wake up it would be fine but reported that his family would be devastated, and he would never do anything.

In medical treatment records dated February 2021 and April 2021, the Veteran denied suicidal and homicidal thoughts. He was alert and fully oriented.

In a September 2021 statement, the Veteran wrote:

Since leaving the Marines I attempted to pursue a college degree but my memory and concentration were giving me problems...I constantly forget what it is I am doing, going to get, or where I'm going...I noticed I began to develop a short temper, unusual thoughts, and an impulsive/addictive personality resulting in bad life choices. I have not been able to sleep without some type of substance...I have struggled to perform in college and with day-to-day tasks at work. My struggles and behavior ostracized me both with friends and coworkers...My behavior and temper towards my family affects them and me negatively. My family members/friends would say I'm disturbed, sick, cold, and have no heart. I began to develop anxiety over dealing with these issues.

In a November 2021 examination for PTSD, the examiner determined that the Veteran had occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity. The Veteran lived with his wife and their three sons. He described somewhat of a conflictual relationship with his wife who had difficulty understanding and coping with his symptoms and related behaviors. He reported having contact with family because of his children, but also reported difficulty with feelings of detachment and limited motivation for socialization and relationships. He continued to work as a police officer. He reported having difficulty related to "abuse of sick time" due to his symptoms leading him to call out of work. He reported panic attacks that were previously twice per week were now at least four times per week. In addition to anxiety, he also had anticipatory anxiety related to the fear of the next panic attack that sometimes triggered an attack. His mind wandered into anxious thought patterns, anniversaries, the news, and reminders, which also triggered his panic attacks. His wife described him as "cold and heartless." He found himself not caring about his appearance or "anything." Symptoms that he currently experienced included depressed mood; anxiety; panic attacks more than once a week; chronic sleep impairment; mild memory loss, such as forgetting names, directions, or recent events; flattened affect; disturbances of motivation and mood; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work like setting; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; and an intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living, including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene. At the time of the examination, the Veteran was fully oriented. His affect was anxious with restless behavior. His speech was linear and logical. His memory and concentration were within normal limits. He denied suicidal ideation.

In a December 2021 statement, the Veteran wrote:

My panic attacks increased from occasionally to multiple times a week, requiring medication to cope. My work and social life were affected to such a degree that I no longer feel comfortable around other people and they do not want to be around me. I struggle at work with abusing sick time and unsatisfactory performance. My night terrors and vision episodes have drastically affected me at night, and during the day, which also spills over into my job. Those issues have created problems at home with my family for several years now. As a result, I have had, and continue to have, serious limitations in my social functioning at home and at work. I frequently deal with it through isolating myself and, even then, I still struggle to function normally day to day.

In medical treatment records ranging from May 2022 to August 2022, the Veteran was alert and fully oriented. His mood was described as normal.

In the March 2024 VA Form 10182, the Veteran's attorney wrote that the Veteran was seeking an increase of his PTSD back to 2017. The Board can only consider this statement as argument, not as evidence, as the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Analysis

After review of the foregoing evidence, the Veteran has not demonstrated symptoms of the frequency, severity, or duration consistent with a 100 percent rating. Specifically, there is no evidence which documents symptoms of or similar to: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; disorientation to time or place; or memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name. On the contrary, in the November 2021 examination and medical treatment records ranging from February 2021 to August 2022, the Veteran was fully oriented and behaved appropriately. He has always denied homicidal ideation.

The Board acknowledges that in the May 2020 examination, the Veteran reported that, at times, he experienced thoughts that if he did not wake up it would be fine but reported that his family would be devastated, and he would never do anything. However, while the Veteran reported having thought that if he did not wake up it would be fine, he also reported that he would never do anything, he never made any plans, and he denied any current suicidal ideation, intent, or plan. Furthermore, he denied suicidal and thoughts in medical treatment records dated February 2021 and April 2021. He also denied suicidal ideation in both the May 2020 and November 2021 examinations. Thus, the Board concludes that the frequency of the suicidal ideation does not rise to the level of presenting a persistent danger of self-harm as articulated in the 100 percent rating criteria. The 70 percent rating contemplates the symptom of suicidal ideation when it does not rise to the frequency, duration, or severity of a persistent danger of self-harm. Thus, the Veteran's social and occupational impairment has not manifested in a persistent danger of self-harm consistent with a 100 percent rating.

The Board acknowledges that the Veteran reported irritability with no physical outbursts, that he was easily irritated, had a short temper, and had an impulsive personality. The symptom of impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence) is contemplated by his current 70 percent rating. A higher 100 percent rating contemplates persistent danger of hurting others. However, the Board finds that this does not rise to the level of presenting a persistent danger of hurting others as articulated in the 100 percent rating criteria. In this case, the Veteran has not been violent or actually hurt someone. In medical treatment records and one of the examinations during the period on appeal, the Veteran consistently denied homicidal ideation. See PTSD Examination dated May 2020 and Medical Treatment Records dated February 2021 and April 2021. Thus, the Veteran's social and occupational impairment has not manifested in a persistent danger of hurting others consistent with a 100 percent rating.

The Board acknowledges that the Veteran has demonstrated the symptom of intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene), as contemplated by a higher 100 percent rating. Here, the November 2021 examiner found that the Veteran experienced an intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living. However, aside from an intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene), he has not demonstrated any of the other symptoms of the frequency, severity, or duration consistent with a 100 percent rating. Specifically, there is no evidence which documents symptoms of or similar to: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; disorientation to time or place; or memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name as provided above. The evidence does not show that an intermittent inability to maintain minimal personal hygiene caused total social and occupational impairment.

The current 70 percent rating is sufficient to contemplate the fact that he was only able to maintain a few relationships during this period. The criteria for the currently assigned 70 percent rating contemplate social impairment of being unable to establish and maintain relationships. In this case, the Veteran was not totally socially impaired as he did maintain a relationship with his wife and three children and stayed in touch with his family.

In order to warrant a 100 percent rating, a Veteran must be totally occupationally and socially impaired. The Board does not find the total social impairment necessary for a 100 percent rating was present from May 8, 2020. While the Veteran's psychiatric disorder interfered in his social relationships, a significant deficit in social functioning is reflected in the assignment of a 70 percent evaluation. During this period the Veteran maintained a relationship with his wife, three children, and family. This evidence persuasively weighs against finding total social impairment. The Board acknowledges that in the May 2020 examination, the Veteran reported that he socially withdrew, was socially isolated, and that, outside of his wife, he did not have any relationships. He also reported that his wife was concerned about him, and called him cold and heartless. He stated that although he was in touch with his family, it was only due to his son and upon his wife's insistence, and that if it were not for them, he would probably lose touch with his family. He also reported a disconnect with others. The Board also acknowledges that in September 2021, the Veteran reported that his struggles and behavior ostracized him from his friends, that his behavior and temper towards his family affected them negatively, and that his family and friends would say that he was disturbed, sick, cold, and had no heart. The Board also acknowledges that in the November 2021 examination, the Veteran described somewhat of a conflictual relationship with his wife who had difficulty understanding and coping with his symptoms and related behaviors. He also reported difficulty with feelings of detachment and limited motivation for socialization and relationships. He stated that his wife described him as "cold and heartless." Lastly, the Board also acknowledges that in December 2021, the Veteran reported that his social life was affected to such a degree that he no longer felt comfortable around people and they did not want to be around him. He also reported that his symptoms had created problems at home with his family for several years. As a result, he had, and continues to have, serious limitations in his social functioning at home. He stated that he frequently dealt with it through isolation.

While his PTSD with TBI certainly interferes in his relationships, total social impairment describes a profound deficit in social functioning that goes beyond even an inability to establish and maintain effective relationships. The current 70 percent rating contemplates any inability to establish and maintain relationships that the Veteran may have. The Board finds no indication that the Veteran's PTSD with TBI rendered him totally socially impaired, as he does still maintain some effective relationships. As there is no indication that the Veteran's PTSD with TBI rendered him totally socially impaired, the Board does not find that a 100 percent rating is warranted.

(Continued on the next page)

?

The May 2020 examiner opined that the Veteran had occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking and/or mood, the level contemplated by his current 70 percent rating. Additionally, the November 2021 examiner opined that the Veteran had occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity, the level contemplated by a lower 50 percent rating. After a thorough review of the evidence, the Board finds the assessment of a 70 percent rating is supported by the record. The evidence persuasively weighs against a rating higher than 70 percent under DC 9411. The claim is denied.

 

 

L. Chu

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	K.M.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.