Citation Nr: A25032519
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 241227-505047
DATE: April 8, 2025

ORDER

Severance of Dependency and Indemnity Compensation (DIC) benefits based on service connection for the cause of the Veteran's death was improper; restoration of DIC benefits based on service connection for the cause of the Veteran's death is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

There is no clear and unmistakable evidence that the Veteran's cause of death was not related to service.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The severance of DIC benefits based on service connection for the cause of the Veteran's death was improper; the criteria for restoration for DIC benefits based on service connection for the cause of the Veteran's death are met. 38 U.S.C. § 5112; 38 C.F.R. § 3.105.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from April 1964 to April 1966. The Veteran passed away in November 2020. The appellant is the Veteran's surviving spouse. 

The rating decision on appeal was issued in August 2024 and constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.

In the December 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) (NOD), the appellant elected the Evidence Submission option; therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the appellant or her representative with the VA Form 10182 or within 90 days of receipt of the VA Form 10182. 38 C.F.R. § 20.303. 

As a preliminary matter, in Williams v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 305 (2024), the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) held that the Board generally may not decide an appeal before the deadline for requesting a docket switch under the AMA has elapsed. 38 C.F.R. § 20.202(c)(2) allows claimants to switch AMA dockets by completing and submitting a new notice of disagreement within one year from the date the AOJ mails notice of the decision on appeal, or 60 days from when the Board receives an NOD, whichever is later, unless a claimant has already submitted evidence or testimony. Here, as the appellant has already submitted evidence, the Board will proceed with adjudicating the appeal.

This appeal has been advanced on docket pursuant to 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.900(c). 38 U.S.C. §§ 7107(a)(2).

The appellant contends that the August 2024 rating decision that severed DIC benefits based on service connection for the cause of the Veteran's death was improper. 

Service connection for the cause of a veteran's death may be granted if a disability incurred in or aggravated by service was either the principal or contributory cause of the veteran's death. 38 U.S.C. § 1310; 38 C.F.R. § 3.312(a). For a service-connected disability to be the principal cause of death it must singly or with some other condition be etiologically related. 38 C.F.R. § 3.312(b). For a service-connected disability to constitute a contributory cause, it is not sufficient to show that it casually shared in producing death, but rather it must be shown that there was a causal connection. 38 U.S.C. § 1310; 38 C.F.R. § 3.312.

When severance of service connection is considered warranted, a rating proposing severance will be prepared setting forth all material facts and reasons. The claimant will be notified at his or her latest address of record of the contemplated action and furnished detailed reasons therefor and will be given 60 days for the presentation of additional evidence to show that service connection should be maintained. Unless otherwise provided in paragraph (i) of this section, if additional evidence is not received within that period, final rating action will be taken, and the award will be reduced or discontinued, if in order, effective the last day of the month in which a 60-day period from the date of notice to the beneficiary of the final rating action expires. 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(d).

To establish that a grant of service connection was the product of CUE, VA must show that (1) either the correct facts as they were known at the time were not before the adjudicator, the adjudicator made an erroneous factual finding, or the statutory or regulatory provisions were incorrectly applied; (2) the alleged error was undebatable, not merely a disagreement as to how the facts were weighed or evaluated; and (3) the error manifestly changed the outcome of the prior decision. See Allen v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 54, 58-59 (2007); Stallworth v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 482, 487-88 (2006); cf. Bustos v. West, 179 F.3d 1378, 1380-81 (Fed. Cir. 1999); Damrel v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 242, 245 (1994); Russell v. Principi, 3 Vet. App. 310, 313-14, 319 (1992) (en banc). A CUE is one about which reasonable minds could not differ. See, e.g., 38 C.F.R. § 20.1403(a).

In most respects, the CUE standard for severing service connection under § 3.105(d) is equivalent to the CUE standard for reversing or revising a prior final decision under 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(a). See Baughman v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 563, 566 (1991). Section 3.105(d) places at least as high a burden of proof on the VA when it seeks to sever service connection as § 3.105(a) places upon an appellant seeking to have an unfavorable previous determination overturned. See id.

However, the determination is not limited to the law and the record that existed at the time of the original decision. VA may consider medical evidence and diagnoses that postdate the original award of service connection to demonstrate that the diagnosis on which service connection was predicated is clearly erroneous. Stallworth, 20 Vet. App. at 488. The Secretary's burden is not to prove clear and unmistakable error in the original decision in the same manner a claimant would show CUE under sections 5109A or 7111. Id.

A decision that is reversed or amended based on CUE is revised to conform to the true state of the facts or the law that existed at the time of the original adjudication. Allen, 21 Vet. App. at 62 (internal quotations omitted).

As an initial matter, the Board must determine whether the AOJ followed the due process requirements of 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(d) for severing DIC benefits.

By way of history, in a July 2023 rating decision, the AOJ granted service connection for the cause of the Veteran's death. In an October 2023 rating decision, the AOJ proposed to terminate entitlement to DIC based on a clear and unmistakable error as there was no evidence showing that the Veteran's lung cancer is related to military service. The appellant was notified in October 2023 at her latest address of record of this contemplated action and furnished detailed reasons therefor and was given 60 days for the presentation of additional evidence to show that service connection should be maintained. The notification letter also informed the appellant that she had the opportunity for a predetermination hearing if such a request for a hearing was received by VA within 30 days from the date of the notice. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(i). The appellant did not request a predetermination hearing. 

Thereafter, in an August 2024 rating decision, the AOJ severed DIC benefits, effective December 1, 2024. In the August 2024 rating decision, the AOJ concluded that severance for this condition was warranted due to finding that the grant of service connection was due to clear and unmistakable error as stated in the proposed rating decision. Notification of this rating decision, plus her appeal rights, was sent to the appellant in a December 2024 letter. The December 2024 severance date was beyond the last day of the month in which a 60-day period from the date of the August 2024 notice expired. As such, the Board finds that all due process requirements were met in severing service connection for DIC benefits. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(d).

Because a predetermination hearing was not requested, the final action will be based solely upon the evidence of record. 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(i)(2).

Having met the due process requirements, the next determination the Board must make is whether the grant of DIC benefits was clearly and unmistakably erroneous. 

At the time of his death, the Veteran was not service connected for any disabilities. The Veteran's death certificate from November 2020 lists the immediate cause of death as lung cancer and no other conditions were listed as a significant condition contributing to death. The Veteran's death certificate also documented that it was unknown as to whether tobacco contributed to death. 

Turning to the evidence of record, the AOJ obtained a medical opinion in June 2023. The examiner opined that the claimed condition was less likely than not (likelihood is less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activity(ies) (TERA), after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all TERAs of the Veteran. As rationale, the examiner stated that the Veteran's cause of death was lung cancer. He explained that lung cancer is a disease caused by uncontrolled cell division in your lungs. The examiner reasoned that while there are many factors that can increase your risk of lung cancer, smoking any kind of tobacco products, including cigarettes, cigars, or pipes is the biggest single risk factor and that experts estimate that 80 percent of lung cancer deaths are smoking-related. He stated that other risk factors include being exposed to secondhand tobacco smoke, being exposed to harmful substances, like air pollution, radon, asbestos, uranium, diesel exhaust, silica, coal products, and others, having previous radiation treatments to your chest, and having a family history of lung cancer. The examiner noted that the Veteran was exposed to asbestos during service while can contribute to the development of lung cancer, however, his medical records noted that he was a smoker and smoked about three quarter a pack per day for 60 years and stopped about a year prior to his death. The examiner stated that the Veteran's previous heavy smoking history, which is a risk factor outside the military outweighs his TERA. 

Nonetheless, the examiner was also asked to opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's lung cancer was substantially and/or materially caused by, related to, or a result of in-service asbestos exposure. The examiner explained that the Veteran's lung cancer was incurred by his long history of smoking, however both smoking and asbestos exposure are significant risk factors for developing lung cancer, and the combined effect of smoking and asbestos exposure is particularly harmful and greatly increases the risk of lung cancer. She stated that when someone is both a smoker and has been exposed to asbestos, their risk of developing lung cancer is significantly higher than the risk associated with either factor alone. The examiner concluded that the combined effect of smoking and asbestos exposure is synergistic, meaning that the risks are multiplied. She cited to a Cleveland Clinic article in her rationale. 

In granting the initial DIC claim in July 2023, the AOJ had relied on the June 2023 examination findings to grant service connection for DIC benefits. 

In August 2023, the AOJ obtained another medical opinion regarding the Veteran's cause of death. The examiner opined that the claimed condition was less likely than not (likelihood is less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) caused by the TERA, after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all TERAs of the Veteran. The examiner stated that the Veteran served in a non-deployment related toxic exposure and thus participated in a TERA. The examiner stated that the Veteran acquired adenocarcinoma of the lungs most likely due to a significant history of tobacco use and not due to toxic exposure. The examiner concluded that any currently diagnosed condition related to the Veteran's claimed cause of death, due to lung cancer is less likely than not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) caused by the indicated TERA, after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic combined effect of all TERA of the Veteran. 

Additionally, in February 2025, when evidence was allowed to be submitted under the requisite timeframe, the appellant submitted articles on the synergistic effects of lung cancer and smoking and that the combined exposure increases the risk of lung cancer exponentially. 

Here, the Board finds that severance of DIC benefits was improper because there is probative evidence indicating the Veteran's lung cancer is at least at likely as not due to the combined effects of both smoking and in-service asbestos exposure. The Board acknowledges that the August 2023 VA examiner provided a negative opinion, however, the examiner's rationale was mainly conclusory and did not provide adequate rationale. As such, the Board finds that the August 2023 medical opinion is inadequate and afforded little probative value. Conversely, the examiner who provided the June 2023 medical opinion, explained their reasoning regarding the risk factors of both smoking and asbestos exposure and how the risks are multiplied due to the synergistic effect. 

Notably, this is not a claim of service connection to be evaluated as to whether the claim should be granted based upon a finding of an approximate balance of positive evidence; nor denied because the evidence persuasively weighs against the claim. In this matter, the standard to be employed is whether there is "clear and unmistakable evidence" of an error. Here, there is evidence that the Veteran's lung cancer is at least in part, related to his in-service asbestos exposure and his lung cancer contributed substantially and materially in producing or accelerating his death. Reasonable minds could disagree as to the ultimate determination. It cannot be said that the evidence clearly and unmistakably demonstrates that the Veteran's lung cancer was not related to his military service. Therefore, the burden of proof required for severance of service connection under 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(d) is not met.

The Board cannot conclude that the grant of DIC benefits based on service connection for the cause of the Veteran's death was the kind of error that, when called to the attention of reviewers, compels the conclusion to which reasonable minds could not differ and that the results would be manifestly different but for the error. See Fugo v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 40, 43 (1993). In the context of a severance case, a disagreement as to how to weigh the facts is legally insufficient to establish that the award of service connection was clearly erroneous. The Board finds that the grant of DIC benefits based on service connection for the cause of the Veteran's death was not clearly erroneous.

Accordingly, the severance of DIC benefits based on service connection for the cause of the Veteran's death was improper and restoration of DIC benefits is warranted. 

 

MARJORIE A. AUER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	E. Kim, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.