Citation Nr: A25032410
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 240819-466079
DATE: April 8, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for low sex drive/female sexual arousal disorder is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from January 2010 to January 2016.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a February 2024 rating decision of a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO). 

In the August 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the February 2024 rating agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim[s], considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of service connection for low sex drive/female sexual arousal disorder, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of this claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

The Board finds that more development is necessary prior to final adjudication of the claim on appeal. 

The Board notes that VA is obligated to provide an examination when the record contains competent evidence that the claimant has a current disability or signs and symptoms of a current disability, the record indicates that the disability or signs and symptoms of disability may be associated with active service; and the record does not contain sufficient information to make a decision on the claim.  38 U.S.C. § 5103A (d) (2012).  

The threshold for finding a link between current disability and disease or injury in service is low.  McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006). 

The Board notes that the Veteran is currently service connected for herpes simplex type II and contends that her current low sex drive disorder disability is a result of service to include as being secondary to her service-connected herpes simplex disability.

A VA examiner in February 2024 opined that it was less likely than not that the Veteran's female sexual arousal disorder disability was proximately due to or the result of the Veteran's service-connected herpes simplex disability. The examiner noted that there was no nexus between female sexual arousal disorder and herpes simplex.

The Board notes that while the February 2024 VA examiner found that the Veteran's female sexual arousal disorder disability was not proximately due to or the result of the Veteran's service-connected herpes simplex disability, he did not specifically address whether the Veteran's service-connected herpes simples aggravated the Veteran's claimed low sex drive disorder.

As such the Board finds that the evidence currently of record is insufficient to resolve the claim for a low sex drive disorder disability and that further medical clarification in connection with this claim is warranted to determine whether the Veteran's current low sex drive disorder disability was a result of the Veteran's service or was caused or aggravated by her service-connected herpes simplex. Green v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 121, 124 (1991); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c) (4).

As a result, the Board finds that a VA medical opinion is required to address whether the Veteran has a low sex drive disorder disability, that is related to her active-duty service to include as to whether it was caused or aggravated by her service-connected herpes simplex disability.

Additionally, the Board notes that the PACT Act provides that the VA is required to provide a disability examination and/or obtain a medical opinion when a veteran submits a claim for compensation, has evidence of disability and participation in a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA) during service, and the evidence is not sufficient to establish service connection for that disability. See 38 U.S.C. § 1168(a). 

In January 2024 and February 2024 memorandums, VA determined that the Veteran participated in a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA) based on his potential asbestos exposure aboard the U.S.S. Winston Churchill. 

Although the rating decision on appeal was issued prior to the enactment of the PACT Act and, thus, failure to obtain a TERA-specific examination or medical opinion is not a pre-decisional duty to assist error, remanding to fulfill a regulatory or statutory duty pursuant to 38 U.S.C. § 1168 and 38 C.F.R. § 20.802 is a valid reason to remand under the AMA. As such, on remand, the AOJ must conduct any necessary development related to the PACT Act, to include scheduling the Veteran for a TERA examination.

The Board noted that AMA provides that remands are warranted based on VA's duty to assist prior to the AOJ decision.  Pub. L. No. 115-55, § 2(d)(2). The AMA structure allows remand only where VA has committed error in the duty-to-assist (DTA) prior to the decision on appeal. After a thorough review of the record, the Board finds the arguments of the Veteran to be compelling. In requesting additional development on remand in this case, the Board notes that the basis for this remand arises from deficiencies in the record existing prior to the appealed AMA decision. Notably, prior to the February 2024 rating decision, the Veteran was not provided with an adequate VA examination with etiological opinions regarding her claimed low sex drive disorder disability.

Therefore, the Board finds that a remand is necessary in order to provide the Veteran with a VA examination and opinions with respect to this claimed condition as there exists pre-decisional duties to assist errors and the claim must be remanded for an examination. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for an appropriate VA examination(s), to determine the nature and etiology of her claimed low sex drive disorder disability.  

Based on a review of the record and examination of the Veteran, the examiner should provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran has a current low sex drive disorder disability that is related to any incident of the Veteran's service.  

The examiner should also provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran has a current low sex drive disorder disability that is caused or aggravated by a service-connected disability.

The VA examiner must also provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that such low sex drive disorder disability arose during service or is otherwise related to any incident of service including the Veteran's presumed toxic exposure in service.

In forming the opinion, the examiner must consider: (a) total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments; and (b) synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities.

All opinions expressed by the examiner must be accompanied by a complete rationale.

Adequate reasons and bases for any opinion rendered must be provided.  All studies deemed appropriate in the medical opinion of the examiner(s) should be performed, and all the findings should be set forth in detail.  The claims file should be made available to the examiner(s), who should review the entire claims folder in conjunction with this examination(s).

 

 

R. Bisignani

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	James A. DeFrank

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.