Citation Nr: A25032504
Decision Date: 04/08/25	Archive Date: 04/08/25

DOCKET NO. 210526-162289
DATE: April 8, 2025

ORDER

The Veteran's character of discharge from service does not constitute a bar to Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) benefits, to include health care under Chapter 17, Title 38, United States Code; the appeal is granted.

Entitlement to restoration of service connection for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is granted.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran was discharged from active-duty service in August 2005 in lieu of facing Special Court Martial following a period of unauthorized absence without leave (AWOL) for 539 days.

2. The Veteran's period of prolonged AWOL constitutes a statutory bar to VA benefits under 38 C.F.R. § 3.12(c)(6).

3. In August 2012, the Navy Discharge Review Board (NDRB), established under 38 U.S.C. § 1153, upgraded the Veteran's characterization of service to General (under honorable conditions)

4. The character of discharge upgraded by a discharge review board established under 38 U.S.C. § 1153 removed all regulatory bars under 38 C.F.R. § 3.12(d) but did not remove any statutory bars under 38 C.F.R. § 3.12(c).

5. Resolving doubt in the Veteran's favor, compelling circumstances mitigated the Veteran's in-service misconduct. 

6. For the purpose of determining eligibility for VA benefits, the statutory bar to VA benefits has been lifted.

7. A January 2019 rating decision granted service connection for PTSD and in so doing, found the character of the Veteran's service not to bar the receipt of VA benefits.

8. A May 2021 rating decision severed service connection for PTSD on the basis that the Veteran's character of service barred the receipt of VA benefits.

9. The evidence does not establish that the January 2019 rating decision granting service connection for PTSD and finding the character of the Veteran's service not to bar the receipt of VA benefits, was clearly and unmistakably erroneous.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The character of the Veteran's character of discharge from service does not constitute a bar to payment of Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) benefits, to include health care under Chapter 17, Title 38, United States Code. 38 U.S.C. §§ 101, 5303; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.12, 3.354.

2. The January 2021 severance of the award of service connection for PTSD was improper, and the criteria for restoration of service connection for PTSD have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.12, 3.102, 3.105, 3.303, 3.304(f).

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from May 2002 to August 2005. He was discharged with an under Other than Honorable (OTH) conditions discharge in lieu of facing Special Court Martial for a period of prolonged Absent without Leave (AWOL). VA has determined that the Veteran's service is dishonorable for VA purposes, to include healthcare treatment under Chapter 17, Title 38 U.S.C. and 38 C.F.R. § 3.360(a).

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a October 2020 administrative decision and a January 2021 rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO), the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).

As an initial matter, in the May 26, 2021, VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct docket. 

In a subsequent correspondence, the Veteran requested to pursue his appeal through the Hearing Docket. While the correspondence was untimely, the Board found that the Veteran had shown good cause for the untimely submission.

In the March 24, 2023, VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Hearing docket. A Board hearing was held on March 25, 2025.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the January 2021 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran [or representative] at the hearing or within 90 days following the hearing. 38 C.F.R. § 20.302(a). If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review and prior to the Board hearing, or (2) more than 90 days following the hearing, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.302(a), 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim[s], considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

1. Whether the Veteran's character of discharge from service does not constitute a bar to Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) benefits, to include health care under Chapter 17, Title 38, United States Code.

The Veteran seeks recognition as a "veteran" for VA purposes. The Veteran contends that his discharge had been ungraded in August 2012 to "General (Under Honorable Conditions)," which would entitle him to VA compensation for his service-connected disabilities. He also contends that there were "compelling circumstances" sufficient to mitigate his in-service misconduct.

Relevant Law

VA benefits are not payable unless the period of service upon which the claim was based was terminated by discharge or release under conditions other than dishonorable. 38 U.S.C. § 101(18); 38 C.F.R. § 3.12(a).

The designation of the discharge as dishonorable by the service department is binding on VA as to character of discharge. 38. C.F.R. § 3.12(a).

Service department findings (i.e., the Army, Navy, and Air Force) are binding and conclusive upon VA for purposes of establishing an individual's service. VA does not have authority to alter the findings of the service department. 38 C.F.R. § 3.203(a); Spencer v. West, 13. Vet. App. 376, 380 (2000); Venturella v. Gober, 11 Vet. App. 240, 241 (1997); Cahall v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 232, 237 (1994); Duro v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 530, 532 (1992); see Soria v. Brown, 118 F.3d 747, 749 (Fed. Cir. 1997); Manlincon v. West, 12 Vet. App. 238 (1999). VA has no authority to alter the claimant's discharge classification, and the claimant's recourse is with the service department. Harvey v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 416 (1994),

If the former service member did not die in service, then pension, compensation, or dependency and indemnity compensation is payable for claims based on period of service that was terminated by discharge or release under conditions other than dishonorable. (38 U.S.C. § 101(2)). A discharge under honorable conditions is binding on the Department of Veterans Affairs as to character of discharge.  

A dishonorable discharge, a statutory bar, or a regulatory bar deprives the claimant of all gratuitous VA benefits. Such a discharge, statutory bar, or regulatory bar is binding on VA as to the character of discharge unless an exception, such as insanity, applies. 38 C.F.R. § 3.12.

Specifically, there are two types of character of discharge bars establishing entitlement for VA benefits: statutory bars found at 38 U.S.C. § 5303(a) and 38 C.F.R. § 3.12(c) and regulatory bars listed in 38 C.F.R. § 3.12(d).

As to the statutory bars, benefits are not payable where the former service member was discharged or released under one of the following conditions listed under 38 C.F.R. § 3.12(c): (1) as a conscientious objector who refused to perform military duty, wear the uniform, or comply with lawful order of competent military authorities; (2) by reason of the sentence of a general court martial; (3) resignation by an officer for the good of the service; (4) as a deserter; (5) as an alien during periods of hostilities, where it is affirmatively shown that the former service member requested his or her release; and (6) by reason of discharge other than honorable conditions issued as a result of an AWOL for a continuous period of at least 180 days.

The provisions of 38 C.F.R. § 3.12(d) state that a discharge or release because of one of the following offenses is considered to have been issued under dishonorable conditions: (1) acceptance of a discharge under other than honorable conditions or its equivalent in lieu of trial by general court-marital; (2) mutiny or spying; (3) offenses involving moral turpitude (this includes, generally, conviction of a felony); (4) willful and persistent misconduct.

Compelling Circumstances Exception

The bar to benefits for prolonged AWOL under paragraph (c)(6) and the two types of misconduct described in paragraph (d)(2) (crime of moral turpitude and willful and persistent misconduct) will not be applied if compelling circumstances mitigate the AWOL or misconduct at issue. 

The following factors will be considered in a determination on this matter: 

(1) Length and character of service exclusive of the period of prolonged AWOL or misconduct. Service exclusive of the period of prolonged AWOL or misconduct should generally be of such quality and length that it can be characterized as honest, faithful and meritorious and of benefit to the Nation.  

(2) Reasons for AWOL or misconduct. Factors considered are as follows: 

(i) Mental or cognitive impairment at the time of the prolonged AWOL or misconduct, to include but not limited to a clinical diagnosis of (or evidence that could later be medically determined to demonstrate existence of) posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), depression, bipolar disorder, schizophrenia, substance use disorder, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), impulsive behavior, or cognitive disabilities. 

(ii) Physical health, to include physical trauma and any side effects of medication. 

(iii) Combat-related or overseas-related hardship. 

(iv) Sexual abuse/assault. 

(v) Duress, coercion, or desperation. 

(vi) Family obligations, or comparable obligations to third parties.  

(vii) The person's age, education, cultural background, and judgmental maturity.  

(3) Whether a valid legal defense would have precluded a conviction for AWOL or misconduct under the Uniform Code of Military Justice. The defense must go directly to the substantive issue of absence or misconduct rather than to procedures, technicalities, or formalities.  

Insanity Exception

No bar to benefits under this section shall be applied if VA determines that the former servicemember was insane at the time of he or she committed the offense(s) leading to the causing such discharge or release under dishonorable conditions. 38 C.F.R. § 3.12(b). Specifically, pursuant to 38 U.S.C. § 5303(b), "if it is established to the satisfaction of the Secretary that, at the time of the commission of an offense leading to a person's court-martial, discharge or resignation, that person was insane, such person shall not be precluded from benefits under laws administered by the Secretary based upon the period of service from which such person was separated." 38 U.S.C. § 5303(b).

An insane person is one who, while not mentally defective or constitutionally psychopathic, except when a psychosis has been engrafted upon such basic condition, exhibits, due to disease, a more or less prolonged deviation from his normal method of behavior; or who interferes with the peace of society; or who has so departed (become antisocial) from the accepted standards of the community to which by birth and education he belongs as to lack the adaptability to make further adjustment to the social customs of the community in which he resides. 38 C.F.R. § 3.354(a). When a rating agency is concerned with determining whether a veteran was insane at the time that he committed an offense leading to his court-martial, discharge or resignation, it will base its decision on all the evidence procurable relating to the period involved and apply the definition in 38 C.F.R. § 3.354(a). 38 C.F.R. § 3.354(b).

When the question is whether an individual was insane at the time of an offense leading to his court-martial or discharge, the rating agency will base its decision on all the evidence procurable relating to the period involved and apply the definition of paragraph (a). 38 C.F.R. § 3.354(b). Mental illness is not identical to "insanity." Beck v. West, 13 Vet. App. 535, 539 (2000). The U.S. Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) has held that the insanity need only exist at the time of the commission of the offense leading to the person's discharge, and that there is no requirement of a causal connection between the insanity and the misconduct. Struck v. Brown, 9 Vet. App. 145 (1996). There still must be competent evidence, though, establishing the appellant was insane at the time of the offenses in question leading to the other than honorable discharge. Zang v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 246, 254 (1995). In addition, the Court held that "a determination of whether a person is insane is, in effect, a determination of whether the person's actions were intentional, and, thus, the result of willful misconduct." Id. at 254. The Court further indicated such a determination is not warranted when the record does not reflect a Veteran suffered from insanity due to disease or that he or she did not know or understand the nature or consequences of his or her acts, or that what he or she was doing was wrong. Id. Significantly, the burden is on the appellant to submit competent medical evidence that the Veteran was insane at the time of the offenses. Stringham v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 445, 449 (1995).

In May 1997, VA General Counsel discussed the intended parameters of the types of behavior, which were defined as insanity under 38 C.F.R. § 3.354(a). It was indicated that behavior involving a minor episode or episodes of disorderly conduct or eccentricity does not fall within the definition of insanity in that regulation. It was further indicated that a determination of the extent to which an individual's behavior must deviate from his or her normal method of behavior could be best resolved by adjudicative personnel on a case-by-case basis in light of the authorities defining the scope of the term insanity. VAOPGCPREC 20-97 (May 22, 1997).

The Board has reviewed all the evidence in the appellant's claims file. Although the Board has an obligation to provide adequate reasons and bases supporting this decision, there is no requirement that the evidence submitted by the appellant or obtained on his behalf be discussed in detail. Rather, the Board's analysis below will focus specifically on what evidence is needed to substantiate the claim and what the evidence in the claims file shows, or fails to show, with respect to the claim. See Gonzales v. West, 218 F.3d 1378, 1380-81 (Fed. Cir. 2000) and Timberlake v. Gober, 14 Vet. App. 122, 128-30 (2000).

VA will resolve reasonable doubt in favor of the appellant in all cases where VA must determine whether a claimant possesses veteran status. Newman v. McDonough, 35 Vet. App. 310 (2022).

Factual Background

The Veteran enlisted in the United States Marine Corps on May 14, 2002, for a period of four years.

The Veteran's military personnel records indicate that he served as a machine gunner, military occupational specialty (MOS) 0331, with service in Iraq from January 2003 to June 2003. He earned the Combat Action Ribbon and Iraq Campaign Medal. The service separation form shows that the Veteran was discharged on August 5, 2005, in lieu of facing Special Court Martial. 

The Veteran's military personnel record indicates the following:

On June 3, 2005, the Veteran was charged with AWOL, for the period from December 5, 2003, to May 27, 2005, in violation of Article 86, Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ). 

In July 2005, the Veteran met with legal counsel, and after advisement, decided to voluntarily submit a request for discharge in lieu of facing court martial. In his request, he acknowledged that he committed the charge offense of AWOL. The Veteran had the opportunity to present his defenses at trial but decided to accept an OTH discharge.

In August 2005, the Veteran's Commanding General approved the request and directed that he be discharged under OTH discharge, effective August 5, 2005.

In May 2006, the Veteran submitted a request for an upgrade to his discharge to the Navy Discharge Review Board (NDRB). In a March 2007 decision, the NDRB denied the Veteran's request.

In March 2012, the Veteran submitted another request to the NDRB.

In an August 2012 decision, the NDRB, established under 38 U.S.C. § 1153, determined that his discharge was inequitable and voted to upgrade his characterization of service to General (under honorable conditions). In this regard, the NDRB found that the characterization of service warranted an upgrade based on the Veteran's combat service and the circumstances surrounding his discharge which included psychiatric/behavioral health issues.

The NDRB upgraded the Veteran's characterization of service to General (under honorable conditions).

Based on the evidence of record, the AOJ found that there is a statutory bar to VA benefits, under 38 C.F.R. § 3.12(c)(6), for a discharge as a result of a period of AWOL in excess of 180 days.

Analysis

The Board finds that the evidence clearly indicates that there is a statutory bar to VA benefits, under 38 C.F.R. § 3.12(c)(6), for a discharge as a result of a period of AWOL in excess of 180 days.

NDRB Discharge Upgrade

Under 38 C.F.R. § 3.12(i), an honorable or general discharge awarded under one of the following programs does not remove any bar to benefits imposed under this section: (1) President's directive of January 19, 1977, implementing Presidential Proclamation 4313 of September 16, 1974; (2) Department of Defense's special discharge review program effective April 5, 1977; or (3) Any discharge review program implemented after April 5, 1977, that does not apply to all persons administratively discharged or released from active military service under other than honorable conditions.

Notably, a character of discharge upgraded by a discharge review board established under 38 U.S.C. § 1153 removes all regulatory bars under 38 C.F.R. § 3.12(d) but does not remove any statutory bars under 38 C.F.R. § 3.12(c).

In this case, the Veteran's DD214 indicates that his discharge was upgraded by the NDRB under authority of 38 U.S.C. § 1153. As such, the upgraded discharge did not remove the statutory bar for a discharge as a result of a period of AWOL in excess of 180 days under 38 C.F.R. § 3.12(c)(6).

Therefore, the remaining defenses to the statutory bar are (1) compelling circumstances and (2) insanity, under 38 C.F.R. § 3.354(a) and (b).

Compelling Circumstances Exemption

The Board has considered the factors of 38 C.F.R. § 3.12(e), as detailed above.

In this case, the Board finds that the Veteran's service outside of the incidents of misconduct was otherwise honest, faithful, and meritorious. The Veteran completed basic training and military occupational specialty (MOS) training. He was promoted to the rank of Lance Corporal, indicating his proficiency, knowledge, and responsibility. He served during combat operations in Iraq. He earned the Combat Action Ribbon and Iraq Campaign Medal. He earned several other awards and commendations. As such, his service, exclusive of his misconduct, can be considered of such length and character to be honest, faithful, and meritorious.

The Board has also considered the factors of 38 C.F.R. § 3.12(e)(ii), including the reasons for misconduct of: (i) Mental or cognitive impairment at the time of the prolonged AWOL or misconduct, to include but not limited to a clinical diagnosis of (or evidence that could later be medically determined to demonstrate existence of) posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), depression, bipolar disorder, schizophrenia, substance use disorder, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), impulsive behavior, or cognitive disabilities; (ii) Physical health, to include physical trauma and any side effects of medication; (iii) Combat-related or overseas-related hardship; (iv) Sexual abuse/assault; (v) Duress, coercion, or desperation; (vi) Family obligations, or comparable obligations to third parties; and (vii) The person's age, education, cultural background, and judgmental maturity.

Regarding (i) Mental or cognitive impairment at the time of the misconduct, the Board finds that a level of impairment is shown by the evidence of record. The evidence indicates that the Veteran had a level of impairment immediately preceding his period of AWOL as due to mental health symptomology. The evidence also indicates some level of mental or cognitive impairment at this time.  The Veteran was referred for mental health evaluation in January 2003 due to suicide ideation. The clinician diagnosed him with a personality disorder, and recommended that he be separated from service, However, the Veteran's command decided to retain him in service. He subsequently deployed to Iraq. 

In a July 2005 mental health correspondence, a service department clinician reported:

(The Veteran) then deployed to a combat zone where the problems noted in the report worsened and were compounded by the development of some level of Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder. The PTSD is documented in several medical diagnosis and treatment plans that are also included I hope that these reports will give an indication as to the medical/mental problems (the Veteran) is suffering and has been dealing with for over two years.

The Veteran has also been diagnosed with PTSD following service, and it is clear that he was experiencing PTSD symptoms at the time of misconduct.

Regarding (ii) physical health, to include physical trauma and any side effects of medication, there is no evidence of physical trauma or other physical conditions in service which contributed to his misconduct.

Regarding (iii) Combat-related or overseas-related hardship, there is evidence of combat-related or overseas-related hardship at the time of his misconduct. Specifically, the Veteran served in the Republic of Iraq immediately prior to his period of AWOL He also endured psychological injuries while serving in a combat zone, as noted in the January 2019 PTSD examination. 

Regarding (iv) Sexual abuse/assault, the Veteran has not asserted that he was the victim of sexual abuse or assault.

Regarding (v) Duress, coercion, or desperation, there is no evidence of duress, coercion, or desperation, in the Veteran's service records.

Regarding (vi), Family obligations, or comparable obligations to third parties, the Veteran has generally asserted that this type of obligation had been a factor in his misconduct. 

Turning to (vii), regarding the Veteran's age, education, cultural background, and judgmental maturity. The evidence indicates that he was 20 years of age at enlistment and 23 years of age at time of discharge. He had completed high school. He was married and had one child. He earned the rank of Lance Corporal. His judgmental maturity would be considered average for his age.

Finally, under 38 C.F.R. § 3.12(e)(3), there is no evidence that a valid legal defense would have precluded conviction under the UCMJ. First, the Veteran submitted a request for discharge in lieu of facing Special Court Martial wherein he acknowledge his guilt of the offense. He had not raised any defenses or issues with his legal proceedings or legal counsel while in service. Second, the Veteran acknowledged that he engaged in misconduct, however, he provided several reasons for his actions. See July 2005 letter to Commanding General. However, the Veteran has submitted no evidence that such a valid defense exists that would preclude conviction for his offenses.

The Board has considered the entire record, and finds the evidence is in relative equipoise as to whether the Veteran experienced a mental or cognitive impairment at the time of his misconduct such that compelling circumstances justify his misconduct. 

Additionally, the Board notes that the Veteran's age, education, cultural background, and judgmental maturity, are also significant mitigating factors. The Veteran was 20 years of age at entry into service. He detailed family and work stress which caused him to act out physically, to include punching walls, etc., and detailed psychological stress from routine activities of daily living. He also demonstrated relative immaturity for his age. His judgmental maturity was average, at best, at this time. His actions indicate an impulsiveness which does not support a finding of judgmental maturity under 38 C.F.R. § 3.12(e)(vii).

Regarding the Veteran's reasons for his misconduct, he asserts that his PTSD contributed to his misconduct. He reported symptoms indicating mental and cognitive impairment, to include psychiatric symptoms. The Veteran is competent to report symptoms as he experiences them. Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 471 (1994). The Board finds no reason to question the general credibility of his accounts that he experienced PTSD in service, which contributed to his period of AWOL, during service and thus affords such statements significant persuasive value.

Based on the analysis of the record, the Board finds that compelling circumstances mitigate the Veteran's willful and persistent misconduct. 38 C.F.R. § 3.12(e).

Weighing these factors, the Board finds that the evidence of record is at least in equipoise as to whether there were compelling circumstances, to include that he experienced a mental or cognitive impairment during service to mitigate his misconduct. Accordingly, resolving reasonable doubt in favor of the Veteran, the Board finds the character of his service is not a bar to his receipt of VA benefits as compelling circumstances mitigated the Veteran's misconduct, and the appeal is granted.

2. Whether entitlement to service connection for posttraumatic stress disorder was properly severed.

Once service connection has been granted, it can be severed only where the evidence establishes that the grant is clearly and unmistakably erroneous, with the burden of proof being upon the Government. 38 C.F.R. § 3.105 (d).

Certain procedural requirements apply where service connection is to be severed, and if they are not followed, the severance of service connection is generally void ab initio. Specifically, a rating proposing severance must be prepared setting forth all material facts and reasons. The veteran must be notified at his or her latest address of record of the contemplated action and the detailed reasons therefor and must be given 60 days to present additional evidence to show that service connection should be maintained. 38 C.F.R. § 3.105 (d). The veteran may also request a hearing within 30 days of receiving notice. 38 C.F.R. § 3.105 (i). In this case, the Veteran was afforded the appropriate due process and the procedural requirements under 38 C.F.R. § 3.105 have been satisfied.

Having met the due process requirements, the remaining question before the Board is whether the January 2019 rating decision that granted service connection for PTSD was clearly and unmistakably erroneous.

"Clear and unmistakable error" is a very specific and rare kind of error. It is the kind of error, of fact or of law, that when called to the attention of later reviewers compels the conclusion, to which reasonable minds could not differ, that the result would have been manifestly different but for the error. Fugo v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 40 (1993).

To establish that a grant of service connection was the product of CUE, VA must show that (1) either the correct facts as they were known at the time were not before the adjudicator, the adjudicator made an erroneous factual finding, or the statutory or regulatory provisions were incorrectly applied; (2) the alleged error was undebatable, not merely a disagreement as to how the facts were weighed or evaluated; and (3) the error manifestly changed the outcome of the prior decision. See Allen v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 54, 58-59 (2007); Stallworth v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 482, 487-88 (2006); cf. Bustos v. West, 179 F.3d 1378, 1380-81 (Fed. Cir. 1999); Damrel v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 242, 245 (1994); Russell v. Principi, 3 Vet. App. 310, 313-14, 319 (1992) (en banc).

In most respects, the CUE standard for severing service connection under 38 C.F.R. § 3.105 (d) is equivalent to the CUE standard for reversing or revising a prior final decision under 38 C.F.R. § 3.105 (a). See Baughman v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 563, 566 (1991). Section 3.105(d) places at least as high a burden of proof on VA when it seeks to sever service connection as § 3.105(a) places upon an appellant seeking to have an unfavorable previous determination overturned. However, the determination is not limited to the law and the record that existed at the time of the original decision. VA may consider medical evidence and diagnoses that postdate the original award of service connection to demonstrate that the diagnosis on which service connection was predicated is clearly erroneous. Stallworth, 20 Vet. App. at 488; Daniels v. Gober, 10 Vet. App. 474, 480 (1998).

In the January 2021 decision on appeal, the AOJ found CUE in the January 2019 rating decision on the basis that the Veteran's character of discharge was a bar to VA benefits.

In March 2012, the Veteran applied to the Navy Discharge Review Board (NDRB) for an upgrade of his discharge characterization. In August 2012, the NDRB determined that his discharge was inequitable and voted to upgrade his characterization of service to General (under honorable conditions). In this regard, the NDRB found that the characterization of service warranted an upgrade based on the Veteran's combat service and the circumstances surrounding his discharge which included psychiatric/behavioral health issues. 

In October 2012, the Veteran was issued a corrected DD Form 214 showing his service characterization was upgraded to General (under honorable conditions) per NDRB proceedings.

In a January 2019 rating decision, the AOJ granted service connection for PTSD, irritable bowel syndrome and right shoulder tendonitis based on the upgraded discharge from the NDRB.

In October 2020, the AOJ proposed severing service connection for PTSD, as well as for irritable bowel syndrome and right shoulder tendonitis. The AOJ explained in the October 2020 proposal, and associated administrative decision, that while the Veteran's character of service was upgraded by the NDRB, VA does not recognize an honorable or general discharge issued by a DRB, established under 10 U.S.C. § 1553, as sufficient to set aside a bar under 38 C.F.R. §3.12(c). Rather, per VA regulation, only favorable action by a Board of Correction of Military Records, under 10 U.S.C. § 1552, will overcome a bar under 38 C.F.R. §3.12(c).

As noted, the Board is limited to consideration of evidence that was on file at the time of the rating decision on appeal (in January 2021) and any evidence submitted by the Veteran or his representative at the hearing or within 90 days following the hearing. 38 C.F.R. §20.302(a). 

In view of such evidence, the Board does not find that it supports a finding that the January 2019 grants of service connection for PTSD, as well as for irritable bowel syndrome and right shoulder tendonitis, was clearly and unmistakably erroneous. First, it is not "undebatable" that the Veteran had no "compelling circumstances" justifying his period of prolonged AWOL. 38 C.F.R. §3.12(c)(6). The evidence shows that the Veteran has combat service and he was experiencing psychiatric/behavioral health issues and family stressors at the time that he went AWOL. Thus, at the very least, it is debatable whether there were compelling circumstances justifying his lengthy periods of AWOL. In fact, the service department specifically found that the Veteran's "serious personality disorder, combat service, and circumstances unique to this case" warranted an upgrade in his discharge.

Second, it is not "undebatable" that the Veteran was not suffering from mental health impairment at the time he went AWOL. In this regard, the Veteran's service treatment records indicate a diagnosis of a personality disorder. Subsequent to service, a VA examiner diagnosed the Veteran with PTSD related to his combat service in Iraq. During the VA examination, as well as the NDRB hearing, the Veteran reported that he was having mental health symptomology during service. Thus, at the very least, it is debatable whether the Veteran was suffering from mental health impairment at the time he went AWOL at the time he went AWOL.

Accordingly, without an "undebatable" error, the Board cannot find that the January 2019 rating decision granting service connection for PTSD, as well as for irritable bowel syndrome and right shoulder tendonitis, contained CUE. Consequently, the January 2021 determination that the Veteran's character of service bars his receipt of VA benefits resulting in the severance of service connection on the basis of CUE was improper. See 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.105(d),3.303. 

As discussed above, there is room for debate regarding the character of the appellant's discharge and the AOJ's determination in this regard; therefore, it cannot be said that his military records clearly and unmistakably show that his service is dishonorable for VA benefits purposes.

As the Board finds that any error in designating the appellant's period of service as honorable for VA purposes in the January 2019 rating decision is not an undebatable error but is rather a difference of opinion on how the facts were weighed, there is no clear and unmistakable error in the grant of service connection for PTSD, and service connection for PTSD must be restored.

Accordingly, entitlement to service connection for PTSD is restored.

 

 

GAYLE STROMMEN

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	M. O'Connor, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.