Citation Nr: A25032768
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240904-470125
DATE: April 9, 2025

REMANDED

Service connection for a right knee disability is remanded.

Service connection for a left knee disability is remanded.

Service connection for a right foot disability is remanded.

Service connection for tinnitus is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from 1979 to January 1983.

This appeal stems from a July 2024 rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO). 

In the July 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the July 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

The Board acknowledges the Court's holding in Williams v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 305 (2024), that "because the regulation gives a claimant the later of one year from the date that the AOJ mails notice of the decision or 60 days from when the Board receives the Notice of Disagreement (NOD) to change the NOD and select a different lane, the Board ordinarily may not decide an appeal before this time period is up."  Although this period has not passed, the evidence of record is insufficient to adjudicate the claims, and the Board must remand the Veteran's appeal to correct pre-decisional duty to assist errors.  Accordingly, the Board finds the Veteran is better served by proceeding with his appeal at this time in the form of a remand.  There is no prejudice to the Veteran in doing so.  The Veteran may submit any additional evidence in support of his claim following remand.

Pre-Decisional Duty to Assist Errors

A remand is necessary because the AOJ failed to obtain adequate medical opinions to help determine the likely etiology of the diagnosed bilateral knee and right foot disabilities, and tinnitus.  In addition, attempts to ensure all service treatment records (STRs) are associated with the claims file should be made.

Right and Left Knee

The Veteran's STRs show multiple complaints of right and left knee pain with assessment of chondromalacia.  For example, an April 1982 treatment record indicated that the Veteran needed to follow up for chronic knee problems.  He reported "trick" or locked knee and swollen/painful joints on the November 1982 Report of Medical History as part of his separation examination.

The Veteran was provided with an April 2024 VA knee examination.  The examiner diagnosed chronic right and left knee pain status-post surgery.  Imaging studies were not obtained.  The Veteran reported that the onset of symptoms was in 1980s and that he had chronic daily right and left knee pain since that time.  

The examiner opined that the claimed conditions were less likely than not incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness.  The examiner reasoned that the November 1982 separation examination mentioned no problem or diagnosis related to the knees.  The examiner added that there was no evidence in the record or continuity of care related to knee pain or problem to conclude that the current knee pain status-post surgery was caused by military service.

The Board finds this opinion inadequate.  First, the examiner misstated the Veteran's medical history by indicating that the November 1982 separation examination was silent to any complaints of knee trouble where the Report of Medical History clearly shows complaints of knee trouble.  See Reonal v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 458, 461 (1993) ("An opinion based upon an inaccurate factual premise has no probative value.").  The examiner also impermissibly ignored the Veteran's competent reports of ongoing knee pain since the 1980s.  Moreover, chronicity of care is not a requirement of service connection.  See Dalton v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 23, 39 (2007) (holding that a VA examination was inadequate because the examiner relied on the absence of evidence in the service treatment records to provide a negative opinion).

Accordingly, a remand is necessary to obtain an adequate addendum medical opinion to cure this pre-decisional duty to assist error.

Right Foot

The Veteran complained of bilateral foot pain multiple times during service, which was usually discussed in the context of plantar surface pruritus.  For example, a July 1982 STR indicates that the Veteran was hospitalized for two months in 1981 due to this condition but that the records were not available.  The skin condition on the foot was documented to be so severe, preventing the Veteran from functioning.  The Veteran reported foot trouble at the time of separation from service.  

The Veteran was provided with an April 2024 VA foot examination.  The examiner diagnosed right foot arthralgia.  Imaging studies were not obtained.  The Veteran reported right foot pain for many years.  

The examiner opined that the claimed condition was less likely than not incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness.  The examiner reasoned that the separation examination mentioned no problem or diagnosis related to the foot.  The examiner further added that there was no evidence in the record or continuity of care related to foot pain or problem to conclude that the current foot arthralgia was caused by military service.  

The Board finds this April 2024 opinion inadequate.  First, the examiner misstated the Veteran's medical history by indicating that the November 1982 separation examination was silent to any complaints of foot trouble where the Report of Medical History clearly shows the Veteran's report of foot trouble.  See Reonal, supra.  The examiner also impermissibly ignored the Veteran's competent reports of ongoing foot pain for many years.  Moreover, chronicity of care is not a requirement of service connection.  See Dalton, supra.  The examiner also did not consider whether the ongoing complaints of foot pain in service related to severe skin conditions was the cause of the currently diagnosed foot pain.

Accordingly, a remand is necessary to obtain an adequate addendum medical opinion to cure this pre-decisional duty to assist error.

Tinnitus

The Veteran's military occupational specialty (MOS) was infantryman, which carries high probability for hazardous noise exposure.  He is also diagnosed with tinnitus, a disability capable of lay observation.

The Veteran underwent an April 2024 VA audiology examination.  The examiner confirmed a diagnosis of tinnitus.  The Veteran reported that the date of onset of tinnitus was after he left service.  The examiner stated that the Veteran has a diagnosis of clinical hearing loss, and his tinnitus is at least as likely as not a symptom associated with hearing loss.  However, the examiner did not consider the Veteran's military noise exposure or reported onset of tinnitus when assessing the etiology of the Veteran's tinnitus.  Moreover, a clinical diagnosis of hearing loss was not documented, and no audiometric results were associated with the examination report.  In fact, the examination report only addressed tinnitus.  The record does not contain any clinical diagnosis of hearing loss.  To the extent that the examiner misstated the Veteran's medical history, the opinion is of no probative value.  See Reonal, supra.  

Given these deficiencies, an addendum medical opinion is necessary to cure this pre-decisional duty to assist error.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain 1981 hospital records during which the Veteran was hospitalized for two months.  See e.g., July 1982 STRs indicating that the Veteran was hospitalized for two months in 1981.

Make at least two meaningful attempts to obtain these records.  In doing so, ensure that the requests are properly received by the applicable record depository.  Follow-up after a reasonable amount of time if a response is not received.  

All attempts to secure this evidence must be documented in the record by the AOJ.  If no additional records are available, a formal documentation showing unavailability should be attached to the Veteran's file. 

2. Obtain an addendum medical opinion to help determine the likely etiology of the claimed bilateral knee disabilities.  The claims file and a copy of this remand will be made available to the examiner, who will acknowledge receipt and review of these materials.  The need for another examination is left to the discretion of the medical professional offering the addendum opinion.

After a review of the evidence, the examiner is asked to respond to the following: 

(a)	Opine whether the Veteran's right and left knee disabilities had their onset during service or are otherwise related to it, to include complaints of bilateral knee pain during service and at the separation examination.  

**In answering this question, address the Veteran's competent reports of continuing bilateral knee pain since separation from service.

The standard of review to be applied is "as likely as not" (meaning that the likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher).

A full and thorough rationale must be provided for all opinions, referencing relevant medical and lay evidence where appropriate.

3. Obtain an addendum medical opinion to help determine the likely etiology of the claimed right foot disability.  The claims file and a copy of this remand will be made available to the examiner, who will acknowledge receipt and review of these materials.  The need for another examination is left to the discretion of the medical professional offering the addendum opinion.

After a review of the evidence, the examiner is asked to respond to the following:

Opine whether the Veteran's right foot disability had its onset during service or is otherwise related to it, to include his complaints of foot pain during service, including as due to severe skin disorders shown therein.

The standard of review to be applied is "as likely as not" (meaning that the likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher).

A full and thorough rationale must be provided for all opinions, referencing relevant medical and lay evidence where appropriate.

4. Obtain an addendum medical opinion to help determine the likely etiology of tinnitus.  The claims file and a copy of this remand will be made available to the examiner, who will acknowledge receipt and review of these materials.  The need for another examination is left to the discretion of the medical professional offering the addendum opinion.

After a review of the evidence, the examiner is asked to respond to the following:

Opine whether the Veteran's tinnitus had its onset during service or is otherwise related to it, to include established exposure to hazardous noise due to his MOS of infantryman, which carries a high probability for hazardous noise exposure.

The standard of review to be applied is "as likely as not" (meaning that the likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher).

A full and thorough rationale must be provided for all opinions, referencing relevant medical and lay evidence where appropriate.

 

 

S. B. MAYS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	A. Yaffe, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.