Citation Nr: A25032778
Decision Date: 04/09/25	Archive Date: 04/09/25

DOCKET NO. 240501-520406
DATE: April 9, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for lumbar degenerative spine disease (a low back disability) is remanded.  

REASONS FOR REMAND

The appellant is a Veteran who served on active duty from July 1979 to July 1983.  This matter is before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal of an August 2019 rating decision.  In his May 2024 appeal to the Board of that decision (on VA Form 10182), the Veteran selected the direct review option.  Therefore, the Board's review is limited to the evidence of record at the time of the August 2019 rating decision.  

At the outset, the Board notes that this case has a somewhat problematic procedural history.  An August 22, 2019, notification letter informed the Veteran that service connection had been again denied for his low back disability claim and that if he disagreed with the decision, he had one year from the date of the letter to select a review option in order to protect his initial filing date for effective date purposes.  He was made aware that he must file his request on the required application form for the review option desired and that such review options included filing a supplemental claim, requesting higher-level review, and appealing to the Board.  

In December 2019, the Veteran submitted a statement in support of claim instead of submitting one of the above review options, and an August 14, 2020, Board letter noted that the Board had received his VA Form 10182 and that his appeal had been placed on the evidence docket.  

A December 2021 VA letter, in response to a Congressional inquiry, notes, in part, that the Board mailed a letter dated August 14, 2020, to the Veteran confirming receipt of his VA Form 10182 and that his appeal was placed on the evidence docket.  

A few years later, a February 29, 2024, VA letter informed the Veteran that, on August 14, 2020, the Board erroneously issued him a letter indicating that an Appeals Modernization Act (AMA) appeal had been docketed at the Board and advised him that the August 2020 VA letter was the result of administrative error.  The Board indicated that his December 11, 2019, correspondence requesting a review of his denied claim had been received but that, unfortunately, the Board was unable to make a decision until the appeal was correctly filed.  The Veteran was then provided instructions on how to properly appeal the claim to the Board and the time limits for filing the claim.  

In his May 2024 VA Form 10182, the Veteran selected direct review of his denied low back claim and referenced the February 29, 2024, VA letter that informed him that his appeal was not filed correctly.  The date of the decision that he was attempting to appeal was not listed.  

Thereafter, a March 24, 2025, Board letter was sent to the Veteran which notes that it was issued in response to his May 1, 2024, request to extend the period of time to file his VA Form 10182 that he submitted in response to the August 2019 rating decision.  It was noted that, based on a review of the record, a Veterans Law Judge (VLJ) (other than the undersigned) found that he had submitted good cause for an extension of time to submit his VA Form 10182 under 38 U.S.C. ยง 7105 and            38 C.F.R. ยง 20.203 and that his appeal would be docketed at the Board.  The letter also indicated that the Veteran would receive a docketing letter explaining the next steps in his appeal based on the review option he selected on his VA Form 10182.  

Additionally, another March 24, 2025, Board letter was sent to the Veteran which notified him that the Board had received his VA Form 10182 on May 1, 2024, and that based on the Board appeal option he selected on the form, his appeal had been placed on the Direct Review docket.  The letter also indicated that although his appeal had been docketed, it was possible that, upon more detailed review, the Board might determine that his appeal request did not meet the necessary procedural requirements and could possibly be dismissed.  

The Board notes that the December 2019 statement was not an appropriate way for the Veteran to appeal the August 2019 rating decision.  However, the August 2020 VA letter informed him, albeit wrongly, that the Board had received his VA Form 10182 and that his appeal had been placed on the evidence docket, which essentially kept him from feeling that it was necessary to file additional documentation to ensure that his appeal was properly before the Board.  Additionally, in March 2025, a Board VLJ found that the Veteran had submitted good cause for an extension of time to submit his VA Form 10182 and specifically noted that he had submitted his May 2024 VA Form 10182 in response to the August 2019 rating decision, which is important, because, as noted above, although the VA Form 10182 was presumably submitted for that rating decision, it was not specifically noted on the form.  Therefore, due to the foregoing, the Board finds that the appeal of the August 2019 rating decision is properly before the Board.  

One of the effects of the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA) is to narrow the set of circumstances in which the Board must remand appeals to the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) for further development instead of immediately deciding them directly.  Nevertheless, even under the AMA, the Board still has the duty to remand issues when necessary to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  See Pub L. No. 115-55 section (2)(d); 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.802(a).  

The Veteran asserts that his low back disability is due to multiple back injuries during service.  An August (the year is obscured but the record notes that the Veteran is 21 so the year is most likely 1980) service treatment record (STR) notes that he reported a lower back problem.  He related that he had been experiencing low back pain for the past three months.  On evaluation, the Veteran had good range of motion in his back, and he reported that he probably overused his back when he was lifting weights.  The assessment was low back pain.  An August 1982 STR notes that the Veteran reported lower back pain that started while he was playing football 2 days prior to seeking treatment.  

In a November 2018 medical statement, the Veteran's private provider indicated that he had been under the care of her office since 2010 and that she was familiar with his chronic health conditions, which included chronic low back pain, lumbar intervertebral disc disease with myelopathy, and sciatica.  The provider related that she had reviewed his military medical records, including the diagnostic studies which showed documentation of chronic lower back pain and lumbar disc disease, and opined that the Veteran's chronic back pain originated from his military service.  She noted that after service, in 1996, the Veteran had lumbar surgery to alleviate his pain, and despite having surgical intervention, pain medication, and physical therapy, he continued to have progressively worsening low back pain which radiated down his lower extremities, and numbness and tingling in his lower extremities.  

In a June 2019 VA back opinion, the VA examiner opined that it was less likely than not that the Veteran's low back disability was related to his service.  She notes that degenerative arthritis of the spine was diagnosed on the examination and then indicated that she could not say without mere speculation if the Veteran's low back disability was caused by an in-service injury because the back injury was acute.  The examiner referenced an August 1982 STR in which the Veteran reported lower back pain for 48 hours after playing football, and she noted that he denied low back pain on his entrance and separation examinations.  She noted that a May 1995 treatment record indicates that he injured his back pushing an air conditioning unit in September 1991 and was diagnosed with chronic myofascial lower spine disease, a January 2019 physical therapy consult was ordered for his chronic low back pain, and an August 2019 treatment record indicated that the Veteran reported experiencing lower back pain for two weeks.  

The examiner explained that osteoarthritis of the spine is a breakdown of the cartilage of the joints and discs in the neck and lower back and that sometimes osteoarthritis produces spurs that put pressure on the nerves leaving the spinal column which can cause weakness and pain in the arms or legs.  She noted that two main risk factors for developing osteoarthritis of the spine were advanced age and damage to a vertebral disc.  The examiner indicated that the prevalence of symptomatic facet joint osteoarthritis increases rapidly starting at age 45 and continues to increase thereafter and that although damage to a vertebral disc is a separate diagnosis from spine osteoarthritis, disc damage commonly leads to osteoarthritis.  She also noted that carrying extra body weight contributes to osteoarthritis in several ways, and that, the more a person weighs, the greater his or her risk because increased weight adds stress to weight-bearing joints, such as the hips and knees.  The examiner further noted that fat tissue produces proteins that can cause harmful inflammation in and around your joints.  Lastly, she opined that the Veteran was 60 years old, had a BMI of 34, and injured his back pushing an air conditioning unit, which is more likely than not the cause of his back pain.  https://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/osteoarthritis/expert-answers/arthritis/faq-20058457.  

The Board finds that the November 2018 medical statement is inadequate because although the provider indicated that she had been treating the Veteran for several years and noted that she reviewed his medical history, to include his STRs, she did not furnish rationale to support her opinion other than indicating that several years after service the Veteran had back surgery and that he continued to have back pain.  

The Board finds that the June 2019 VA back opinion is inadequate for multiple reasons.  Although the examiner referenced an August 1982 STR and indicated the back injury was acute, she did not discuss the August (most likely 1980) STR in which the Veteran reported back pain that had been ongoing for three weeks.  This indicates a less than thorough review of the record.  Also, although she noted that two main risk factors for developing osteoarthritis of the spine were advanced age and damage to a vertebral disc, and attempted to explain why the Veteran's age was a risk factor because he was 60 years old, she also noted that disc damage commonly leads to osteoarthritis and did not address why the additional reports of back pain during service in August 1980 may have contributed to any present disc damage.  Lastly, although the examiner indicated that the Veteran had a BMI of 34 and that carrying extra body weight contributed to osteoarthritis in several ways, she also noted that increased weight added stress to weight-bearing joints, such as the hips and knees, and did not indicate how extra body weight contributed to osteoarthritis of the spine.  

Due to the foregoing, the failure to obtain an adequate medical advisory opinion regarding the etiology of the Veteran's low back disability constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 312 (2007).  Thus, the Board finds that remand is necessary to obtain an adequate medical advisory opinion regarding the etiology of the Veteran's low back disability.  

The matter is REMANDED for the following:

1. Arrange for the Veteran's record to be sent to a clinician with appropriate expertise for review and an addendum opinion regarding the likely etiology of his low back disability.  [Unless the provider finds that further examination is needed, an examination is not required; however, if an opinion cannot be provided without another examination of the Veteran, such examination should be arranged.]  On review of the record the provider should furnish an addendum medical advisory opinion that responds to the following:

(a) Identify (by diagnosis) each low back disability entity found/or shown by the record during the pendency of the instant claim.  

(b) Identify the likely etiology for each low back disability entity diagnosed.  Specifically, is it at least as likely as not that such disability began in (or is otherwise related to) the Veteran's military service/alleged injury therein?  The provider must discuss the August (most likely 1980) STR in which the Veteran reported experiencing back pain for three months and an August 1982 STR in which he reported lower back pain that started while he was playing football 2 days prior to seeking treatment.  

(c) If a diagnosed low back disability is determined to be unrelated to service, identify the etiology for the disability that is considered to be more likely, and explain why that is so.  Also, if risk factors for the Veteran's low back disability are identified, the provider must note how the risk factors specifically relate to the Veteran.  

2. If a requested opinion cannot be provided without resort to mere speculation, it must be so stated, with explanation why the opinion would require mere speculation.  The provider should state whether the need to speculate is caused by a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given the current state of medical science and the known facts) or by a deficiency in the record or the examiner (additional facts are required-if so identify them, or the examiner lacks the requisite knowledge or training).  

The opinion must include adequate rationale.  

 

 

John R. Doolittle, II

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Bayles, James J.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.1303.