Citation Nr: A25034519
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 190311-15135
DATE: April 15, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to a compensable disability rating for status post left hand, second finger metacarpal fracture (hereinafter "left hand disability") is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from October 1991 to December 1992.

A rating decision was issued under the Legacy appeal system in February 2016. In March 2018, the Veteran opted into the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), by submitting a Rapid Appeals Modernization Program (RAMP) election form and selecting the higher-level review (HLR) lane. In the March 2019 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Hearing docket. On August 2, 2023, the Veteran withdrew his hearing request. See Hearing Request, received August 2, 2023.

In a February 2024 decision, the Board denied the issue of entitlement to a compensable disability rating for the Veteran's service-connected left-hand disability. The Veteran appealed that decision to the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court). During the pendency of this appeal, in November 2024, the parties signed a Joint Motion for Partial Remand (JMPR) in which they agreed to "vacate that part of the Board of Veterans' Appeals' (Board) February 20, 2024, decision denying entitlement to a compensable disability rating for status post left hand, second finger metacarpal fracture, and remand the matter for readjudication." CAVC Decision, dated November 26, 2024. The Court subsequently granted the JMPR in a November 2024 order. See id. 

The matter has now been returned to the Board for further consideration.

Entitlement to a compensable disability rating for service-connected left-hand disability.

Pursuant to the terms of the JMPR, the Board is remanding the issue of entitlement to a compensable disability rating for service-connected left-hand disability for an adequate VA medical examination and opinion. 

Specifically, the parties to the November 2024 JMPR agreed that the January 2017 VA examination - the only VA medical examination of record that specifically addressed the Veteran's left-hand disability - was inadequate as follows: "Appellant reported pain in his left hand during the appeal period, but the VA examiner failed to portray functional loss on repeated use over time in terms of range of motion (ROM) measurements. And in response to the question whether pain, weakness, fatigability or incoordination significantly limit functional ability with repeated use over time, the VA examiner responded that she could not offer an opinion without resorting to mere speculation. (R. at 3718 (3715-21) (January 31, 2017, VA examination report)). The examiner's response, however, did not indicate that she had considered "all procurable and assembled data," before reaching her conclusion, or that her inability to provide an opinion without resorting to speculation reflected the "limitation of knowledge in the medical community at large," as required by Sharp v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 26, 33 (2017)." CAVC Decision, dated November 26, 2024.

The parties further agreed that the "VA examiner failed to test for pain on active and passive ROM, and in weight-bearing and non-weight-bearing positions as required by Correia v. McDonald, 28 Vet. App. 158, 169-70 (2016), and the examiner provided no explanation why this testing would not be feasible. The VA examiner noted that Correia questions were not addressed due to the form 2507 request not to address the right hand, but she did not provide an explanation why such testing was not done on the left hand." CAVC Decision, dated November 26, 2024.

Given the foregoing, the Board finds that remand is necessary to obtain an adequate VA medical examination that complies with the Court's holding in Sharp and Correia.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Schedule the Veteran for an examination with an appropriate clinician as to the current severity of the Veteran's left-hand disability. 

The examiner should provide a full description of the disability and report all signs and symptoms necessary for evaluating the Veteran's disability under the rating criteria. 

The examiner is asked to make all reasonable efforts to comply with Correia and Sharp. 

To the extent possible, the examiner should respond to the following: 

1. Test the Veteran's active motion, passive motion, as well as for pain with weight-bearing, without weight-bearing, and with comparison to the opposite joint. If pain was present, the examiner should identify where, in degrees of ROM, this pain began. 

If it is not possible to provide a specific measurement without speculation, the examiner must state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training).

2. Elicit information regarding the severity, frequency, and duration of any flare-ups, and the degree of functional loss during flare-ups. If pain was present, the examiner should identify where, in degrees of ROM, this pain began.

3. Provide an estimate as to the degrees of range of motion lost due to any functional impairment identified by the examiner and/or described by the Veteran. Put another way, functional limitation - to include flare-ups, painful motion, and repetitive use over time - should be estimated in terms of the point, in degrees, in range of motion of the left hand and at which such impairment begins. 

*In providing such an estimate, the examiner should take into consideration the prior January 2017 VA Hand and Finger examination report, as well as any lay statement of record.

**If it is not possible to provide a specific measurement without speculation, the examiner must state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training).

(Continued on the next page)

?

The examiner is advised that the Veteran is competent to report symptoms, treatment, events, and injuries, and that his assertions must be taken into account, along with the other evidence of record, in formulating the requested medical opinions. A full explanation must be provided.

 

 

A. S. CARACCIOLO

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Cross, A.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.1303.