Citation Nr: A25034036
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 220923-279547
DATE: April 11, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to an initial disability rating in excess of 10 percent for service-connected open angle glaucoma, dry eye syndrome, and ulcerative chronic blepharitis is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral cataracts is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the U.S. Air Force from July 1983 to October 1985.  He was a member of the Air National Guard and Air Force Reserve from October 1985 to March 2007.   

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from rating decisions dated April 2022 and July 2022 of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO), the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).

By way of history, in a January 2022 rating decision, the RO granted service connection for open angle glaucoma, dry eye syndrome, and ulcerative chronic blepharitis and assigned a 10 percent disability, effective August 9, 2010.  In February 2022, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review, on which he identified the January 2022 rating decision and the issue as entitlement to a higher rating for service-connected open angle glaucoma, dry eye syndrome, and ulcerative chronic blepharitis.

In a February 2022 decision, the Higher-Level Reviewer determined that there had been a duty to assist error and transferred the initial rating claim to the Supplemental Claim decision review option for additional development.  A rating decision was issued in July 2022, which denied the Veteran's claim of entitlement to an initial disability rating for service-connected open angle glaucoma, dry eye syndrome, and ulcerative chronic blepharitis.

In an April 2022 rating decision, the RO denied service connection for bilateral cataracts.

In September 2022, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request:  Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), in which he identified the July 2022 rating decision denying entitlement to a higher initial rating for open angle glaucoma, dry eye syndrome, and ulcerative chronic blepharitis, and the April 2022 rating decision denying service connection for bilateral cataracts.  The Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the July 2022 AOJ decision as to the initial rating claim and the April 2022 AOJ decision with respect to the bilateral cataracts claim.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  If evidence was submitted during the periods after the AOJ issued the respective decisions, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

1. Entitlement to an initial disability rating in excess of 10 percent for service-connected open angle glaucoma, dry eye syndrome, and ulcerative chronic blepharitis.

The Veteran asserts entitlement to an initial disability rating in excess of 10 percent for service-connected open angle glaucoma, dry eye syndrome, and ulcerative chronic blepharitis.  See the VA Form 10182 dated September 2022.

In a statement dated January 2021, the Veteran reported that he received treatment for his eye disability at VIW Bowden Eye Care from 2017 to 2020.  In a separate statement dated January 2021 the Veteran indicated that he received treatment for his eyes at Nix Healthcare System from March 17, 2012 to March 18. 2012.  Additionally, in his February 2022 bilateral cataracts claim, the Veteran reported that he received treatment for his eyes in December 2010 at South Texas Medical Center.

Critically, the records of the identified private treatment providers are not contained in the Veteran's VA claims file, and there is no indication that the RO attempted to obtain these records.  Although the Veteran's VA claims file contains treatment records from Nix Healthcare System, no records pertaining to the identified period dating from March 17, 2012 to March 18, 2012 were provided.

VA's duty to assist includes making reasonable efforts to obtain relevant records from private medical care providers.  38 U.S.C. § 5103A; 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(1).  As the RO failed to undertake reasonable efforts to obtain the specifically identified private treatment records from VIW Bowden Eye Care, Nix Healthcare System, and South Texas Medical Center prior to issuing the decision on appeal, a pre-decisional duty to assist error has occurred.  38 U.S.C. § 5103A; 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(1).  Thus, remand to undertake those efforts is also required.

2. Entitlement to service connection for bilateral cataracts.

The Veteran asserts entitlement to service connection for bilateral cataracts.  In his February 2022 claim, the Veteran asserted that his cataracts are caused by his "previous eye injury and inflammation, exposure in military service."

The Veteran was afforded a VA eye examination in March 2022 at which time the examiner confirmed a diagnosis of nuclear cataracts of both eyes.  The examiner noted the Veteran's report that his cataracts developed in the 1980s and are not causing any visual difficulty.  In a March 2022 medical opinion, a VA examiner opined that the claimed disability was at least as likely as not incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness.  The examiner provided the following rationale: "[m]edical records were reviewed.  Records show claimant was diagnosed with left eye cataracts in 1985 while on active duty, therefore, the [Veteran's] cataract right eye is at least as likely as not (50 percent or greater probability) incurred in or caused by (the) cataract bilateral during service."

A contradictory medical opinion was obtained from the same VA examiner just five days later in March 2022.  The examiner opined that the claimed bilateral cataracts were less likely than not incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness.  The examiner explained, "[t]he Veteran claims that cataract developed in 1984.  He has no mention of glaucoma in the history in the DBQ examination and is using no medication for glaucoma.  He is using artificial tears only and Pataday drops for irritation."  The examiner continued, "[t]he cataract was diagnosed during active duty service and has been related to being around solvents and chemicals in his work as an air crew technician with multiple jobs including repairs and use of chemicals.  It therefore remains less likely than not that military service was present during the earliest etiology of the cataract."

A third medical opinion was obtained from the same examiner in which he reiterated that the claimed bilateral cataracts were less likely than not incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness.  The examiner provided the following rationale, "[t]aking an environmental history, it is less likely than not that chemical exposure on the [sic] flight line as a flight line mechanic started the nuclear cataract which can takes years to develop into a significant cataract, but the presumptive diagnosis of cataract formation by chemical exposure still exists through less likely than not the reason."

Unfortunately, these three March 2022 VA medical opinions are contradictory, conclusory, and largely nonsensical.  VA's duty to assist includes ensuring that an examination report or opinion obtained is adequate.  38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c); Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007).  Accordingly, the Board finds that the failure to obtain an adequate VA medical opinion is a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  Remand is therefore necessary to afford the Veteran a new VA opinion to address outstanding questions of nexus with respect to the claimed bilateral cataracts.

Additionally, given the assertions of the Veteran in his February 2022 claim to the extent that his cataracts are caused by his "previous eye injury and inflammation," the Board finds that the question of secondary service connection was raised by the Veteran.  The VA therefore also committed a pre-decisional duty to assist error when it failed to obtain a medical opinion to address the Veteran's assertion that his bilateral cataracts were caused by his service-connected open angle glaucoma, dry eye syndrome, and ulcerative chronic blepharitis.  Upon remand, VA must obtain a VA opinion to address outstanding questions of secondary service connection and aggravation.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. After obtaining any necessary information and authorization from the Veteran, undertake efforts to obtain records of reported treatment at VIW Bowden Eye Care (as referenced in the Veteran's January 2021 statement), NIX Healthcare System dated from March 17, 2012 to March 18, 2012 (as referenced in the Veteran's January 2021 statement), and South Texas Medical Center (as referenced in the Veteran's February 2022 claim).   

2. Obtain an addendum medical opinion regarding the nature and etiology of the Veteran's diagnosed bilateral cataracts.  Access to the claims file should be made available to the examiner for review in connection with the opinion.  After reviewing the record, the examiner should provide an opinion, with supporting rationale, as to:

(a). Whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's diagnosed bilateral cataracts disability had its inception during his period of active duty from July 1983 to October 1985, or is otherwise causally related to an in-service disease or injury, to include his duties as an aircraft pneudraulics mechanic?

(b). Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not greater) that the diagnosed bilateral cataracts are caused by or due to the Veteran's service-connected open angle glaucoma, dry eye syndrome, and ulcerative chronic blepharitis?

(c). If not, is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not greater) the Veteran's diagnosed bilateral cataracts were aggravated (any increase in severity) by his service-connected open angle glaucoma, dry eye syndrome, and ulcerative chronic blepharitis?  If aggravation is found, the clinician should indicate the approximate level of impairment (i.e., a baseline) before the onset of the aggravation.

The clinician is advised that the Board has not made any credibility determinations with respect to the Veteran's reports of symptom history, pending the ordered opinion.

 

 

K. Conner

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	K. K. Buckley, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.