Citation Nr: A25034117
Decision Date: 04/14/25	Archive Date: 04/14/25

DOCKET NO. 241001-478499
DATE: April 14, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for orthostatic hypotension, to include as secondary to service-connected esophageal carcinoma, is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from September 1994 to July 2008.

This matter comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a September 2024 rating decision wherein the AOJ, in pertinent part, denied service connection for orthostatic hypotension.  

In October 2024, the Veteran timely appealed the decision to the Board by submitting a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) (NOD) and requesting a "Direct Review" of the evidence by a Veterans Law Judge.  In an Appeals Modernization Act (AMA) Direct Review appeal, the Board considers the evidence of record at the time of the September 2024 rating decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301.

However, because the Board is remanding the claim for orthostatic hypotension, to include as secondary to service-connected esophageal carcinoma, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of that claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Entitlement to service connection for orthostatic hypotension, to include as secondary to service-connected esophageal carcinoma, is remanded.

In the Veteran's August 2024 claims application, he contends that service connection for orthostatic hypotension is warranted as secondary to his service-connected esophageal carcinoma, noting that the claimed condition appeared following surgery and treatment for his cancer.  The Veteran makes similar contentions in his October 2024 Notice of Disagreement.  

In the September 2024 rating decision on appeal, the AOJ found that the Veteran had been diagnosed with orthostatic hypotension and conceded that he participated in a toxic risk exposure activity based upon his service in Southwest Asia during the Gulf War.  The Board is bound by these favorable findings.  38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).  The AOJ then stated that the Veteran, without good cause, failed to appear to a scheduled VA examination in connection with his claim.  Consequently, the AOJ denied the claim pursuant to 38 CFR 3.655.    

38 CFR 3.655 provides that when entitlement to a benefit cannot be established without a current VA examination or reexamination and a claimant, without good cause, fails to report for such examination or reexamination, action shall be taken in accordance with 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.655(b) or (c) as appropriate.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.655(a).  When a claimant fails to report for an examination scheduled in conjunction with a claim for increase, the claim shall be denied.  38 C.F.R. § 3.655(b).

When a claimant fails to participate in a scheduled VA examination, the Board must consider (1) whether the examination was necessary to establish entitlement to the benefit sought, and (2) whether the claimant lacked good cause to miss the scheduled examination.  Turk v. Peake, 21 Vet. App. 565, 568 (2008).

In this instance, the Board finds the provisions of 38 C.F.R. § 3.655 inapplicable, as the AOJ never scheduled the VA examination.  Here, an August 29, 2024 examination request documents that the AOJ requested a cardiovascular hypertension examination and medical opinion in association with a new service-connection claim for orthostatic hypotension.  However, the AOJ was unsuccessful in its efforts to contact the Veteran.  Therefore, the examination and medical opinion were "being cancelled due to no contact."  The Board finds that before the AOJ could apply 38 C.F.R. § 3.655, it was required to first schedule the examination.  Then, if the Veteran failed to report to the examination following proper notification of the examination, the AOJ could apply the provision in determining the claim.

The AOJ's failure to schedule the VA examination and medical opinion prior to denying the Veteran's claim constituted a pre-decisional duty to assist error for which remand is warranted.       

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Schedule the Veteran for a TERA examination to determine whether the Veteran's orthostatic hypotension is at least as likely as not related to the toxic exposure risk activity that the Veteran experienced during service or if it is caused or aggravated by the service-connected esophageal carcinoma.  The examiner should have access to the claims file.  

The agency of original jurisdiction must provide a copy of the below facts to the examiner. 

To assist in a review of the claims file, the examiner is informed of the following facts with citations in the record, when applicable:

"	The Veteran served on active duty from September 1994 to July 2008. 

"	The Veteran is service connected for esophageal carcinoma and anemia associated with esophageal carcinoma.

"	The Veteran contends that his orthostatic hypotension is caused or aggravated by his service-connected esophageal carcinoma, noting that the claimed condition appeared following surgery and treatment for his cancer.   

"	A November 2022 private cardiology consultation record notes that the Veteran was admitted to the hospital with acute anemia and a history of gastric cancer status post partial esophagectomy in March 2022 followed by chemotherapy and radiation.  He reported feeling dizzy upon standing for one month.  He denied chest pain or syncope.  The provider noted that the Veteran's orthostatic measurements at the hospital had been positive for a drop in blood pressure and a rise in heart rate with position change.  He was on Midodrine and Metoprolol.  A subsequent transthoracic echocardiography report indicated that the Veteran had hypotension.  See VBMS entry with Document Type, "Medical Treatment Record - Non-Government Facility," Receipt Date 08/14/2024, pp. 35, 41.

"	January 2023 private cardiology records show that the Veteran was being seen for follow-up for orthostatic hypotension following hospital admission.  The provider noted that the Veteran's medical history included gastric cancer, gastrointestinal bleed, and anemia.  The provider documented that the Veteran was thought to have significant orthostatic hypotension initially due to autonomic dysfunction following gastrectomy.  He was started on Fludrocortisone while inpatient and also experienced hypertension while supine.  He had been on Amlodipine/Losartan with Fludrocortisone since discharge and felt well.  He denied any further episodes of dizziness or syncope.  He reported that his blood pressure at home was often 110 while seated.  He currently had mild lower extremity edema.  The assessment and plan for the Veteran's cardiology problems noted the "new problem" of orthostatic hypotension, primary, secondary to esophagectomy, gastrectomy.  "Medical Treatment Record - Non-Government Facility," Receipt Date 08/14/2024, pp. 29, 31.

"	An August 2023 VA Esophageal Conditions examination documents that the Veteran reported that in 2021, he was diagnosed with esophageal cancer, for which he underwent 23 sessions of radiation and 8 sessions of chemotherapy.  The Veteran reported that after his surgery, he experienced issues with regulating his blood pressure, noting that when he stands, his blood pressure drops.  His current symptoms included hypotension.  The examiner further indicated that the Veteran's hypotension was a residual of his cancer.  See VBMS entry with Document Type, "C&P Exam," Receipt Date 08/30/2023.

"	November 2023 VA treatment records show that the Veteran was seen to establish care with general cardiology.  His primary medical history was noted as including orthostatic hypotension, esophageal cancer (status post Ivor Lewis Esophagectomy, radiation treatment, and chemotherapy) anemia, empyema, GERD, and hypertension.  The Veteran stated that he had been doing well for some time, however, approximately one month ago, he had a near syncopal spell in the bathroom while urinating.  He stated that he felt dizzy for a moment, but it quickly passed.  He also experienced a similar episode while he was cooking.  He stated that he sat down for a moment and felt better within a few minutes.  See VBMS entry with Document Type, "CAPRI," Receipt Date 06/10/2024, p. 64.

"	In a June 2023 Toxic Exposure Risk Activity (TERA) Memorandum, VA determined that the Veteran participated in TERA based upon his service in Southwest Asia during the Gulf War. See VBMS entry with Document Type, "TERA Memorandum," Receipt Date 06/09/2023.

"	The examiner's review of the record is NOT restricted to the evidence listed above. This list is provided to assist the examiner in locating potentially relevant evidence.

The examiner is asked to provide opinions for the following questions:

1. Whether it is at least as likely as not that there is a nexus between the Veteran's orthostatic hypotension and the toxic exposure risk activities he participated while in service?  When answering this question, the examiner should consider the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran; and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran.  Please state upon what facts, medical principles, and/or medical literature support the opinion.

2. Did the service-connected esophageal carcinoma cause or aggravate the Veteran's orthostatic hypotension?  Aggravation is different from causation in that it did not cause the disability but rather caused an increase in severity of the orthostatic hypotension.  Please explain upon what facts, medical principles, and/or medical literature support the opinion.

The examiner is asked to provide a rationale for each opinion given, including providing the medical principles and evidence relied upon for each opinion. If the examiner is unable to provide an opinion without resorting to speculation, he or she should explain why this is so and what, if any, additional evidence would be necessary before an opinion could be rendered.

 

 

A. P. SIMPSON

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	P.C.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.