Citation Nr: A25034151
Decision Date: 04/14/25	Archive Date: 04/14/25

DOCKET NO. 240406-432155
DATE: April 14, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to an initial compensable disability rating for plantar keratoderma is remanded.

Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 30 percent for psoriasis from August 23, 2023, is remanded.

Entitlement to an earlier effective date prior to August 23, 2023, within the remaining year prior to September 21, 2023, for the award of a 30 percent disability rating for psoriasis based on a factually ascertainable increase in severity is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from October 2001 to October 2002 and April 2005 to July 2006.

Regarding the initial increased rating claim for plantar keratoderma, this matter comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from August 2023 and September 2023 Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) decisions issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).  In the April 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the August 2023 and September 2023 AOJ decisions on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  However, because the Board is remanding this claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Regarding the issues related to psoriasis, these matters come to the Board on appeal from a January 2024 AOJ decision issued by the VA RO, which was later reviewed and continued in a January 2024 Higher-Level-Review (HLR) decision.  The Veteran appealed the decision in an April VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), electing the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the earlier January 2024 AOJ decision subject to HLR.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  However, because the Board is remanding these claims, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

1. Entitlement to an initial compensable disability rating for plantar keratoderma is remanded.

The Veteran contends her plantar keratoderma is worse than currently rated.  The Board finds remand is necessary to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error by ensuring an adequate VA examination is obtained which considers the entire period on appeal for rating purposes.

Relevantly, the Veteran's initial increased rating claim stems from a May 7, 2013, VA 21-526EZ Fully Developed Claim wherein the Veteran sought service connection for plantar keratoderma.  Eventually, following an appeal to the Board and multiple associated decisions, service connection for plantar keratoderma was granted in an August 2023 AOJ decision.  At that time, the AOJ also assigned an initial noncompensable disability rating and effective date.  The initial noncompensable disability rating was then continued in a spontaneous September 2023 AOJ decision stemming from the Board's March 2023 remand of entitlement to service connection for plantar keratoderma.  The Veteran timely appealed the initial August and September 2023 rating decisions stemming from said claim.  Thus, the period on appeal for consideration herein begins May 7, 2013, the date of the receipt of the Veteran's claim for benefits.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.400.

Within the significant period on appeal herein, the record only contains one VA examination assessing the current severity of the Veteran's plantar keratoderma in August 2023.  At that time, the examiner noted that the Veteran denied any current treatment, medication, or surgery for keratoderma.  The examiner also found that the Veteran's plantar keratoderma has not been treated with medication within the past 12 months.  As noted above, however, the period on appeal herein stems from May 2013, and treatment records during this period reference use of ointments, creams, and steroids specifically for the feet and hands, including in at least 2016 and 2017.  Although, the Veteran is service connected for psoriasis which also involves at least the feet.  It is otherwise unclear from the record whether all the referenced ointments, creams, steroids, and treatment within the period on appeal were for treatment of psoriasis only, treatment of plantar keratoderma only, or were for both skin disabilities.  Thus, the AOJ should have obtained clarification regarding any treatment related specifically to plantar keratoderma throughout the entire appeal period since May 2013, including the type and duration of said treatment, before assigning an initial noncompensable disability rating, a duty to assist error.  

Based on the above, this claim is remanded for corrective action.

2. Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 30 percent for psoriasis from August 23, 2023, is remanded.

3. Entitlement to an earlier effective date prior to August 23, 2023, within the remaining year prior to September 21, 2023, for the award of a 30 percent disability rating for psoriasis based on a factually ascertainable increase in severity is remanded.

The Veteran contends she should be assigned a higher disability rating for psoriasis throughout the appeal period and that the 30 percent disability rating assigned should have been effective prior to August 23, 2023, based on a factually ascertainable increase in severity.  Upon review, the Board finds remand is necessary to obtain outstanding treatment records that were identified prior to the AOJ decision on appeal and clarification regarding the Veteran's psoriasis treatment, if any.

Specifically, during an August 2023 VA examination, the Veteran was noted to be receiving phototherapy for treatment of her psoriasis.  The examiner noted that the last session was in December 2022.  However, the Veteran was afforded another VA examination in October 2023 during which the Veteran was noted to not have any current treatment for psoriasis in the last 12 months.  Upon review, pre-decisional VA treatment records during the appeal period lack any mention of phototherapy for psoriasis.  Moreover, the pre-decisional record lacks any outside provider records for consideration.  While VA treatment records in December 2023 reference that the Veteran is going to see an outside provider for dermatology, nothing indicates that actually occurred prior to the AOJ decision on appeal herein.  Nonetheless, the reference to December 2022 phototherapy must have been gleaned from something as the examiner did not indicate that this was by the Veteran's own statement.  Thus, the pre-decisional record indicates there are outstanding treatment records related to psoriasis, and the AOJ erred in failing to attempt to obtain them.  Moreover, the AOJ should have obtained clarification regarding the Veteran's psoriasis treatment as treatment records lack reference to phototherapy during the appeal period. 

Accordingly, these claims are remanded for corrective action.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain any of the Veteran's outstanding VA treatment records related to psoriasis, including for any phototherapy in December 2022, and associate them with the claims file.  

2. Ask the Veteran to complete a VA Form 21-4142 for any nonVA treatment records related to psoriasis not currently of record.  Make two requests for any facility where authorized records forms are received unless it is clear after the first request that a second request would be futile.  All efforts to obtain authorizations and / or private treatment records should be documented in the claims file.

3. Only after the above development, return the entire claims file and this remand to an appropriate clinician for clarification regarding the Veteran's psoriasis treatment during the period on appeal since September 2022.  Specifically, the examiner is directed to clarify whether the Veteran was receiving any treatment for psoriasis since September 2022, including phototherapy.

NOTE: The examiner is directed to address and reconcile the August 2023 and October 2023 VA examinations reflecting contradictory notations regarding the use of phototherapy. 

4. Schedule the Veteran for an examination by an appropriate clinician to determine the severity of the service-connected plantar keratoderma throughout the entire appeal period since May 2013. The examiner should provide a full description of the disability and report all signs and symptoms necessary for evaluating the Veteran's disability under the rating criteria.  

NOTE: The examiner is asked to review the medical evidence of record since May 2013, including references to various creams, ointments, and steroids in at least 2016 and 2017 and clarify what treatment, if any, the Veteran had for plantar keratoderma.  Specifically, the examiner is asked to clarify whether said treatment was for only psoriasis, only for plantar keratoderma, or was used to treat both disabilities.  

NOTE: If the examiner finds that the Veteran's plantar keratoderma required treatment at any time since May 2013, the examiner should clarify the duration of said treatment by explaining exactly when it began and when it ended, to the extent possible.  If the duration of any specific treatment cannot be provided, the examiner should explain why.

The examiner is advised that the Veteran is competent to report her symptoms and history, and such reports should be acknowledged and considered in formulating any opinion.  If medical literature is relied upon, the examiner should identify and specifically cite each reference material used.  The examiner should specifically discuss any contradictory evidence in the claims file and reconcile that evidence with their findings.

All opinions should be accompanied by supporting rationale explaining how the examiner arrived at the conclusions expressed. 

If the examiner determines that s/he cannot provide an opinion without resorting to speculation, s/he should explain the inability to provide an opinion, identifying precisely what facts could not be determined.  In particular, s/he should comment on whether an opinion could not be provided because the limits of medical knowledge have been exhausted or whether additional testing or information could be obtained that would lead to a conclusive opinion.

(Continued on the next page)

?

5. After the above development, and any additionally indicated development, has been completed, readjudicate the issues on appeal.

 

SHEREEN M. MARCUS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	A.C. Allen, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.