Citation Nr: A25034072
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 241126-492558
DATE: April 11, 2025

ORDER

1. Entitlement to an increased disability rating of 100 percent for major depressive disorder (previously rated as acquired psychiatric disorder, to include post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD)) is granted for the period on appeal. 

2. The issue of entitlement to a total disability rating based upon individual unemployability (TDIU) is moot. 

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. Applying the benefit of the doubt, the severity, frequency, and duration of the Veteran's symptoms more closely approximate total occupational and social impairment. 

2. In light of the 100 percent schedular rating for major depressive disorder granted herein, there is no longer a case or controversy on the issue of the Veteran's entitlement to a TDIU.?

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for entitlement to an increased disability rating of 100 percent for major depressive disorder (previously rated as acquired psychiatric disorder, to include PTSD) have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.126, 4.130, Diagnostic Code (DC) 9434. 

2. The issue of whether the Veteran is entitled to an award of a TDIU is moot.  38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. § 4.16.   

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from January 1965 to March 1968. 

This matter comes before the Board on a September 2024 rating decision. In the November 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement (NOD)), the Veteran elected the Evidence Submission docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the September 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or his representative with, or within 90 days from receipt of, the Notice of Disagreement. 38 C.F.R. § 20.303. If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal and prior to the date the Board received the Notice of Disagreement, or (2) more than 90 days following the date the Board received the Notice of Disagreement, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.303, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence which was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

1. Entitlement to an increased disability rating for major depressive disorder (previously rated as acquired psychiatric disorder, to include PTSD). 

Disability ratings are determined by applying the criteria set forth in the VA Schedule for Rating Disabilities (Rating Schedule). 38 C.F.R. Part 4. The Rating Schedule is primarily a guide in the evaluation of disability resulting from all types of diseases and injuries encountered as a result of or incident to military service. The ratings are intended to compensate, as far as can practicably be determined, the average impairment of earning capacity resulting from such diseases and injuries and their residual conditions in civilian occupations. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1. Separate diagnostic codes identify the various disabilities. Disability ratings are determined by applying the criteria set forth in the Rating Schedule. 

If two disability ratings are potentially applicable, the higher rating will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that evaluation. Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7. In view of the number of atypical instances, it is not expected, especially with the more fully described grades of disabilities, that all cases will show all the findings specified. 38 C.F.R. § 4.21. It is the defined and consistently applied policy of VA to administer the law under a broad interpretation, consistent, however, with the facts shown in every case. Any reasonable doubt regarding the degree of disability is resolved in favor of the veteran. 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.3. 

Major depressive disorder is evaluated under 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, DC 9434. Under this diagnostic code, a 70 percent evaluation is contemplated for occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control, such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence; spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work-like setting; inability to establish and maintain effective relationships. Id. 

A 100 percent evaluation is warranted when there is evidence of total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living, including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene; disorientation to time and place; memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation or name. Id. 

When determining the appropriate disability evaluation to assign, the Board's primary consideration is a veteran's symptoms, but it must also make findings as to how those symptoms impact a veteran's occupational and social impairment. Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 118 (Fed. Cir. 2013); Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436, 442 (2002). Because the use of the term "such as" in the rating criteria demonstrates that the symptoms after that phrase are not intended to constitute an exhaustive list, the Board need not find the presence of all, most, or even some, of the enumerated symptoms to award a specific rating. Mauerhan, 16 Vet. App. at 442; Sellers v. Principi, 372 F.3d 1318, 1326-27 (Fed. Cir. 2004). 

Nevertheless, all ratings in the general rating formula are also associated with objectively observable symptomatology and the plain language of the regulation makes it clear that the veteran's impairment must be "due to" those symptoms, a veteran may only qualify for a given disability by demonstrating the particular symptoms associated with that percentage, or others of similar severity, frequency, and duration. Vazquez-Claudio, 713 F.3d at 118. 

Here, the Veteran was afforded VA examinations in March and December 2023. The March 2023 examiner diagnosed the Veteran with PTSD and major depressive disorder. The examiner noted it was not possible to differentiate what symptoms were attributable to which diagnosis. The Veteran reported his relationships with his wife and granddaughter were "not so good." He also reported socially isolating and lying in bed wondering why he should get up most days. It was noted the Veteran met with Dr. D. L. monthly, and Dr. D. L. reported the Veteran's PTSD significantly increased in the past few years. It was noted the Veteran also met with a VA psychiatrist monthly. 

The examiner described the Veteran as "very cooperative." It was noted the Veteran spoke slowly, his mood was "I don't know", and his affect was "flat." The Veteran reported feeling tired and appeared depressed. The Veteran had "good recall for recent and remote events," his insight and judgment were good, he was alert and oriented, and he was dressed casually and groomed adequately. The examiner recorded symptoms of depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, chronic sleep impairment, flattened affect, disturbances of mood and motivation, difficulty establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, suicidal ideation, and an intermittent ability to perform activities of daily living. 

The examination was conducted by a licensed psychiatrist, who used reliable principles and methods of observation and analysis to diagnose the Veteran with PTSD and major depressive disorder.  As such, the Board finds this opinion probative. 

The December 2023 examiner continued a diagnosis of major depressive disorder. The Veteran reported self-isolating, trouble concentrating, trouble sleeping, trouble with activities of daily living, and trouble communicating with others. It was noted the Veteran thought about dying and closed his eyes while driving. 

The examiner noted the Veteran was "alert and oriented," but his mood and affect were "restricted." The Veteran was "casually dressed and fairly groomed," he was able to answer questions with an appropriate rate and volume of speech, but his eye contact was intermittent, with the Veteran often looking at the floor. The examiner recorded symptoms of depressed mood, panic attacks occurring weekly or less often, chronic sleep impairment, flattened affect, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, and neglect of personal appearance and hygiene. 

The examination was conducted by a licensed Doctor of Psychology, who used reliable principles and methods of observation and analysis to diagnose the Veteran with major depressive disorder.  As such, the Board finds this opinion probative. 

The Veteran's medical records, dated January 2023 through October 2024, contain evidence of total occupational and social impairment as manifested by hallucinations, grossly inappropriate behavior, a danger of hurting himself, an inability to perform activities of daily living, and memory loss. 

A January 2023 medical treatment record noted the Veteran "cannot interact appropriately with the public, co-workers, or persons of authority." It was also noted his "attention, concentration, and immediate memory are moderately to severely impaired which makes him unsafe for others and himself." Finally, it was noted that, "[s]uicidality and/or self-injurious behaviors are always a strong possibility for [the Veteran]." 

A June 2023 medical treatment record noted the Veteran "does not have much energy or endurance for even minor everyday tasks." A May 2024 medical treatment note found the Veteran to be experiencing psychological symptoms so severe they were "limiting to his daily functioning." The Veteran was hospitalized in May 2024 for active suicidal ideation. And finally, an October 2024 medical treatment record documents the Veteran's PTSD flashbacks were "so intense they present[ed] as hallucinations" and notes the Veteran experienced "constant suicide ideation." 

The evidence is, at a minimum, in equipoise. See?38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); see also Gilbert v. Derwinski,?1?Vet. App.?49, 55 (1990) ("[T]he 'benefit of the doubt' standard is similar to the rule deeply embedded in?sandlot baseball?folklore that 'the tie goes to the runner'.... [I]f... the play is close, i.e., 'there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence,' the veteran prevails by operation of [statute]."). As such, applying the benefit of the doubt, the Board finds entitlement to an increased disability rating of 100 percent for major depressive disorder is warranted. Therefore, the claim is granted. 

2. Entitlement to a TDIU. 

In his VA Form 10182 NOD, in addition to appealing the AOJ's decision as to the disability rating for his major depressive disorder, the Veteran also raised the issue of entitlement to a TDIU.  See Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447, 453 (2009) (holding that "a request for TDIU, whether expressly raised by a veteran or reasonably raised by the record, is not a separate claim for benefits, but rather involves an attempt to obtain an appropriate rating for a disability or disabilities").  

In Bradley v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 280 (2008), the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims determined that a separate TDIU rating predicated on one disability may be awarded if that disorder is not ratable at the schedular 100 percent level. Thus, pursuant to Bradley, such an award does not automatically moot the pending appeal for a TDIU.  However, a separate TDIU rating cannot be awarded based on one service- connected disability if the Veteran is already receiving a 100 percent schedular rating for that disorder. Buie v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 242 (2010).

Following implementation of the present Board decision, the Veteran will be in receipt of a schedular 100 percent evaluation for major depressive disorder for the entire period on appeal.  This is the Veteran's only service-connected disability.  Therefore, the holding of Bradley is not applicable in this case; and the issue of entitlement to a TDIU is moot, as the Veteran is in receipt of a 100 percent schedular rating for major depressive disorder.

 

ANTHONY C. SCIRÉ, JR

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Mills, D.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.