Citation Nr: A25034595
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 211122-199804
DATE: April 15, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for right ear hearing loss is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from April 1969 to April 1971.  He appeals a June 2021 rating decision by the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) that denied service connection for right ear hearing loss.  

The Veteran requested his appeal be placed on the hearing docket.  See November 2021 VA Form 10182.  Under the hearing docket, the Board is authorized to review the evidence of record at the time of the AOJ's June 2021 rating decision, in addition to evidence submitted at the Board hearing or within 90 days of the Board hearing.  38 C.F.R. ยง 20.302.  A Board hearing was held in January 2025.  A transcript is of record.

Entitlement to service connection for right ear hearing loss

The Veteran seeks service connection for right ear hearing loss.  To establish service connection, a claimant must show (1) the existence of a present disability, (2) an in-service incurrence or aggravation of an injury or disease, and (3) a causal relationship or "nexus" between the present disability and the in-service injury or disease.  Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166-67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

The Veteran has right ear hearing loss for VA purposes.  See June 2019 VA examination.  He was exposed to hazardous noise from tank and rifle fire during service.  See Board Hearing Tr. at 6.  The Veteran testified that he first noticed hearing loss towards the end of his active service.  Id. at 8.  Thus, the question in this case is whether the Veteran's right ear hearing loss is related to his service.  

The Veteran was given a VA examination in June 2019 in which an examiner concluded that his right ear hearing loss was less likely than not related to his service.  The examiner reasoned that the Veteran's entrance and exit examinations revealed normal hearing and that there was no documentation regarding complaints or treatment for hearing loss during service.  See June 2019 VA examination.  

In April 2021, the Veteran filed a supplemental claim in which he stated that his hearing loss was caused by noise exposure from rifle fire in service, and that servicemembers did not go to the medic for hearing loss.  See April 2021 VA Form 20-0995.  The AOJ did not order a new medical examination or opinion, and denied the Veteran's supplemental claim.  See June 2021 rating decision.  

Given that the June 2019 examiner's conclusion relied, in part, on a lack of in-service treatment records for hearing loss, the AOJ should have obtained a new medical opinion that considered the Veteran's explanation for why such records did not exist.  Accordingly, remand is necessary for a new examination or opinion.  See 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.802.  

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Obtain an opinion from an appropriately qualified reviewing clinician to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's right ear hearing loss.  The evidentiary record, including a copy of this remand, must be made available to and reviewed by the clinician.  The opinion must include a notation that this record review took place.  It is up to the discretion of the reviewing clinician as to whether a new examination is necessary to provide an adequate opinion.

After review, the clinician is to answer the following medical question:

Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's right ear hearing loss was incurred in, or is otherwise related to, his active service, to include his conceded noise exposure therein?

The clinician is advised that the Veteran is competent to report his symptoms and history, and that such reports, including his reports that he first noticed hearing loss towards the end of his service and that servicemembers did not go to see the medic for hearing loss, must be considered in formulating an opinion.  

(Continued on the next page)

?

The complete rationale for all opinions should be set forth and a discussion of the facts and medical principles involved would be of considerable assistance to the Board.  If an opinion cannot be provided without resorting to mere speculation, the reviewing clinician must provide a complete explanation for why an opinion cannot be rendered.  In doing so, the clinician must explain whether the inability to provide a more definitive opinion is the result of a need for additional information, or that he or she has exhausted the limits of current medical knowledge in providing an answer to the question.

 

 

DONNIE R. HACHEY

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Moore, Thomas J.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.1303.