Citation Nr: A25034222
Decision Date: 04/14/25	Archive Date: 04/14/25

DOCKET NO. 240213-416336
DATE: April 14, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include depression, is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for lumbosacral strain with intervertebral disc syndrome (IVDS) is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for a left lower extremity nerve disability (claimed as left pain and numbness) as secondary to lumbosacral strain with IVDS, is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for a right lower extremity nerve disability (claimed as right pain and numbness) as secondary to lumbosacral strain with IVDS, is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for hypertension is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral hearing loss is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The persuasive weight of the evidence is against finding that the Veteran had a mental health disability, to include depression, at any time during or approximate to the pendency of the claim.

2. The Veteran has since been service-connected for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), effective September 11, 2023, and rated for manifestations to include (but not limited to) depressed mood. 

3. The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran's lumbosacral strain with IVDS began during active service, within a year of service, or is otherwise etiologically related to service.

4. The persuasive weight of the evidence is against a finding that the Veteran had a bilateral lower extremity nerve disability at any time during the appellate period, which was incurred in service, within a year of service, or is attributable to service or a service-connected disability.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include depression, have not been met. 38 U.S.C. § 1110, 1131, 5103, 5103A, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.310, 4.14, 4.125.

2. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for lumbosacral strain with intervertebral disc syndrome (IVDS) have been met. 38 U.S.C. § §§ 1110, 1117, 1131, 1154(a), 1168, 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.307, 3.309.

3. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for a left lower extremity nerve disability (claimed as left pain and numbness), as secondary to lumbosacral strain with IVDS, have not been met. 38 U.S.C. § §§ 1110, 1117, 1131, 1154(a), 1168, 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.310.

4. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for a right lower extremity nerve disability (claimed as right pain and numbness), as secondary to lumbosacral strain with IVDS, have not been met. 38 U.S.C. § §§ 1110, 1117, 1131, 1154(a), 1168, 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.310.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Air Force March 1985 to April 1988 with additional service in the Air Force Reserves.  

This matter comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from March 2023, April 2023, and February 2024 rating decisions issued by a VA Regional Office (RO). The March 2023 rating decision denied entitlement to service connection for bilateral lower extremity nerve disabilities claimed as pain and numbness secondary to a lumbar spine disability. The April 2023 rating decision denied entitlement to service connection for depression and a lumbar spine disability. Two rating decisions were issued in February 2024 which separately denied entitlement to service connection for bilateral hearing loss and hypertension. 

In regard to the Veteran's bilateral hearing loss claim, in January 2024, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, and requested readjudication of bilateral hearing loss most recently addressed in an October 2023 rating decision.  In February 2024, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the supplemental claim decision on appeal, which found that new and relevant evidence had been received and denied the claim based on the evidence of record at the time of that decision.

In the February 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket appealing all rating decisions noted above.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2023, April 2023, and February 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decisions on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of entitlement to service connection for hypertension and bilateral hearing loss, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

The Board has limited the discussion below to the relevant evidence required to support its finding of fact and conclusion of law, as well as to the specific contentions regarding the case as raised directly by the Veteran and those reasonably raised by the record.  See Scott v. McDonald, 789 F.3d 1375, 1381 (Fed. Cir. 2015); Robinson v. Peake, 21 Vet. App. 545, 552 (2008).

Service Connection

Generally, service connection may be granted for disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303. The three-element test for service connection requires evidence of: (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166 -67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

Alternatively, service connection may be established under 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(b) by (a) evidence of (i) the existence of a chronic disease in service or during an applicable presumption period under 38 C.F.R. § 3.307 and (ii) present manifestations of the same chronic disease, or (b) when a chronic disease is not present during service, evidence of continuity of symptomatology. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303. The provisions of 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(b) relating to continuity of symptomatology can be applied only in cases involving those conditions explicitly recognized as chronic under 38 C.F.R. § 3.309(a), which includes such diseases as arthritis. See Walker v. Shinseki, 708 F.3d 1331 (Fed. Cir. 2013); Fountain v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 258 (2015).

Establishing service connection on a secondary basis requires evidence sufficient to show (1) that a current disability exists and (2) that the current disability was either (a) caused by or (b) aggravated by a service-connected disability. Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439, 448 (1995) (en banc); see also Spicer v. McDonough, 61 F.4th 1360 (2023) (invalidating the requirement of "proximate cause" and instead held a "but for" causation or aggravation is enough to show entitlement to secondary service connection).

On August 10, 2022, the Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxins Act of 2022 (PACT Act) established circumstances in which a specific toxic exposure risk activity (TERA) examination is required if it is determined that a veteran participated in a TERA as a result of his service.  Here, the Veteran has been found to have participated in a TERA based on his military occupational specialty (MOS) as an aircraft maintenance specialist in the Air Force and exposure to several substances has been conceded. See January 2024 VA Memorandum. 

In rendering this decision, the Board has reviewed all evidence of record whether discussed in detail. See Newhouse v. Nicholson, 497 F.3d 1298, 1302 (Fed. Cir. 2007) (holding the Board must only discuss the evidence which is relevant to the issues on appeal).

A veteran is entitled to the benefit of the doubt when the evidence is in approximate balance or "nearly equal," and does not require that the evidence be in exact equipoise. Under 38 U.S.C. § 5107, the benefit of the doubt rule is clear and unambiguous on its face. Evidence is in approximate balance when the evidence in favor of and opposing the veteran's claim is found to be almost exactly or nearly equal. Lynch v. McDonough, 999 F.3d 1391 (Fed. Cir. 2021), affirmed en banc 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

1. Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include depression, is denied.

The Veteran contends he suffers from depression due to a lumbar spine disability. See January 2023 Claim; see also February 2024 VA Form 10182. 

The Board takes judicial notice of the fact that after the April 2023 rating decision on appeal here, the Veteran was service connected for PTSD, effective September 11, 2023. Although not within the period on appeal, the Veteran alternatively noted on his February 2024 VA Form 10182 that his depression should be considered as secondary to his PTSD. Id. 

With respect ot psychiatric disabilities, VA expressly limited compensation to disabilities conforming to a Diagnostic and Statistical Manual to Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM-5) diagnosis. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.125. Thus, in addition to the general service connection elements, the Board notes that a DSM-5 diagnosis is required to satisfy the first "current diagnosis" element of service connection. Id.; see also Martinez-Bodon v. McDonough, 38 F.4th 1241 (Fed. Cir. 2022).

Here, the Veteran does not, and did not, have any DSM-5 diagnoses of any mental health disability during the period on appeal and, therefore, the appeal must be denied.

Again, after the period on appeal, the Veteran was assessed and diagnosed with PTSD, for which he is now service connected.  His disability encompasses manifestations, to include depression and, to that extent, the appeal appears to be moot. Compare Amberman v. Shinseki, 570 F.3d 1377, 1381 (Fed. Cir. 2009) (two psychiatric conditions "could have different symptoms and it could therefore be improper in some circumstances for the VA to treat these separately diagnosed conditions as producing only the same disability").

Nonetheless, the Board considers here whether the Veteran has or had an acquired psychiatric disability during the period on appeal here in which service connection can be granted. The Board finds he did not and for that reason, the appeal is denied. 

Turning to the relevant evidence of record, the Veteran's service treatment records (STRs) are silent as to any complaints, treatment, or diagnoses related to any psychiatric symptoms, complaints, or diagnoses.

After service, the record also is silent as to any complaints, treatment, or diagnoses of depression or any acquired psychiatric disorder.  

Again, the Veteran's contentions as it pertains to this appeal is that he has depression as a result of his lumbar spine disability. 

He also did not identify any particular treatment in connection with his claim and the record does not otherwise reasonably identify such treatment.

VA has a duty to assist the Veteran in obtaining information, and the Veteran has a duty on his part to cooperate with VA in developing a claim. See Wood v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 190, 193 (1991) (noting that "[t]he duty to assist is not always a one-way street"). VA's duty must be understood as a duty to assist the Veteran in developing his claim, rather than a duty on the part of VA to develop the entire claim with the Veteran performing a passive role. Turk v. Peake, 21 Vet. App. 565, 568 (2008). In this instance, the Veteran must aid in the development of his claim by providing or identifying any treatment records relevant to his claim. If the Veteran fails to do so, as is the case here, his claim will be decided based on the evidence of record. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.655.

The Board acknowledges the Veteran was not afforded a VA examination in connection with his claim, but in light of the lack of any indication of a DSM-V diagnosis

The lack of any indication of a DSM-V diagnosis prior to the April 2023 rating decision is dispositive to the Veteran's depression claim here. See 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.304(f); 4.125(a); see also Martinez-Bodon v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 393 (2020) (holding that the Court does not have jurisdiction to review the Secretary's decision to require a psychiatric diagnosis under the DSM-V as set out in the schedule of ratings). Therefore, the Board finds the RO's duty to provide a VA examination was not triggered here as there was no reasonable indication that the Veteran had a disability that could be associated with an incident of service. See McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006). 

The Board acknowledges that while the Veteran believes he had depression prior to the rating decision on appeal, he is not competent to provide a diagnosis as this issue is medically complex, requiring specialized medical education and the ability to conduct and/or interpret complicated diagnostic medical testing. Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 n.4 (Fed. Cir. 2007). 

In short, at the time of the April 2023 rating decision, the record was devoid of any evidence that the Veteran had a DSM-5 diagnosis of any acquired psychiatric disability.  Further, there were no complaints, treatment, or diagnoses for related manifestations. While the Veteran contended on his claim that he believed he had depression related to a lumbar spine injury, he also was not (and is not) service connected for a lumbar spine disability. For these reasons, the Board finds there was no duty to provide the Veteran a VA examination based on the cursory information available at the time of the April 2023 rating decision.

It is clear the Veteran has now been service-connected for PTSD, which encompasses depressive manifestations and were largely attributed to an in-service stressor witnessing a plane crash. 

Thus, the persuasive weight of the evidence weighs against a finding that the Veteran has or had a DSM-5 diagnosis of depression, or any acquired psychiatric disability, at any point during the period on appeal.  As such, the claim fails for want of a disability. The Board notes the Veteran has since been service-connected with PTSD, encompassing the Veteran's depressive manifestations.  For these reasons, the Veteran's appeal is denied. 

there is no persuasive evidence of record indicating he had separate manifestations that were attributed to a separate and distinct disability.  As such, his pending appeal is essentially moot and, therefore, denied.

2. Entitlement to service connection for lumbosacral strain with intervertebral disc syndrome (IVDS), is denied. 

The Veteran contends he has a low back condition that is related to an injury that occurred during active-duty service. See January 2023 Claim, see also February 2024 VA Form 10182. 

The Board finds service connection is not warranted. 

Turning to the relevant evidence of record, the Veteran's STRs contain a single report of back pain during active duty in January 1986 stemming from a fall on a ramp. X-rays taken at that time were noted to be normal. 

During the Veteran's non-active-duty periods of service in the Air Force Reserves, STRs contain a September 1988 periodic Air Force Reserves examination which documented the Veteran's reports of being in "excellent health...no medications" with no reports of back or low extremity issues. A January 1989 record from Mary Black Memorial Hospital, indicated the Veteran was hospitalized for surgery to repair a herniated lumbar disc. Admission records further document that a surgery was necessitated as a part of a workmen's compensation claim from the Kohler company. A postoperative visit later in January 1989 noted the Veteran's reports of having relief from left leg pain and his back incision was healing well. A February 1989 physical profile report noted the Veteran's need for "no squatting, lifting, or prolonged standing" stemming from the back surgery. 

After service, it is important to emphasize no "pertinent VA Healthcare records from a VA Medical Center" were located prior to the April 2023 rating decision on appeal. See April 2023 Rating Decision; see also July 2021 correspondence. 

Indeed, the Veteran himself does not claim to having received any post-service treatment for his claimed condition, nor has he identified any such treatment either through VA or privately. See January 2023 Claim.

VA has a duty to assist the Veteran in obtaining information, and the Veteran has a duty on his part to cooperate with VA in developing a claim. See Wood v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 190, 193 (1991) (noting that "[t]he duty to assist is not always a one-way street"). VA's duty must be understood as a duty to assist the Veteran in developing his claim, rather than a duty on the part of VA to develop the entire claim with the Veteran performing a passive role. Turk v. Peake, 21 Vet. App. 565, 568 (2008). In this instance, the Veteran must aid in the development of his claim by providing or identifying any treatment records relevant to his claim. If the Veteran fails to do so, as is the case here, his claim will be decided based on the evidence of record. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.655.

During the period on appeal, the Veteran underwent a VA back examination in January 2023. At which time, the examiner diagnosed the Veteran with lumbosacral strain and intervertebral disc syndrome (IVDS). Historically, the examiner noted the Veteran's reports of injuring his back during service due to a fall and having back and leg pain as a result. Back surgery in 1994 and 1995 was reported with physical therapy after the surgeries. Current symptoms were noted to include pain with sitting for prolonged periods and tightness in his lower back. Pain in the right hip radiating down to his right leg was also reported. Range of motion (ROM) was noted to be abnormal with pain noted upon forward flexion, extension, and rotation. No guarding or muscle spasms were reported. Muscle strength was noted to be reduced bilaterally for hip flexion reflecting a 4/5 upon testing, however, no muscle atrophy was indicated, and muscle strength otherwise was noted to be normal. Reflex and sensory testing was noted to be normal. No ankylosis was indicated. Straight leg raising testing was reported to be normal indicating no radiculopathy. The examiner further noted there were no other signs or symptoms of radiculopathy. IVDS was again indicated however, with no prescribed bed rest by a physician required.

Ultimately, the January 2023 examiner provided a positive nexus opinion finding the Veteran had injured his back during active-duty service and subsequently underwent surgery therefor. However, the examiner incorrectly assumed that the Veteran's back surgery occurred while he was on active duty because documentation of which was located in his STRs, and the timeline appeared to the examiner (incorrectly) that it coincided with the documented fall injury. See Reonal v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 458, 460-61 (1993) (medical opinion based on inaccurate factual premise may properly be rejected as non-probative). Therefore, the RO sought an addendum medical opinion, noting these errors.

In April 2023, the same VA examiner provided said addendum medical opinion. This time, the examiner opined that it is less likely than not that the Veteran's current lumbar spine disability is due to the back injury he sustained during active-duty service. The examiner noted the Veteran's documented complaint of back pain in January 1986 due to falling on a ramp and that an x-ray of his lower back at that time was "normal". STRs were noted to further show that the Veteran denied back pain during his Air Force Reserves periodic examination in September 1988. The examiner then reported that there was no complaint and/or mention of a back condition until January 1989 when the Veteran was admitted to Mary Black Memorial Hospital for surgery to repair a herniated lumbar disc. The admission records from Mary Black were also reported to show that said injury was due to a workmen's compensation claim from the Kohler Company. A postoperative follow-up visit in January 1989, noted that he had relief of left leg pain, and his back incision was healing well. The examiner then concluded that, "there is no additional records of a complaint and/or care for a back condition after the surgery in January of 1989...a nexus has not been established".

Based on the above, the Board finds the persuasive weight of the evidence is against the Veteran's appeal.

At the outset, the Board notes the Veteran has only contended that his lumbar spine disabilities are related to a documented fall during active-duty service. See January 2023 Claim; see also January 2023 VA examination. 

The Board has considered whether additional development was necessary in light of the Veteran's service and presumed TERA exposures. See January 2024 VA Memorandum. As noted in the PACT Act, there are circumstances in which a specific toxic exposure risk activity (TERA) examination is required, however, an exception applies here. That is, the Veteran has only contended that his lumbar spine disabilities are due to physical trauma from a fall documented during active-duty service thus, a TERA specific examination is not warranted. See 38 U.S.C. § 1168.

It is undisputed from the record that the Veteran has a current diagnosis of lumbosacral strain and IVDS. However, the disability was not shown as chronic in service, did not manifest to a compensable degree within a presumptive period, and was not noted in service with attributable continuity of symptomatology. The Veteran was not diagnosed with lumbosacral strain and IVDS until 2023, decades after his last period of active-duty service. Accordingly, the presumptions under 38 C.F.R. § 3.309 are not applicable.

Service connection for a lumbar spine disability may still be granted on a direct basis; however, the evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that a medical nexus exists between the Veteran's lumbar spine conditions and an in-service injury, event, or disease, including during a period of active duty for training (ADT) or inactive duty for training (IDT). 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; Holton v. Shinseki, 557 F.3d 1363, 1366 (Fed. Cir. 2009); 38 C.F.R. § 3.303. The Veteran has not contended, nor does the record suggest, any in-service injury except for a fall which occurred in January 1986 during active duty. The Board acknowledges here that the record contains a line of duty determination that the Veteran required limitations to his physical duties while in the Air Force Reserves. However, hospital records surrounding this finding reflect that the Veteran underwent surgery in January 1989 for a herniated disc in his back which was related to a worker's compensation claim involving his civilian employer, Kohler. Thus, the question becomes whether the Veteran's current lumbar spine conditions are due solely to the 1986 fall injury which occurred during active duty.

To this point, the Board finds most probative the August 2023 VA opinion as the examiner considered the entire evidence of record, to include the Veteran's STRs, post-service treatment records, and lay statements, and contains clear conclusions and supporting data such that the Board is able to make a fully informed decision. See Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 123 (2007). The August 2023 VA examiner opined that the Veteran's lumbar spine conditions are less likely than not related to service, to include the fall injury in 1986. The examiner explained that there was no evidence of chronic or recurrent back problems noting specifically the September 1988 examination, which was conducted after the fall, and during which the Veteran himself reported being in "good health" with no back issues, while also considering the Veteran's lay statements of continuous pain. Moreover, the examiner noted that there were no additional documented complaints or treatment for a back condition after separation from service. The examiner's rationale is supported by the contemporaneous medical evidence of record which lacks any documented reports of continued complaints or treatment for back symptoms.

Although a lack of contemporaneous medical evidence does not automatically constitute substantive negative evidence, the Board may weigh the absence of contemporaneous records when assessing the credibility of lay evidence. Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331, 1336-37 (Fed. Cir. 2006); Buczynski v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 221, 224 (2011). The Board acknowledges that the Veteran's STRs reflect a back injury in 1986 during active duty. In the years thereafter, however, STRs and medical records lack any evidence of continued or persistent symptoms to corroborate the Veteran's statements of experiencing continued pain in the lower back. That is, until he filed a service connection claim seeking benefits for his lumbar spine disability and was provided a VA examination revealing lumbosacral strain and IVDS, there were no pertinent records or evidence applicable to his lumbar spine claim. It stands to reason that if the Veteran continued to experience lumbar spine symptoms after 1986, he would have reported said symptoms in contemporaneous treatment records, to include during his Air Force Reserves examination in 1988, or at least did so after service, especially considering the need to undergo back surgery for a worker's compensation claim in 1989. Upon review of the evidence of record, the Board finds the Veteran's contentions of persistent symptoms of back pain and symptoms to be not credible as they are contradicted by the contemporaneous evidence of record.

Ultimately, the Board finds the Veteran's lay statements regarding onset and persistence of symptoms not credible. While the Veteran is certainly competent to describe that he experienced left shoulder pain in 1986 and thereafter, competency and credibility are two separate inquiries. Rucker v. Brown, 10 Vet. App. 67, 74 (1997) (distinguishing between competence and weight and credibility and explaining that the "former is a legal concept determining whether testimony may be heard and considered by the trier of fact, while the latter is a factual determination going to the probative value of the evidence to be made after the evidence has been admitted"). If evidence is not competent, it cannot be considered as evidence by the factfinder. Id. However, the mere fact that evidence is deemed competent does not mean that it must be found persuasive of a particular fact. See id. If evidence is found to be competent, it is for the Board to determine what, if any, probative value to assign to that evidence. See Washington v. Nicholson, 19 Vet. App. 362, 368 (2005) (it is the responsibility of the Board to assess the probative weight of the evidence).

The Veteran's claims file does not reference any complaints regarding persistent lumbar spine symptoms until he filed a complaint for disability benefits in January 2023. His statements of persistence are not corroborated by the contemporaneous evidence of record. Indeed, the Veteran himself did not claim to have received any post-service treatment for his claimed condition, nor has he identified any such treatment either through VA or privately. See January 2023 Claim. Thus, to the extent the Veteran asserts a continuity of symptomatology beginning at the time of the 1986 injury, the Board finds these statements to lack credibility as they are in direct conflict with the Veteran's contemporaneous STRs, medical records, and his own statements. See Gardin v. Shinseki, 613 F.3d 1374, 1379-80 (Fed. Cir. 2010) (affirming rejection of lay evidence based, in part, on fact that it was inconsistent with the record).

Moreover, the Board finds most probative the August 2023 VA opinion wherein the examiner opined that the Veteran's current lumbar spine conditions are not related to the 1986 injury during active-duty service. While the Veteran believes his current lumbar spine conditions are related to the 1986 fall injury, he is not competent to provide a diagnosis or nexus opinion in this case. The issues are medically complex, as they require specialized medical knowledge, training, and testing. Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377, 1377 n.4 (Fed. Cir. 2007). Consequently, the Board gives more probative weight to the competent medical evidence, including the 2023 VA opinion of record.

Accordingly, the evidence is persuasively against the claim. As there is not an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence, the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine is not applicable and service connection for lumbosacral strain with IVDS is not warranted. The appeal is denied. See 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

3. Entitlement to service connection for a left lower extremity disability (claimed as left pain and numbness) as secondary to lumbosacral strain with IVDS, is denied.

4. Entitlement to service connection for a right lower extremity disability (claimed as right pain and numbness) as secondary to lumbosacral strain and IVDS, is denied. 

The Veteran contends that he suffers from pain and numbness in his lower extremities due to his lumbar spine disability. See January 2023 Claim.

STRs do not indicate any complaints, treatment, or diagnoses related to any lower extremity nerve conditions. However, they do indicate, as noted above, that the Veteran sustained a fall injury to his back in 1986 while on active duty resulting in pain. X-rays taken at that time revealed a normal back. A 1988 Air Force Reserves examination documented the Veteran's reports of being in "good" health and no reported back issues. 

After service, it is important to emphasize no "pertinent VA Healthcare records from a VA Medical Center" were located prior to the rating decision on appeal. See March 2023 Rating Decision.

Indeed, the Veteran himself does not claim to have received any post-service treatment for these claimed conditions, nor has he identified any such treatment either through VA or privately. See January 2023 Claim. 

VA has a duty to assist the Veteran in obtaining information, and the Veteran has a duty on his part to cooperate with VA in developing a claim. See Wood v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 190, 193 (1991) (noting that "[t]he duty to assist is not always a one-way street"). VA's duty must be understood as a duty to assist the Veteran in developing his claim, rather than a duty on the part of VA to develop the entire claim with the Veteran performing a passive role. Turk v. Peake, 21 Vet. App. 565, 568 (2008). In this instance, the Veteran must aid in the development of his claim by providing or identifying any treatment records relevant to his claim. If the Veteran fails to do so, as is the case here, his claim will be decided based on the evidence of record. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.655.

The Veteran underwent a VA back examination in January 2023 as noted above. At which time, the Veteran's reports of pain and numbness were noted however, the examiner did not diagnose the Veteran with any bilateral lower extremity nerve condition. Negative results from straight leg raise testing were indicated to support this finding along with no reflex or sensory loss upon further testing. 

Regardless, as noted above, in order to prevail under a theory of secondary service connection, the primary disability must first and foremost be service connected. See Wallin v. West, 11 Vet. App. 509, 512 (1998). In contrast, herein the Board finds that service connection is not warranted for the Veteran's lumbar spine condition, and therefore as a matter of law, the Veteran's claim on a secondary service-connection theory of entitlement must be denied. Id.; see also 38 C.F.R. § 3.310 (b).

The Board has also considered whether any lower extremity nerve condition could be directly attributed to service but finds no such supporting evidence. Aside from the lack of in-service treatment, complaints, or diagnoses, the post-service medical evidence indicates no clinical diagnosis of lower extremity radiculopathy and relates the reported pain and numbness symptoms, first documented, and diagnosed decades after service, with impaired functional ability stemming from his nonservice-connected lumbosacral strain and IVDS. See January 2023 VA Examination; see also August 2023 VA Medical Opinion. Thus, service connection for any bilateral lower extremity nerve condition on a direct basis is not warranted. See 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7. The appeal is denied.

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to service connection for hypertension is remanded. 

The Board finds a pre-decisional duty to assist error has occurred warranting a remand to correct. Specifically, the RO failed to address documented abnormal blood pressure (BP) readings during the Veteran's active-duty service, to include those noted within a year of separation from active service.

The Veteran generally contends that his current hypertension is a result of active service. See January 2024 Claim. 

The Veteran's service treatment records (STRs) contain reports of low BP for two weeks and a current reading of 120/84 in January 1986. In June 1986, the Veteran was documented to have "passed out" resulting in an injury to his chin/jaw. A December 1988 BP reading reflected 120/78.  Elevated BP readings of 130/82 were noted during a September 1988 Air Force Reserves periodic examination. 

Upon filing his claim, the Veteran was afforded a VA hypertension examination in February 2024. At which time, the examiner diagnosed the Veteran with hypertension. Ultimately, the examiner provided a negative nexus opinion focused exclusively on the Veteran's presumed TERA exposures. 

An opinion has not been rendered, however, on whether the Veteran's hypertension had its onset in service given the documented abnormal BP readings and symptoms noted above. Thus, remand is necessary to obtain an opinion on direct service connection for hypertension to correct this pre-decisional duty to assist error. See Robinson v. Peake, 21 Vet. App. 545, 552-56 (2008) (holding the Board is required to address those issues either expressly raised by the claimant or reasonably raised by the record).

While the Board is remanding this matter at this time to obtain a VA examination and medical opinion, the Board is mindful of the holding in Smith v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 332 (2020) and the impact of implicit credibility determinations within remand orders. The Board does not at this time make any determinations regarding the credibility of any evidence currently of record, to include those described in this remand.

2. Entitlement to service connection for bilateral hearing loss is remanded.

The Board finds a pre-decisional duty to assist error has occurred warranting a remand to correct. Specifically, the RO relied on inadequate VA examinations to deny entitlement to service connection for bilateral hearing loss. 

The Veteran asserts that he currently suffers from bilateral hearing loss as a direct result of hazardous noise exposure during service. See January 2024 Supplemental Claim. 

At the outset, the RO has favorably found that the Veteran was exposed to hazardous noise during service as a result of his military occupational specialty as an aircraft maintenance specialist. Also, the Veteran's service treatment records (STRs) indicate that the Veteran entered service with hearing loss in his left ear meeting VA's definition of hearing loss, but not in his right ear. See February 1985 Enlistment Examination; see also 38 C.F.R. § 3.385. Therefore, for the Veteran's right ear only, he is presumed to have entered service "sound" and the presumption of soundness applies. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.385; see also McKinney v. McDonald, 28 Vet. App. 15 (2016). 

In regard to the Veteran's left ear, when a pre-existing condition is noted upon entry into service, as is the case here, "the veteran cannot bring a claim for service connection, but the veteran may bring a claim for service-connected aggravation of the disorder." Wagner v. Principi, 370 F.2d 1089, 1096 (Fed. Cir. 2004). A pre-existing condition will be considered to have been aggravated by active service "where there is an increase in disability during such service, unless there is a specific finding that the increase in disability is due to the natural progress of the disease." 38 U.S.C. § 1153. In such cases, the question of whether a pre-existing defect or injury underwent an increase in severity "must be answered in the affirmative before the presumption of aggravation attaches." Verdon v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 529, 538 (1996). It is the veteran who bears the burden of proof to show an increase in disability occurred in service. 38 U.S.C. § 1153; Wagner, 370 F.3d at 1096. If the veteran satisfies the burden, the pre-existing condition will be presumed to have been aggravated by service. Wagner, 370 F.3d at 1096. In such cases, the burden falls on the government to rebut the presumption of aggravation by clear and unmistakable evidence that the demonstrated increase in disability was the result of the natural progress of the condition. Id.

Therefore, the remaining questions before the Board are whether the Veteran has right ear hearing loss for VA purposes, and if so, whether there is a nexus to his conceded in-service noise exposure, and in regard to his left ear, whether his preexisting hearing loss was aggravated by service. Unfortunately, due to the inadequacies of the VA examinations of record discussed below, the Board cannot address these necessary questions and a remand is therefore warranted. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802.

Throughout the appellate period, the Veteran was afforded VA examinations for hearing loss in August 2021 and February 2024. Both examiners were not able to provide Puretone audiometric testing results noting that "today's results are not consistent with organic hearing loss". The February 2024 examiner also indicated that Speech Discrimination scores were not appropriate for the Veteran because the examiner reported he was "unable to obtain/maintain seal" during testing. The August 2021 examiner provided a diagnosis of "mixed hearing loss" but otherwise refused to provide any nexus opinions indicating that he could not do so "without resorting to speculation". The February 2024 examiner declined to provide any etiology opinions noting the examination was "not valid, therefore, no diagnosis of hearing loss can be made". 

The Board finds the VA examiners' lack of rationale to support their findings that the examination results were inconsistent "with organic hearing loss" and thus invalid for rating purposes, renders the entirety of their findings insufficient for the Board to adjudicate the Veteran's claim. The examiners' failure to do so, provides the Board with no basis with which to assign probative value to the examinations themselves in relation to the other evidence of record. See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 312 (2007) (once VA undertakes to provide a medical examination or opinion, it must ensure that the examination or opinion is adequate). The examiners did not cite to specific treatment records in support of their findings, nor did they report that the Veteran himself was being uncooperative during examination. To the contrary, the February 2024 examiner reported the Veteran was able to communicate and followed instructions.

Given the unexplained inconsistencies noted above and the inability to provide valid Puretone and speech discrimination scores, a remand is warranted to obtain a corrective VA examination with medical nexus opinions, a pre-decisional duty-to-assist error.

While the Board is remanding this matter at this time to obtain a VA examination and medical opinion, the Board is mindful of the holding in Smith v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 332 (2020) and the impact of implicit credibility determinations within remand orders. The Board does not at this time make any determinations regarding the credibility of any evidence currently of record, to include those described in this remand.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain an addendum medical opinion from an appropriate examiner to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's hypertension. The entire claims file and this remand should be made available for review. The necessity of an in-person examination is left to the discretion of the examiner. The examiner is asked to provide an opinion addressing the following:

(a.) Whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's hypertension was caused by or incurred during his active-duty service, to include within one year of separation. 

In so opining, the examiner is asked to specifically address the in-service documented reports of abnormal blood pressure readings and symptoms of "passing out". See January 1986, June 1986, December 1988, and September 1988 service treatment records.

The examiner must provide a complete rationale for any opinion expressed, based on the examiner's clinical and medical expertise; established medical principles; and references to the evidence of record, as appropriate.

If the examiner determines that s/he cannot provide an opinion without resorting to speculation, s/he should explain the inability to provide an opinion, identifying precisely what facts could not be determined. In particular, s/he should comment on whether an opinion could not be provided because the limits of medical knowledge have been exhausted or whether additional testing or information could be obtained that would lead to a conclusive opinion.

2. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination before an appropriate examiner to determine the nature and etiology of his claimed bilateral hearing loss. The entire claims file and this remand should be made available for review. The clinician is asked to render an opinion, including rationale, addressing:

(a.) Whether the Veteran has a right ear hearing loss disability that is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) (i) had an onset in service; (ii) manifested to a compensable degree within a year of separation from service; or (iii) is otherwise related to service, to include his exposure to hazardous noise as a result of his military occupational specialty as an aircraft maintenance specialist.

(b.) Whether the Veteran's preexisting left ear hearing loss increased in severity during active service as a result of his exposure to hazardous noise as an aircraft maintenance specialist and, if so, was the increase in severity during service clearly and unmistakably (i.e., undebatable) due to the natural progression of the disorder?

In so opining, the examiner should consider all relevant medical and lay evidence of record, including the August 2021 and February 2024 VA examinations, as well as the February 1985, March 1988, and September 1988 audiograms located in the Veteran's service treatment records.

The examiner is advised that the Veteran is competent to report his symptoms and history, and such reports should be acknowledged and considered in formulating any opinion. 

If medical literature is relied upon, the examiner should identify and specifically cite each reference material used. 

All opinions should be accompanied by supporting rationale explaining how the examiner arrived at the conclusions expressed.

If the examiner determines that s/he cannot provide an opinion without resorting to speculation, s/he should explain the inability to provide an opinion, identifying precisely what facts could not be determined. In particular, s/he should comment on whether an opinion could not be provided because the limits of medical knowledge have been exhausted or whether additional testing or information could be obtained that would lead to a conclusive opinion.

NOTE: If the examiner finds that any testing results are inconsistent or unreliable for ratings purposes, he/she must fully explain why that is so. (i.e. the veteran was not cooperative, appeared to embellish, or that there was equipment failure).

3. After the above development, and any additionally indicated development, has been completed, readjudicate the issues on appeal.

 

 

SHEREEN M. MARCUS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Minnitte, Samuel F.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.