Citation Nr: A25034300
Decision Date: 04/14/25	Archive Date: 04/14/25

DOCKET NO. 240819-466500
DATE: April 14, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a foot disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for hearing loss is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a heart disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for posttraumatic stress disorder is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Marine Corps from January 1996 to January 2000, to include service in Southwest Asia.

This case comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from March 2024 rating decisions issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).  In an August 2024, VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the direct review lane.   

As an appeal in which the appellant requested, on the Notice of Disagreement, direct review by the Board without submission of additional evidence and without a Board hearing, the Board's decision is based on a review of the evidence of record at the time of the decision on the issues on appeal.  38 C.F.R. ยง 20.301.

1. Entitlement to service connection for a foot disability is remanded.

2. Entitlement to service connection for hearing loss is remanded.

3. Entitlement to service connection for a heart disability is remanded.

4. Entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea is remanded.

5. Entitlement to service connection for posttraumatic stress disorder is remanded.

The Veteran is seeking service connection for a foot disability, hearing loss, a heart disability, sleep apnea and for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD).  He claims the following:  that a foot condition is due to standing for long periods of time and from wearing poorly fitted boots and shoes; that hearing loss is due to shooting guns with without adequate ear protection; that a heart condition began in 1999 with heart palpitations and skipped beats; that sleep apnea is due to being woken up most nights for react drills and that his sleeping was impacted; and that PTSD is related to fear of hostile military or terrorist activity.  

The RO determined that VA examinations were warranted for each of the Veteran's claims.  The claims file reflects copies of three examination notices that were mailed to the Veteran in January 2024.  The notices did not specify clearly what claim would be addressed by each examination.  Moreover, each notice indicated that the Veteran was scheduled for examinations on January 29, 2024, and on February 15, 2024; however, computer printouts show that the Veteran failed to report for sleep apnea and hearing loss examinations on February 24, 2024, and that he failed to report for a PTSD examination on March 22, 2024.  There are no printouts showing cancellations of foot and heart examinations.

In the March 2024 rating decisions on appeal, the RO determined that the Veteran failed to report for scheduled examinations, however, it is unclear if the Veteran received notices of the attempt to schedule the examinations.  Therefore, the Board finds that VA medical opinions are warranted to address the nature and etiology of his claimed foot disability, hearing loss, heart disability, sleep apnea and PTSD.  See McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006).  The failure to provide etiology opinions is a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Schedule the Veteran for examinations to determine the nature and origin of a foot disability, hearing loss, heart disability, sleep apnea and for PTSD. The examiner must review the claims file and conduct all necessary testing.

The examiner is requested provide an opinion on whether any current foot disability, hearing loss, heart disability, sleep apnea and PTSD is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) related to an in-service event, injury, or disease?

A complete and detailed rationale should be provided for each opinion requested by the examiner.

 

 

RAY BARTO SLABBEKORN, JR.

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Henriquez, J.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.1303.