Citation Nr: A25034234
Decision Date: 04/14/25	Archive Date: 04/14/25

DOCKET NO. 240414-433053
DATE: April 14, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to a disability rating higher than 70 percent for depressive disorder due to another medical conditions and insomnia with traumatic brain injury is remanded.

Entitlement to a total disability rating based on individual unemployability (TDIU) is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from August 1976 to July 1992, from May 2001 to August 2001, and from May 2002 to August 2002.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a December 2023 Appeals Modernization Act (AMA) rating decision from a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ), that, as pertinent here, denied the Veteran's claims for entitlement to a TDIU and a disability rating higher than 70 percent for his service connected depressive disorder due to another medical conditions and insomnia with traumatic brain injury (TBI).  The December 2023 rating decision noted the favorable finding that the Veteran's service-connected disabilities meet the schedular criteria for entitlement to a TDIU.  The Board is bound by favorable findings unless rebutted by clear and unmistakable error.  38 U.S.C. § 5104A.

In April 2024, the Veteran initiated this appeal to the Board with the filing of a Decision Review Request (VA Form 10182), requesting direct review by a Veterans Law Judge on the evidence of record at the time of the rating decision.  In April 2024 correspondence, the Board acknowledged the appeal and informed the Veteran that the appeal had been placed on the Board's direct review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the AOJ's rating decision on appeal, here as of December 18, 2023.  38 U.S.C. § 7113(a).  The Board cannot consider evidence submitted after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  However, because the Board is remanding the claims, evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

In November 2023, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination, and the examiner submitted a TBI Disability Benefits Questionnaire (DBQ).  In completing the section for residuals attributable to a TBI, the examiner checked findings of Hearing loss and/or tinnitus, Visual impairment, Headaches, and Mental disorder (including emotional, behavioral, or cognitive).  This section clearly instructs that "If checked," DBQs for hearing loss and tinnitus, visual impairment, headaches, and mental disorders or PTSD must "ALSO be completed."  See November 2023 TBI DBQ, Section III.  Although a separate Mental Disorders DBQ was submitted by a VA psychologist, separate hearing loss/tinnitus, visual impairment, and headaches DBQs were not provided by an examiner.  Consequently, the Board finds pre-decisional duty to assist error to the extent that the AOJ failed to discharge its duty to assist by not obtaining an adequate VA examination.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).  Thus, while the Board regrets the additional delay, to ensure that the Veteran's claim is afforded full consideration, the Board concludes that remand is warranted.

As the issue of entitlement to a TDIU could be affected by the decision on the increased rating claim being remanded, these matters are inextricably intertwined and as such, the TDIU claim must be remanded as well.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for the following VA examinations with appropriately qualified examiners regarding the severity of TBI residuals noted by the VA examiner in the November 2023 TBI DBQ, Section III:

"	Hearing loss/tinnitus

"	Visual impairment

"	Headaches

The claims file, including a copy of this Remand, must be made available to, and be reviewed by, the examiners.  All indicated studies, tests, and evaluations must be conducted, and all findings reported in detail and correlated to a specific diagnosis.

 

 

S. B. MAYS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	B. Farrell, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.