Citation Nr: A25034446
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 240916-474861
DATE: April 15, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for lower back conditions is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for left leg conditions, to include as secondary to lower back conditions, is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from September 2015 to December 2015, with service in the Army National Guard. This matter comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a December 2023 rating decision from a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ). The Veteran timely appealed, submitting the VA Form 10182 in September 2024 and selecting the Direct Review docket. In the Direct Review docket, the Board reviews the evidence of record at the time of the AOJ rating decision on appeal for each issue. Accordingly, no additional evidence after the December 2023 rating decision may be considered. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.301. However, because the Board is remanding the appeal, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the readjudication of that appeal. 38 C.F.R. ยง 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Of note, the Veteran, in his September 2024 VA Form 10182, appeals the claim for insomnia. According to the record, a claim for insomnia has never been filed. To that end, if the Veteran wishes to file a claim for insomnia he is encouraged to file a Supplemental Claim.

1. Entitlement to service connection for lower back conditions is remanded.

2. Entitlement to service connection for left leg conditions, to include as secondary to lower back conditions, is remanded.

The Veteran asserts that he has lower back pain and left leg pain and that the pain is due to injuries or occurrences sustained during his time in service, and service treatment records reflect a left leg injury. The record also raises the matter of direct and secondary service connection for the Veteran's leg conditions. Accordingly, the Board finds that based upon the foregoing, an examination should have been provided to the Veteran. To this day, he has not been provided a VA examination, creating a pre-decisional duty-to-assist error. McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 83 (2006). On remand VA examinations and corresponding opinions should be secured.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for an examination to determine the nature and etiology of any disability or functional impairment of the lower back. The claims file, to include a copy of the remand should be made available to and should be reviewed by the examiner. Any necessary testing should be performed.

The examiner should address the following:

(a.) Please diagnose any current disability or functional impairment of the lower back.

(b.) For each disorder or functional impairment diagnosed in subpart (a), please opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that such impairment had its onset during or is otherwise etiologically related to the Veteran's service.

2. Schedule the Veteran for an examination to determine the nature and etiology of any disability or functional impairment of the left leg. The claims file, to include a copy of the remand should be made available to and should be reviewed by the examiner. Any necessary testing should be performed.

The examiner should address the following:

(a.) Please diagnose any current disability or functional impairment of the left leg.

(b.) For each disorder or functional impairment diagnosed in subpart (a), please opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that such impairment had its onset during or is otherwise etiologically related to the Veteran's service.

A complete rationale for the examiner's opinion should be provided, citing to specific evidence of record, as necessary. If the examiner cannot provide an opinion without resort to speculation, the examiner must state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training).

If the inability to provide an opinion without resorting to speculation is due to a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), the AOJ should develop the claim to the extent it is necessary to cure any such deficiency. If the inability to provide an opinion is due to the examiner's lack of requisite knowledge or training, then the AOJ should obtain an opinion from a medical professional who has the knowledge and training needed to render such an opinion.

 

 

JIMMY L. BARDIN

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	J. J. Rogers, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.1303.