Citation Nr: A25034217
Decision Date: 04/14/25	Archive Date: 04/14/25

DOCKET NO. 240219-418349
DATE: April 14, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for a left hand disorder is granted.

Entitlement to service connection for a right hand disorder is granted.

Entitlement to service connection for a right shoulder disorder is granted.

Entitlement to service connection for a left shoulder disorder is granted.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. Resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the persuasive evidence is at least in equipoise as to whether the Veteran's left hand disorder is attributable to his active duty service.

2. Resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the persuasive evidence is at least in equipoise as to whether the Veteran's right hand disorder is attributable to his active duty service.

3. Resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the persuasive evidence is at least in equipoise as to whether the Veteran's right shoulder disorder is attributable to his active duty service.

4. Resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the persuasive evidence is at least in equipoise as to whether the Veteran's left shoulder disorder is attributable to his active duty service.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for a left hand disorder have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 1131; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

2. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for a right hand disorder have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 1131; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

3. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for a right shoulder disorder have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 1131; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

4. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for a left shoulder disorder have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 1131; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Air Force from July 1986 to November 1990.

This appeal is being processed under the modernized review system, commonly referred to as the "AMA," as established by the Veterans Appeals Improvement and Modernization Act of 2017.  115 Pub. L. No. 55, 131 Stat. 1105.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal of a January 2024 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) regional office (RO), an agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ).

VA received the Veteran's VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) in February 2024.  The Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the January 2024 AOJ decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

Under the AMA, the Board must accept any favorable findings made by the AOJ in its adjudication of the claims.  The January 2024 rating decision concluded that new and relevant evidence had been received pertinent to the Veteran's claims for entitlement to service connection for right and left hand disorders and shoulder disorders.  The Board is bound by these favorable findings.  38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).  Accordingly, the Board will not address whether new and relevant evidence has been received, and will consider the claims on the merits.

SERVICE CONNECTION

Service connection may be established for a disability resulting from diseases or injuries which are present in service or for a disease diagnosed after separation from service, when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disability was incurred in service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.  Establishing service connection generally requires medical or, in certain circumstances, lay evidence of (1) a current disability; (2) an in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a nexus between the claimed in-service disease or injury and the present disability.  Davidson v. Shinseki, 581 F.3d 1313 (Fed. Cir. 2009).

Entitlement to service connection for a left hand disorder; entitlement to service connection for a right hand disorder; entitlement to service connection for a right shoulder disorder; and entitlement to service connection for a left shoulder disorder

After thorough consideration of the record, the Board finds that the persuasive evidence of record supports a grant of entitlement to service connection for a left hand disorder, a right hand disorder, a right shoulder disorder, and a left shoulder disorder.

First, there is evidence of current disabilities.  In that regard, May 2020 private treatment records reflect a diagnosis of hand arthritis.  Additionally, VA treatment records dated in April 2023 report complaints of shoulder pain with a finding of osteoarthritis of multiple joints.  Accordingly, current diagnoses of right and left hand arthritis and right and left shoulder osteoarthritis are established.

Additionally, there is evidence of an in-service event.  Initially, the Board acknowledges that the Veteran's service treatment records are silent for any complaints of right or left hand or shoulder symptoms.  However, review of the available service treatment records shows that they are incomplete.  Moreover, the Veteran has provided lay statements in which he reported that his in-service duties included the use of Hilti hammer drills, hammers, electric drills, and portable band saws.  The Veteran stated that the vibration and twisting from the drills caused him to develop arthritis in his hands and shoulders with numbness and tingling in his hands.  In a June 2021 lay statement, C.C., who served with the Veteran, reported that they used Hilti hammer drills to drill holes in the concrete floors and brick walls and the use of other equipment including forklifts and jackhammers.  Further, the Veteran's service personnel records describe his in-service duties to include installing, removing, relocating, troubleshooting, repairing, testing, maintaining, and overhauling inside plant telephone switching equipment and constructing frames, cabinets, and cable racks.  The personnel records note that the Veteran also operated and maintained vehicles, tools, and test equipment.  With consideration of the Veteran's competent and credible lay statements, which are corroborated by C.C.'s lay statement and the Veteran's service personnel records, the Board concludes that the persuasive evidence of record shows that the Veteran used hammers and drill equipment which resulted in hand and arm vibration and twisting.  Thus, an in-service event is shown.

Last, the only medical evidence of record addressing the etiology of the Veteran's right and left hand and shoulder disorders relates his current disabilities to his active duty service.  In a December 2020 opinion, A.A., M.D. opined that the Veteran's "chronic arthritic conditions" are "more likely related to his engineering in the military use of jackhammer is [sic] another heavy equipment leading to secondary arthritis in all joints.  This is especially affecting his shoulders . . . ."  In a November 2023 opinion, S.S., BSN, RN, CCCTM, LNC, opined that the Veteran's "hand and arm pain are related to his prolonged occupational exposure to handheld vibration tools during military service."  S.S. explained that the medical literature related the use of hand-arm vibration tools and "vibration syndrome" to damage in the hands and shoulders.  Citations to the cited medical literature were provided.  The Board finds these medical opinions to persuasively support a nexus between the Veteran's current right and left hand and shoulder disabilities and his active duty service.

In sum, the evidence of record is at least in equipoise as to whether the Veteran's right and left hand and arm disorders are related to his active duty service.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a).  Resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, service connection for right and left hand and shoulder disorders is warranted.

 

 

C. CRAWFORD

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	M. Katz, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.