Citation Nr: A25034524
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 240621-450049
DATE: April 15, 2025

REMANDED

Service connection for bilateral plantar fasciitis is remanded.

Service connection for allergic rhinitis is remanded.

Service connection for tinnitus is remanded.

Service connection for hypertension is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from December 1978 to December 1986.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from December 2023 and January 2024 rating decisions issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In March 2024 the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR), and requested review of a December 2023 and January 2024 decisions.  In June 2024, the RO issued the HLR decision on appeal, which considered the evidence of record at the time of the prior December 2023 and January 2024 decisions.  

In the June 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the December 2023 and January 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision, which were subsequently subject to higher-level review. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of service connection for hypertension, rhinitis, tinnitus, and plantar fasciitis, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Duty to Assist Errors

After a thorough review of the record, the Board finds that additional evidentiary development is warranted before a final decision may be reached for the issues on appeal.

Initially, with respect to all issues on appeal, "active military, naval, air, or space service" includes active duty, any period of active duty for training during which the individual concerned was disabled or died from a disease or injury incurred or aggravated in line of duty, and any period of inactive duty training during which the individual concerned was disabled or died from an injury incurred or aggravated in line of duty or from an acute myocardial infarction, a cardiac arrest, or a cerebrovascular accident which occurred during such training. 38 U.S.C. § 101(24); 38 C.F.R. § 3.6(a).

The Board finds a remand is warranted to verify the exact dates and nature of the Veteran's service. The codesheets prior to the December 2023 and January 2024 rating decisions note that the Veteran served on active duty from December 11, 1978, to December 13, 1986. The Veteran's DD 214 indicates the same. 

However, a March 2024 Information Report indicates the Veteran had Army Reserve service from December 1982 to August 1987 and Army National Guard service from August 1987 to February 1989. Personnel records similarly show enlistment into the Army National Guard in December 1986. Failure to clarify the Veteran's service periods constitutes a pre-decisional duty-to-assist error by the AOJ.

Additionally, the Board finds that, prior to the December 2023 and January 2024 rating decisions, it does not appear that the Veteran's service personnel records for all periods of service had been associated with the claims file. The service personnel records may include evidence relevant to the Veteran's claims. Failure to obtain these records constitutes a pre-decisional duty-to-assist error by the AOJ. The AOJ is further directed to confirm that all of the Veteran's military treatment records have been obtained from all appropriate periods of duty. The evidence of record contains service personnel and service treatment records beginning in 1985. All efforts to obtain these records should be documented in the claims file and the provisions of 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(e) must be followed.

Turning to the claims on appeal, the Board cannot make a fully informed decision on the issues of service connection for bilateral plantar fasciitis, allergic rhinitis, tinnitus, or hypertension, discussed below, because the VA medical opinions of record are based on an incomplete service record. See Reonal v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 458, 460-61 (1993) (medical opinion based on inaccurate factual premise may properly be rejected as non-probative).

1. Service connection for bilateral plantar fasciitis is remanded.

The Veteran contends that unsupported military boots caused his foot condition of plantar fasciitis. See October 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ Application for Disability Compensation and Related Compensation Benefits (DBQ). 

In January 2024, the Veteran underwent a VA examination and was diagnosed with bilateral plantar fasciitis. The examiner did not provide an opinion or rationale regarding the etiology of the Veteran's bilateral plantar fasciitis. An adequate medical opinion must be based upon a consideration of the Veteran's prior medical history and must describe the Veteran's condition in sufficient detail to allow the Board to make a fully informed evaluation.?Ardison v. Brown, 6?Vet. App.?405, 407 (1994). 

As noted above, service treatment records relevant to the Veteran's claim were not associated with the file at the time of the rating decision denying service connection for bilateral plantar fasciitis. A remand is warranted for a new medical opinion that considers the Veteran's lay statements describing foot surgery in service and provides a rationale that considers the Veteran's medical history in service.

2. Service connection for allergic rhinitis is remanded.

The Veteran contends his allergic rhinitis is related to his military service. See October 2023 DBQ. 

In December 2023, the Veteran underwent a VA examination where he was diagnosed with allergic rhinitis. The examiner provided a negative nexus opinion, stating that the Veteran's entrance and separation exams do not contain complaints of symptoms of allergic rhinitis. The Board finds this opinion inadequate for adjudication, as the examiner opined on records not in the claims file. Reonal v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 458, 460-61 (1993) (medical opinion based on inaccurate factual premise may properly be rejected as non-probative). As such, a new medical opinion is warranted. 

3. Service connection for tinnitus is remanded.

The Veteran contends that his tinnitus is related to noise exposure in active-duty service. See October 2023 DBQ.  The Veteran's military occupational specialty (MOS) was Medical Laboratory Specialist. See DD 214. Specifically, the Veteran asserts that noise exposure from grenades and arms during training exercises, laboratory automation, saws, and drills, caused his tinnitus. 

In December 2023, the Veteran underwent a VA examination where he was diagnosed with tinnitus. The examiner opined that, based on the Veteran's MOS having a low probability of noise exposure and the lack of in-service complaints of tinnitus, it was less likely than not that the Veteran's tinnitus is related to service. 

While the Veteran is competent to describe ringing in his ears during service, the evidence of record is inadequate for adjudication. Charles v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 370, 374 (2002) (stating that "ringing in the ears is capable of lay observation"). Specifically, the Veteran's lay statements asserting noise exposure during active duty from 1978 through 1986 were not addressed by the December 2023 examiner. Consequently, the Board finds remand is warranted for a new medical opinion addressing the etiology of the Veteran's tinnitus.

4. Service connection for hypertension is remanded.

The Veteran contends that his hypertension is related to his military service. Specifically, he asserts that exposure to diesel fuels in service caused dizziness, high blood pressure, and the resultant hypertension. See October 2023 DBQ. 

In December 2023, the Veteran underwent a VA examination where he was diagnosed with hypertension. The examiner opined that the Veteran's hypertension was "well-controlled" with medication and that there were no complaints of hypertension in service. The Board finds this opinion inadequate for adjudication, as the examiner opined on records not in the claims file. Reonal v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 458, 460-61 (1993) (medical opinion based on inaccurate factual premise may properly be rejected as non-probative). 

As such, a new medical opinion is warranted. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. The Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) must conduct a search for a complete copy of the Veteran's service personnel records spanning his active-duty service in the Army and the Army National Guard and as a Reservist of the Army. 

2. Provide a memorandum identifying the nature and dates of the Veteran's service, including periods of active duty, active duty for training, and inactive duty for training.

A report detailing the Veteran's award of reserve retirement points will not represent compliance with this instruction.

3. Contact any appropriate source to obtain any outstanding Active Duty and National Guard/Reserve service treatment and personnel records.

All reasonable attempts should be made to obtain such records. If any records cannot be obtained after reasonable efforts have been made, issue a formal determination that such records do not exist or that further efforts to obtain such records would be futile, which should be documented in the claims file. The Veteran must be notified of the attempts made and why further attempts would be futile, and allowed the opportunity to provide such records, as provided in 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(b)(2) and 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(e).

4. Obtain a VA medical opinion regarding the etiology of the Veteran's bilateral plantar fasciitis from a medical professional with appropriate expertise. The Veteran's claims file and a copy of this remand should be provided to the examiner and the examination report should reflect that these items were reviewed:

State whether the Veteran's bilateral plantar fasciitis as least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) originated during service or are otherwise etiologically related to service.

A complete rationale must be provided for all opinions offered.  If an opinion cannot be offered without resort to mere speculation, the examiner must fully explain why this is the case and identify what additional evidence, if any, would allow for a more definitive opinion.

5. Obtain a VA medical opinion regarding the etiology of the Veteran's allergic rhinitis from a medical professional with appropriate expertise. The Veteran's claims file and a copy of this remand should be provided to the examiner and the examination report should reflect that these items were reviewed:

State whether any diagnosed allergic rhinitis during the claim period at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) originated during service or is otherwise etiologically related to service.

The examiner is reminded that the absence of service treatment records showing in-service evidence of allergic rhinitis is not fatal to the Veteran's claim for service connection.

A complete rationale must be provided for all opinions offered.  If an opinion cannot be offered without resorting to mere speculation, the examiner must fully explain why this is the case and identify what additional evidence, if any, would allow for a more definitive opinion.

6. Obtain a VA medical opinion regarding the etiology of the Veteran's tinnitus disability from a medical professional with appropriate expertise. The Veteran's claims file and a copy of this remand should be provided to the examiner and the examination report should reflect that these items were reviewed:

State whether any tinnitus disability during the claim period is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) originated during service, or is otherwise etiologically related to service.

A complete rationale must be provided for all opinions offered.  If an opinion cannot be offered without resorting to mere speculation, the examiner must fully explain why this is the case and identify what additional evidence, if any, would allow for a more definitive opinion.

7. Obtain a VA medical opinion regarding the etiology of the Veteran's hypertension from a medical professional with appropriate expertise. The Veteran's claims file and a copy of this remand should be provided to the examiner and the examination report should reflect that these items were reviewed:

State whether any diagnosed hypertension during the claim period at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) originated during service or is otherwise etiologically related to service.

The examiner is reminded that the absence of service treatment records showing in-service evidence of hypertension is not fatal to the Veteran's claim for service connection.

A complete rationale must be provided for all opinions offered.  If an opinion cannot be offered without resorting to mere speculation, the examiner must fully explain why this is the case and identify what additional evidence, if any, would allow for a more definitive opinion.

 

 

Christopher Seppanen

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Marron, Sara C.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.