Citation Nr: A25034567
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 231109-391314
DATE: April 15, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a respiratory disability, to include bullous emphysema, also claimed as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), chronic lung issues, and/or lung cancer, is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a thoracic spine disability, claimed as chronic osteophytes, is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from June 1977 to June 1980.  He also had service in the United States Army Reserve, with various periods of active duty for training and inactive duty training.

In a September 2023 rating decision, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ), in pertinent part, denied service connection for "bullous emphysema (claimed as COPD [], chronic lung issues[,] and cancer malignant neoplasm respiratory/lungs)" and chronic osteophytes of the thoracic spine.  The Veteran timely filed a request for Higher-Level Review (HLR) in October 2023.  Later that month, the AOJ issued a decision continuing the denials of service connection for these disabilities.  See October 2023 HLR decision.  Thereafter, the Veteran timely appealed to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) by filing a VA Form 10182 (Decision Review Request:  Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement)) in November 2023, requesting direct review of the evidence considered by the AOJ.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.201, 20.202(b)(1).  

Under the direct review option, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of issuance of the September 2023 rating decision.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  The Board cannot consider evidence submitted after that decision was promulgated.

That said, for the reasons set forth below, the Board is remanding the Veteran's claims to the AOJ for correction of pre-decisional duty to assist errors.  The AOJ will consider any additional evidence that has been submitted when the claims are readjudicated.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

1. Entitlement to service connection for a respiratory disability is remanded.

2. Entitlement to service connection for a thoracic spine disability is remanded.

Although the Board sincerely regrets the delay, a remand is necessary to correct pre-decisional duty to assist errors.  First, it does not appear that service treatment records were obtained from the Veteran's first period of active duty service from June 1977 to June 1980.  Rather, the service treatment records that have been obtained are from the Veteran's lengthy period of reserve service.  There are a few entries from his active service period on his immunization and vaccine records, which appear to have been turned over to the reserve component for updating throughout his reserve service, but the fact that no examination reports, Reports of Medical History forms, or other treatment records have been obtained from his first period of active period is highly suggestive that relevant service treatment records from his active duty service remain outstanding.  Prior to adjudicating the claim, VA should have made additional attempts to obtain a complete copy of the service treatment records from June 1977 to June 1980.

Next, it appears that the AOJ failed to obtain all relevant VA treatment records prior to adjudicating the claims, and failed to associate with the claims file relevant PDFs and other documents accessible through VistA Imaging.  In this regard, the Board notes that VA treatment records for the period from June 7, 2016, through June 22, 2020 (of which the AOJ had constructive notice), were only associated with the claims file after the September 2023 decision was rendered.  Additionally, the existing records physically and constructively before adjudicators at that time referenced several private treatment records from Winona Heath-an agency that the Veteran stated had treated him for his claimed disabilities in his application form-that were accessible through VistA Imaging.  See May 2015, October 2015, and May 2015 VA treatment records ("WINONA HEALTH [January 18, 2015, January 22, 2015, October 12, 2015, and April 16, 2017] Records requested by the Non VA Care Section for this date of service have been imported into VistA Imaging").  Prior to adjudicating the claim, VA should have obtained these potentially relevant records in VA's possession and associated them with the claims file.

Also, a May 2016 VA treatment report noted that the Veteran "[b]rings with him today S[ocial] S[ecurity] I[nsurance] paperwork for emphysema disability.  He was working in a saw mill but d[ue] t[o] breathing issues can no longer.  He states his breathing difficulties began [approximately] one year ago."   If the Veteran submitted an application for SSA disability insurance benefits, records from the Social Security Administration (SSA) may contain information pertinent to the appeal.  Therefore, efforts should have been made to request any SSA documentation prior to adjudication.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5103A; 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c).

With regard to the Veteran's claimed respiratory disorder, the Veteran was provided with a VA examination and medical opinions regarding both theories of direct service connection and consideration of the Veteran's toxic risk exposure activity (TERA) in service under the PACT Act, in September 2023.  However, the VA examiner noted in the examination portion of the report that the "Veteran was stationed at Aberdeen, Maryland; Fort Dicks, NJ; Fort Stewart Georgia; and Fort McCoy.  He did Fuel and Electrical systems repair according to his MOS.  His TERA memo indicates that he had exposure to a hazard according to his DD214 but it does not indicate exactly what the exposure was."  See September 2023 VA examination report.

Accordingly, in the VA medical opinion itself, the VA examiner referenced the Veteran's exposure to fuel as noted by his active duty specialty noted in his DD Form 214 for his three years of active duty service, but did not reference the Veteran's claims of exposure to particulate matter or any other exposures he had throughout his many years of subsequent reserve service.  See, e.g., September 1986 service personnel record (noting the Veteran's principal duty title of "Fuel-Electrical Systems Repairer" and stating, "The fuel and electrical systems repairer performs intermediate maintenance on fuel and electrical systems of wheel and track vehicles, brake system components, and on the internal combustion engines, associated with power-generation equipment or materials-handling equipment. Troubleshoots and diagnoses fuel and electrical systems."); September 1987 service personnel records (noting again work on systems such as brake system components); service personnel records through December 1996 (noting duties performed as a fuel and electrical repairer); November 1997 service personnel records (noting the Veteran's change in title to "Auto Repair S[ear]g[an]t" and corresponding duties); November 1998 through June 2000 service personnel records (noting the Veteran's change in title to "Master Mechanic" and corresponding duties).  The Board finds that because the September 2023 VA medical opinions did not adequately address the Veteran's contentions and other potential exposures beyond exposure to fuel, an addendum opinion should have been sought prior to adjudication of the Veteran's claim.  See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311-12 (2007) (holding that once VA undertakes to provide a medical opinion, it must provide an adequate one). 

Finally, the Board notes that no VA examination was provided with regard to the Veteran's claimed thoracic spine disability.  Rather, the AOJ found that "the evidence shows your disability is determined to result from physical trauma, and the Secretary has determined there is no indication of association between this condition and participation in a TERA."  See September 2023 VA examination report.  However, the Board notes that the Veteran's osteophytes were identified on CT (computed tomography) imaging in July 2023, after he was screened for malignant neoplasms of the respiratory organs.  See July 2023 private treatment report.  In this regard, the Veteran expressly claims that his thoracic osteophytes are the result of "Particulate Matter exposure/Time in service/ TERA/ Aberdeen Proving Ground" and not the result of physical injury.  See August 2023 VA Form 21-VA Form 21-526EZ (Application for Disability Compensation and Related Compensation Benefits).  As such, he should have been afforded a VA examination and medical opinion under the PACT Act prior to the adjudication of his claim.  See 38 U.S.C. § 1168(a); September 2023 VA Memorandum (concluding "Yes, the Veteran participated in a TERA" and citing his "MOS: Fuel and electrical systems repair"). 

These matters are REMANDED for the following actions:

1. Obtain a complete copy of the Veteran's active duty service treatment records from June 1977 to June 1980, following the procedures set forth in 38 C.F.R. § 3.159. Efforts to obtain the evidence should be fully documented and should be discontinued only if it is concluded that the evidence sought does not exist or that further efforts to obtain the evidence would be futile.  38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(2).  The evidence obtained, if any, should be associated with the record.

2. Take all necessary action to obtain copies of Winona Heath private treatment records from January 18, 2015, January 22, 2015, October 12, 2015, and April 16, 2017.   See May 2015, October 2015, and May 2017 VA treatment records noting that these records could be accessed through VistA Imaging).  If necessary, enlist the assistance of the Veterans Health Administration to access the identified records from VistA Imaging so they can be printed and/or uploaded to the claims file.  Efforts to obtain the records should be fully documented and should be discontinued only if it is concluded that the evidence sought does not exist or that further efforts to obtain the evidence would be futile.  38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(2).The evidence obtained, if any, should be associated with the record.

3. Ask the SSA to provide copies of any relevant records in its possession pertaining to its consideration of the Veteran's application for disability insurance benefits, to include any medical records considered in connection with his application, following the procedures set forth in 38 C.F.R. § 3.159.  Efforts to obtain the evidence should be fully documented and should be discontinued only if it is concluded that the evidence sought does not exist or that further efforts to obtain the evidence would be futile.  38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(2).  The evidence obtained, if any, should be associated with the record.

4. After the foregoing development has been completed to the extent possible, make arrangements to provide the record on appeal to a qualified clinician for purposes of obtaining an addendum medical opinion pertaining to the Veteran's claimed respiratory disorder.  

a.  The examiner is requested to offer an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (i.e., whether the likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that any diagnosed respiratory disability, to include bullous emphysema, was incurred in or is otherwise related to the Veteran's service.

b.  The examiner is also requested to offer an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran has a respiratory disability that has been caused by an in-service TERA.  In addressing that question, the examiner must consider (i) the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran, and (ii) the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran.

In rendering the opinion, the examiner must consider and discuss the Veteran's claims of in-service exposures to particulate matter, exposures at Aberdeen Proving Ground, and other exposures noted in his service personnel records.  See, e.g. September 1986 enlisted evaluation report ("The fuel and electrical systems repairer performs intermediate maintenance on fuel and electrical systems of wheel and track vehicles, brake system components, and on the internal combustion engines, associated with power-generation equipment or materials-handling equipment"); November 1997 service personnel record (reviewing the Veteran's performance as an automotive repair sergeant, including his duties to "[r]epair or replace engine, powertrain, chas[sis] and related components of wheel vehicles.  Diagnose and analyze components and systems malfunctions by visual and auditory examination and use of testing equipment.  Test, repair, adjust and replace assemblies, sub[-]assemblies and components, such as engines, transmissions, differentials, steering assemblies, etc."); June 2000 service personnel record (noting duties as a "Master Mechanic"). 

The need for another examination and/or telephonic or video interview of the Veteran is left to the discretion of the examiner(s) selected to offer the requested opinions.

A complete medical rationale for all opinions expressed must be provided. 

5. Also arrange to have the Veteran scheduled for a VA examination to assess the nature and etiology of his claimed thoracic spine disability.  All indicated tests should be conducted and the results reported.

After examining the Veteran and reviewing the record, together with the results of any testing deemed necessary, the examiner should offer an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (i.e., whether the likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that any diagnosed thoracic spine disability, including osteophytes, has been caused by an in-service TERA.  In addressing that question, the examiner must consider (i) the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran, and (ii) the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran.

In rendering the opinion, the examiner must consider and discuss the Veteran's claims of in-service exposures to particulate matter, exposures at Aberdeen Proving Ground, and other exposures noted in his service personnel records.  See, e.g. September 1986 enlisted evaluation report ("The fuel and electrical systems repairer performs intermediate maintenance on fuel and electrical systems of wheel and track vehicles, brake system components, and on the internal combustion engines, associated with power-generation equipment or materials-handling equipment"); November 1997 service personnel record (reviewing the Veteran's performance as an automotive repair sergeant, including his duties to "[r]epair or replace engine, powertrain, chas[sis] and related components of wheel vehicles.  Diagnose and analyze components and systems malfunctions by visual and auditory examination and use of testing equipment.  Test, repair, adjust and replace assemblies, sub[-]assemblies and components, such as engines, transmissions, differentials, steering assemblies, etc."); June 2000 service personnel record (noting duties as a "Master Mechanic").

A complete medical rationale for all opinions expressed must be provided. 

 

DAVID A. BRENNINGMEYER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	K. Gielow, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.