Citation Nr: A25034619
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 231221-402503
DATE: April 15, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a thyroid condition is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from June 1983 to October 2009.

By way of background, a rating decision was issued under the legacy system in April 2017 denying entitlement to service connection for a thyroid condition. The Veteran submitted a timely notice of disagreement (NOD), a Statement of the Case was issued (SOC), and the Veteran substantively appealed. In December 2023, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued a Supplemental SOC (SSOC). The Veteran opted the claim into the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), by submitting a timely VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (NOD) identifying the December 2023 SSOC; therefore, the December 2023 SSOC is the decision on appeal.

In the December 2023 Form 10182, the Veteran elected the Direct Review option. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  

In January 2023, the Veteran testified before a Veterans Law Judge at a video conference hearing. A transcript of the hearing is of record.

Under the AMA, remand is required to correct pre-decisional duty to assist errors. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).  Unfortunately, the claim on appeal must be remanded for further development. Although the Board regrets the additional delay, it is necessary to ensure that there is a complete record upon which to decide these issues so that the Veteran is afforded every possible consideration.

1. Entitlement to service connection for a thyroid condition is remanded.

As an initial matter, the Board notes that the Veteran's claim for service connection for a thyroid condition does not implicate the laws and regulations pertaining to undiagnosed or chronic multisymptom illness for Gulf War veterans. See 38 U.S.C. § 1117; 38 C.F.R. § 3.317. In this case, the Veteran has received a definite diagnosis of hypothyroidism.

Turning to the issue on appeal, the Veteran seeks service connection for a thyroid condition, which he contends was incurred in or caused by service, particularly as due to exposure to dust and toxins during his active service during the Gulf War. See March 2023 Claim for Benefits.

In this case, the Veteran is noted to have served in Southwest Asia during the requisite period. A January 2023 memorandum conceded the Veteran's presumed toxic exposure under 38 U.S.C. § 1119 based on deployment in the Southwest Asia theater of operations. See 38 U.S.C. § 1710(e)(1).

Accordingly, based on the Veteran's Persian Gulf service during the requisite statutory period in Iraq, Kuwait, and Qatar, his exposure to burn pits and other toxins are now presumed under the PACT Act.

Under 38 U.S.C. § 1168, a disability examination and medical opinion may be requested for certain non-presumptive conditions involving TERA. When a medical opinion involving a TERA is requested, the examiner must consider the total potential exposure through all applicable deployments and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran.

Turning to the issue on appeal, the Veteran seeks entitlement to service connection for a thyroid condition, diagnosed as residuals of thyroid adenomatous hyperplasia status-post total thyroidectomy and hypothyroidism, that he contends is due to in service exposure to in service environmental exposures. 

During the Veteran's January 2023 hearing, the Veteran has claimed that he had symptoms in service, particularly weight loss and fatigue, which he believes were an indication of a thyroid disorder therein. In addition, he has claimed that he has a current thyroid disorder that may be related to his environmental exposures in service.

By way of relevant history, in October 2010, the Veteran underwent a general medicine protocol examination focused on heart and heart rhythm disturbances in light of an abnormal EKG. On examination, a sonogram of the Veteran's throat revealed bilateral thyroid nodes. The examiner characterized the Veteran's thyroid functioning as normal. 

In November 2011, the Veteran had a follow up appointment for the bilateral thyroid nodes, and he was advised to meet with an ears, nose, and throat specialist. 

The Veteran was able to establish care with a specialist in early January 2011. Following review of the records and examination of the Veteran, the treating physician rendered a diagnosis of nontoxic multinodular goiter and suggested a total thyroidectomy, stating that a definitive diagnosis was not possible without surgery. A February 2011 pathology report details the results of a bilateral hemithyroidectomy conducted to remove the identified abnormal thyroid tissue comprising the nodes and contains diagnoses of thyroid adenomatous hyperplasia, benign lymph nodes. In a follow up appointment later that month, a diagnosis of iatrogenic hypothyroidism was noted.

In the most recent May 2023 remand, the Board remanded the Veteran's claim with instructions to assess whether any of the Veteran's currently diagnosed thyroid conditions were incurred in or caused by service, specifically considering and discussing the Veteran's total potential toxic exposure throughout his military service and the synergistic, combined effect of all of the Veteran's toxic exposure risk activities (TERAs) as well as the Veteran's testimony that he had fatigue and weight loss in service, which he believes were manifestations of a thyroid disorder that was later diagnosed when he was evaluated, and that his current disorder may also be related to his exposure during deployments.

Pursuant to the May 2023 remand, an addendum medical opinion was obtained in October 2023. Following review of the evidence of record and with consideration of the Veteran's conceded TERA, the May 2023 VA examiner provided a negative nexus opinion regarding the Veteran's diagnosed hypothyroidism, finding it more likely the condition was a result of the February 2011 Veteran's total thyroidectomy. 

However, the May 2023 VA examiner did not provide a nexus opinion regarding the Veteran's thyroid nodules, diagnosed as thyroid adenomatous hyperplasia, that were identified shortly after the Veteran's separation from service and necessitated the Veteran's total thyroidectomy that has been identified as the cause of the Veteran's currently diagnosed hypothyroidism. Furthermore, to date, no opinion has been obtained regarding the etiology of these nodules. 

Thus, the Board finds the opinion of record to be inadequate for adjudication purposes and finds that a pre-decisional duty to assist error occurred and the issue must be remanded so that a new medical opinion can be obtained. 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(f); 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

Accordingly, the matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Forward the Veteran's claims file to a qualified VA examiner to provide an opinion as to the nature and etiology of the Veteran's thyroid condition. The examiner must review the claims file in its entirety and that review must be noted in the report.

Thereafter, the examiner is asked to provide a fully articulated medical opinion addressing the following:

(a) Whether the Veteran's thyroid nodules, diagnosed as thyroid adenomatous hyperplasia, had their onset during active service, within one year of separation, or are otherwise related to an in-service disease, event, or injury?

Furthermore, the examiner should address the Veterans' contentions that he had fatigue and weight loss in service, which he believes were manifestations of a thyroid disorder that was later diagnosed when he was evaluated, and that his current disorder may also be related to his exposure during deployments.

The examiner is advised that the Veteran is considered competent to report the events that occurred during service, as well as the symptoms she experienced, including when those symptoms were incurred and how long they have persisted.

It should be noted that the lack of documented treatment in service, while probative, cannot serve as the sole basis for a negative finding. The Veteran's lay contentions must be considered and weighed in making the determination as to whether a nexus exists between the claimed disability and military service.

(Continued on the next page)

?

Any conclusion or opinion offered must be accompanied by a complete medical rationale, citing to established medical principles and relevant medical evidence, such as examination findings, service treatment records, or other pertinent evidence in the record, when necessary, to support the conclusion reached. If an opinion cannot be reached without resorting to speculation, the examiner must fully explain why that is so.

 

 

DUSTIN L. WARE

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Rosenthal, Ariana

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.