Citation Nr: A25034251
Decision Date: 04/14/25	Archive Date: 04/14/25

DOCKET NO. 240703-452826
DATE: April 14, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for gastroesophageal reflux disease and hernia hiatal with stricture of esophagus (GI condition) is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Navy from November 1996 to November 2006.  He was awarded the Navy and Marine Corps Achievement Medal, Global War on Terrorism Expeditionary Medal, and Sea Service Deployment Ribbon, among others.

Applicable Evidentiary Window

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a September 2023 rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO), agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ).  Therefore, this matter is adjudicated under the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA).

In the July 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review Docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the September 2023 rating decision.  See 38 C.F.R.§ 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the September 2023 rating decision cannot be considered by the Board.  See 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, or if the Veteran would like to submit any new and relevant evidence, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

Preliminary Matters

As an initial matter, the Board notes that correspondence was submitted with the July 2024 VA Form 10182 that selected the Direct Review docket.  See July 2024 VA Form 10182 and Correspondence.  Under the AMA, if a Veteran elects the Direct Review docket, only argument - not evidence - can be considered after the AOJ decision on appeal.  Recently, in Edwards v. McDonough, 36 Vet. App. 56 (2023), the Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) held that if a Veteran submits evidence with a VA Form 10182 but selects the Direct Review docket, VA is required to clarify with that Veteran that he intended to proceed with direct review by the Board.  Here, the correspondence submitted with the VA Form 10182 is argument only and presents no new evidence, as the correspondence was previously submitted in the record.  See March 2024 Correspondence. Thus, no clarification is necessary.

As an additional preliminary matter, it is noted in the July 2024 VA Form 10182, Notice of Disagreement (NOD), in addition to the GI condition, the Veteran sought to appeal service connection of his hearing loss (June 30, 2022, rating decision) and evaluation of his right knee replacement surgery (June 30, 2022, rating decision). However, since the June 30, 2022, rating decision was more than one year prior to the NOD, the hearing loss and right knee matters were not docketed.  Therefore, the Board will not adjudicate the hearing loss service connection or the right knee replacement disability rating in this decision.  See Hall v. McDonough, 34 Vet. App. 329 (2022); see also 38 C.F.R. § 20.203.

The last preliminary matter noted by the Board, is the Freedom of Information Act or Privacy Act request submitted by the Veteran.  The Veteran failed to sign the request, and it was returned by the Board with a request that a signed form be submitted.  See April 2024 Board Correspondence.  Absent a signed form being returned by the Veteran or the Veteran taking any further action toward this request, the Board will proceed without further delay.  See Wood v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 190 (1991) (noting the duty to assist is a two-way street that requires a claimant's active participation in a claim for VA benefits).

Entitlement to service connection for gastroesophageal reflux disease and hernia hiatal with stricture of esophagus (GI disabilities) is remanded. 

The Veteran contends that his GI disabilities were caused by the Diclofenac (NSAID) medication he was prescribed for his service-connected right knee replacement surgery and right knee pain.  He states that he took this medication from 2019 to 2023.  He states that he stopped the medication, Diclofenac, after being diagnosed with the GI condition in March 2023.  See October 2023 Veteran's Lay Witness Statement; July 2023 Statement in Support of Claim.  

The RO made favorable findings that (1) the Veteran has a service-connected right knee replacement surgery to include anterior cruciate ligament deficiency, lateral collateral ligament strain, medial meniscus tear, and degenerative joint disease (right knee condition), and (2) the Veteran has a current disability based on his diagnosis of gastroesophageal reflux disease and hernia hiatal with stricture of esophagus (GI disabilities).

Therefore, the Board must determine if the Veteran's GI condition is causally related to his toxic exposure risk activities (TERA) during service in the Gulf War, or if the Veteran's service-connected right knee condition caused or aggravated his GI condition.  See Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166-67 (Fed. Cir. 2004); Spicer v. McDonough, 61 F.4th 1360, 1365 (Fed. Cir. 2023).

In connection with the claim, the Veteran was afforded a VA Esophageal Conditions DBQ examination and two Medical Opinion DBQs.  See July 2023 VA Esophageal Conditions DBQ; July 2023 VA Medical Opinion DBQ; and September 2023 VA Medical Opinion DBQ.

The July 2023 VA examination confirmed the Veteran's diagnosis of a GI condition and provided a complete review of the medical history with consideration given to the Veteran's reported statements.  It was an adequate and probative examination.  See Monzingo v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 97 (2012), July 2023 VA Esophageal Conditions DBQ.

The September 2023 VA TERA medical opinion considered whether the diagnosed GI disabilities were related to the Veteran's TERA and provided a negative nexus opinion.  The examiner reviewed the medical history, diagnostic tests, and military service exposure.  Citing medical literature and explaining the specific nature of this Veteran's GI conditions, the VA clinician opined that the TERA was less likely than not the cause of the diagnosed conditions.  The rationale included plausible medical causes for the GI disabilities, which outweighed the Veteran's toxic exposure as a potential cause. The Board finds the medical opinion adequate and probative of the etiology of his GI disabilities.  See Monzingo, supra.

The July 2023 Medical Opinion DBQ addressed the Veteran's contention that his GI disabilities were caused by the medication prescribed for his service-connected knee condition.  The VA clinician reviewed the medical history, claim file, diagnostic testing, and medical treatment records.  It was reported that the Veteran's GI symptoms continued after the Diclofenac (NSAID) medication was stopped, and that there was inconsistency as to whether the symptoms began 15 years prior or in 2021.  The VA clinician further noted that the Veteran's primary care physician had reported in March 2023 that the Veteran's GI disabilities were probably due to chronic NSAID use, but disagreed with this opinion primarily due to the continuing symptoms after the medication was stopped.  See July 2023, Medical Opinion DBQ; October 2023 Medical Treatment Record.  The VA clinician opined that the claimed GI condition was less likely than not proximately due to or the result of the Veteran's service-connected right knee condition.  

The Board finds that the July 2023 medical opinion regarding whether the Veteran's GI disabilities are secondary to his service-connected right knee condition is not compliant with Spicer v. McDonough, 61 F.4th 1360, 1365 (Fed. Cir. 2023).  In Spicer, the Federal Circuit held that 38 U.S.C. § 1110 employs only "but-for" causation in direct and secondary service connection claims.  Therefore, it held 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(b) was unlawful because it required proximate causation to establish aggravation of a disability, rather than but-for causation.  The but-for causation standard is not limited to a single cause and effect, but rather contemplates multi-causal links, including action and inaction.  Stated another way, but-for causation is broad, undisputedly broader than proximate cause.  Thus, a service-connected disability need only be a contributing cause to establish secondary service connection.  In rendering an opinion regarding secondary service connection, the July 2023 VA clinician in this case used the "proximate cause" standard, which has been deemed unlawful by Spicer.  Thus, the Board is unable to accept the opinion addressing secondary service connection.  The Board finds that this constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error; and as such, a remand is warranted to obtain a medical opinion.

Additionally, the RO did not request the clinician to provide an opinion regarding aggravation of a non-service-connected condition by a service-connected condition.  See El-Amin v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 136, 140 (2013) (a medical opinion is inadequate when it fails to adequately address the question of aggravation); Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439, 448 (1995) (an opinion that something "is not related to" or "is not due to" does not answer the question of aggravation); Jeffries v. McDonough, No 23-1339, 2024 U.S. App. Vet. Claims LEXIS 1503 (September 19, 2024) (when an examiner opines on secondary service connection, the examiner must directly address aggravation, separately from wither a service-connected disability caused the disability at issue.  In particular, the opinion must address whether the service-connected disability or disabilities aggravated any functional impairment associated with the non-service-connected disability); Bethea v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 252 (1992) (single-judge memorandum decisions may be cited or relied upon for any persuasiveness or reasoning they contain).  Based on the above, the Board must find the July 2023 VA medical opinion inadequate regarding aggravation as well.

Last, the Veteran has also raised the theory that his service-connected right knee disability caused his obesity, which in turn caused his GI disabilities (among others).  See Veteran's 21-4138 July 3, 2024 correspondence with his July 2024 VA Form 10182.  Obesity may act as an "intermediate step" between a service-connected disability and a current disability that may be service-connected on a secondary basis under 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a). See VAOPGCPREC 1-2017.  In order to show secondary service connection is warranted under such a theory, a veteran must show (1) that his service-connected disability caused or aggravated his obesity and, if so, (2) whether the obesity as a result of the service-connected disability was a substantial factor in causing or aggravating his claimed condition, and (3) whether the claimed condition would not have occurred or worsened but for obesity caused or aggravated by the service-connected disability.  Id.; Walsh v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 300 (2020).  Accordingly, the Board must remand the claims on appeal to determine whether the Veteran's service-connected right knee disability caused or aggravated his obesity, and whether such resulting obesity was a substantial factor in causing or aggravating his current GI disabilities. See Veteran's 21-4138 July 3, 2024 correspondence with his July 2024 VA Form 10182.  

While the Board regrets the additional delay this remand will cause, remand is required to correct these pre-decisional duty to assist errors and to obtain an addendum medical opinion.

Mindful that it must construe a Veteran's claim sympathetically and that the scope of a disability claim encompasses the claimant's description of claim, reported symptoms, and other information of record, the Board considers both direct and secondary service connection as theories of entitlement falling within the scope of the Veteran's claim.  38 C.F.R. § 20.202(a); Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1, 5 (2009).  Accordingly, remand is therefore required to obtain addendum opinions regarding service connection on those theories of entitlement, including obesity as an intermediate step.  

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Please request an addendum medical opinion from a qualified clinician, regarding the etiology of the Veteran's gastroesophageal reflux disease and hernia hiatal with stricture of esophagus (GI disabilities).  The entire claims file, including a copy of this remand, must be made available to the clinician, and the clinician should confirm that such records were reviewed.  If the clinician believes that a physical examination should be conducted to provide the requested opinions, one should be provided.

The clinician should address the following:

1. Direct Service Connection:  Please opine whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's gastroesophageal reflux disease and hernia hiatal with stricture of esophagus (GI disabilities) were incurred in or is otherwise related to service.  

Consistent with Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (2021), the examiner is advised that the term "at least as likely as not" means that the likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher.

2. Secondary Service Connection:  Next, please consider whether it is as likely as not that the Veteran's GI disabilities were caused or aggravated by his service-connected right knee replacement surgery (to include anterior cruciate ligament deficiency, lateral collateral ligament strain, medial meniscus tear, and degenerative joint disease) (right knee disabilities).  

(a)	In other words, would the Veteran's GI disabilities have occurred "but for" his service-connected right knee disabilities or whether "but for" his right knee disabilities, the functional impairment of his GI disabilities would have improved or worsened.

(b)	In rendering the opinions, the clinician should consider and include an analysis of the relevant treatment and medical records, as well as specifically address the Veteran's contention that his GI disabilities were caused by the Diclofenac medication prescribed for his service-connected right knee disabilities.  

A finding of "aggravation" does not require a permanent worsening of the disorder; rather, any incremental increase in a nonservice connected condition attributable to a service-connected disability, whether permanent or not, constitutes aggravation.  Ward v. Wilkie, 31 Vet. App. 233 (2019).

3. Secondary Service Connection/Obesity as an Intermediate Step:  Whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's service-connected disabilities (including his right knee disabilities) caused the Veteran to become obese?  Please note the Veteran's July 3, 2024 correspondence (VA Form 21-4138).

(a) If so, was obesity a substantial factor in causing the Veteran's GI disabilities?

(b) Whether the Veteran's GI disabilities would not have occurred but for his obesity?

4. The examiner is reminded that the Veteran is competent to report any lay observable symptoms and their history, as well as reports of medical diagnoses from other providers, and that the Veteran's lay reports must be specifically considered in formulating a medical opinion.  If the examiner rejects the Veteran's reports, the examiner should provide a reason for doing so.

(Continued on the next page)

?

A complete and fully explanatory rationale must be provided for any and all opinions expressed.  If the examiner finds that the requested opinion cannot be rendered without resorting to speculation, he or she should so state, and should indicate whether the need to speculate is caused by a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (i.e., no one could respond given the state of medical science and the known facts) or by a deficiency in the record (i.e., additional facts are required), or that the examiner does not have the necessary knowledge or training.

When responding, regardless of whether favorably or unfavorably, it is essential the examiner provide rationale preferably citing to evidence in the file and/or accepted medical authority in order to support the conclusions asserted.  An unsupported medical opinion will carry negligible probative weight.

 

 

Colleen M. Glaser-Allen

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Smith, Linda L.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.