Citation Nr: A25034304
Decision Date: 04/14/25	Archive Date: 04/14/25

DOCKET NO. 240403-428359
DATE: April 14, 2025

REMANDED

The issue of entitlement to service connection for traumatic optic neuropathy, right eye with nuclear sclerosis and glaucomatous atrophy, is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from January 1981 to March 1981. He has additional inactive service in the Army National Guard.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from a September 2023 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In the April 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the September 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. However, because the Board is remanding the claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

The Veteran seeks service connection for a right eye condition that he contends is due to an in-service firearm accident. See December 2022 VA Form 21-4138 Statement in Support of Claim. 

Under the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), the Board must remand appeals to the RO to correct pre-decisional duty to assist errors. Remand is also appropriate for correction of any AOJ error in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty if correction of the error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the claim. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination and opinion as to the etiology of his right eye condition in March 2023. In rendering a positive nexus opinion, the examiner cited to a January 2019 private treatment record noting a history of "vision loss [right eye] after traumatic injury during service". The examiner wrote that, per that medical record, there is no other etiology for vision loss. The examiner did not provide a rationale in explaining how the Veteran's current eye condition is related to his service, instead reciting a single private treatment record that also did not provide a rationale for its findings. See January 2019 Allied Eye Private Treatment Record. Given this deficiency, the Board finds that remand is necessary to obtain an opinion that provides an adequate rationale for its findings. 

Furthermore, the AOJ should provide the Veteran additional notice. VA regulations provide that, "[u]pon request, a claimant is entitled to a hearing on any issue involved in a claim... before VA issues notice of a decision on an initial or supplemental claim." 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(d)(1). That regulation does not indicate that the claimant is entitled to pre-decisional notice of this optional hearing. In fact, 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(b)(1) provides that, following a decision, "[c]laimants and their representatives are entitled to notice of any decision made by VA affecting the payment of benefits or the granting of relief... [including] the right to a hearing on any issue involved in the claim as provided in paragraph (d) of this section...." Read together with § 3.103(d), the only notice § 3.103(b) requires is that a claimant be provided notice of the right for a hearing with notification of the decision (by definition, a post-decisional notice). In November 2022, VA amended VA Form 21-526EZ and in May 2024 VA amended VA Form 20-0995 to inform claimants of the right to a hearing at any time during the claims process.  

The claim in this appeal was filed prior to the amended version. Therefore, the Veteran was not provided notice of his right to a pre-decisional hearing before the AOJ issued the initial decision on appeal, which was during the period where VA had a duty to assist him in substantiating his claims, 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(e)(1), and remand is required for correction of the failure to provide him such notice. See 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain a medical opinion as to the etiology of the Veteran's right eye condition. The examiner must review the claims file, including this remand, and respond to the following:

Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's traumatic optic neuropathy, right eye with nuclear sclerosis and glaucomatous atrophy, is related to the Veteran's service?

If the examiner finds that another examination is necessary to provide this opinion, one should be scheduled.

In forming a conclusion, the examiner should assume the Veteran's statements about his symptoms are credible, unless they are inconsistent with the medical evidence or with medical principles concerning his condition(s). The Board emphasizes that this does not constitute a positive credibility determination, as the Board will weigh the evidence once the appeal returns.

If there is a medical basis to support or doubt the history provided by the Veteran, the examiner should provide a fully reasoned explanation. In doing so, the examiner may identify any discrepancies, inconsistencies, or contradictions contained in the evidence of record, and may state whether or not the Veteran's lay statements are supported by medical or other evidence.

2. Provide the Veteran with notice of his right to participate in a pre-decisional RO hearing and conduct a hearing if elected by the Veteran.

 

KRISTI L. GUNN

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Dorsey, J.T.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.