Citation Nr: A25034716
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 240908-472044
DATE: April 15, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from September 1980 to September 2004.

In April 2024, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, and requested readjudication of entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea most recently addressed in a March 2020 rating decision.  In June 2024, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the supplemental claim decision on appeal, which found that new and relevant evidence had been received and denied the claim based on the evidence of record at the time of that decision.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the decision on appeal.

In the September 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the June 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in its adjudication. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

The Board notes the recent decision issued by the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) in the case of Williams v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 305.  In Williams v. McDonough, the Court held the Board must refrain from deciding a case until the case proceeds to the point where a docket switch is no longer permitted under the terms of 38 C.F.R. § 20.202(c)(2).  In the present case, the rating decision on appeal was issued on June 5, 2024.  Thus, the one-year period following the decision has not yet elapsed.  However, the decision below is remanding the issue for further development.  Accordingly, there is no prejudice with the Board adjudicating the claim prior to the expiration of the one-year period, and delaying adjudication would needlessly delay necessary development of the claim with no potential benefit.  Thus, the Board will proceed to adjudicate the claim.  

1. Entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea is remanded.

The issue of entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea is remanded to correct a duty to assist error that occurred prior to the June 2024 rating decision on appeal. While the AOJ obtained a medical opinion regarding whether the Veteran's sleep apnea is related to his toxic exposures during service, there is no medical opinion regarding direct service connection. 

Both the Veteran and his wife have provided statements indicating that the Veteran experienced snoring and difficulty breathing in his sleep during his active service. They are competent to report these wholly observable symptoms and their continuance since service. Therefore, a medical opinion addressing direct service connection is necessary. 

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain an addendum opinion from an appropriate clinician.

The clinician is asked to provide a response to the following: Is the Veteran's sleep apnea at least as likely as not related to service, to include the lay reports regarding snoring and difficulty breathing during sleep in service? 

Provide a rationale to support the opinion.  

In providing the requested opinion, consider the lay descriptions of the in-service symptoms as well as post-service symptoms.  If there is any medical reason to accept or reject the proposition that the Veteran's reported symptoms in service and thereafter represented the onset of the current disability, this should be noted.  Stated another way, do the Veteran's reports about the symptoms align with how the currently diagnosed disability is known to develop or are the Veteran's reports generally inconsistent with medical knowledge or implausible?

  

 

 

Christopher Seppanen

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	A. Creegan

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.