Citation Nr: A25034437
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 210812-178612
DATE: April 15, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to a total disability rating based upon individual unemployability (TDIU) due exclusively to service-connected posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is granted, subject to the controlling regulations governing the payment of monetary awards.

Entitlement to special monthly compensation (SMC) pursuant to 38 U.S.C. § 1114(s)(1), is granted, subject to the controlling regulations governing the payment of monetary awards.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. Throughout the appeal period, the Veteran's service-connected PTSD has rendered him unable to secure and follow a substantially gainful occupation.

2. Throughout the appeal period, the Veteran has been in receipt of a TDIU exclusively due to service-connected PTSD and additional separate and distinct service-connected disabilities ratable at 60 percent or more.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for a TDIU have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.340, 3.341, 3.400(o), 4.16.

2. The criteria for SMC pursuant to 38 U.S.C. § 1114(s)(1) have been met. 38 U.S.C. § 1114(s); 38 C.F.R. § 3.350(i).

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran had active duty service in the United States Army from October 1990 to October 1994.

These matters come before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from an appeal of a June 2021 rating decision of the Department of Veterans' Affairs.  In the rating decision, the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) denied entitlement to a TDIU.  As is applicable to the instant Board decision, the AOJ made a favorable finding that the Veteran was not employed.

In his August 2021 Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) (NOD), the Veteran elected the Hearing docket.  

Under the AMA hearing docket, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the respective AOJ decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or representative at the hearing or within 90 days following the hearing.  38 U.S.C. § 7113(b); 38 C.F.R. § 20.302(a).  

The Veteran testified at a Board hearing before the undersigned Veterans Law Judge on April 11, 2025.  A transcript has not yet been associated with the claims file, but one is not necessary because the benefits sought are being granted in full.  The Board notes that the case has been advanced on the docket.

If the Veteran wishes to have VA consider any evidence that was not considered, she may at any time, file a supplemental claim with the AOJ after receiving this decision and the additional evidence will be considered in connection with the supplemental claim.  38 U.S.C. §§ 5104C(a)(1)(B), (b); 5108; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.2501, 20.1105(a).  If filed within one year, this supplemental claim will preserve the date of the claim denied herein as the effective date of the grant of the benefit or benefits sought.  38 U.S.C. § 5104C(a)(2)(B); 38 C.F.R. § 3.2500(h)(1).

Given that the Board is granting the benefits sought in full, it need not consider the outstanding request for "a complete copy of the C-file", which VA had received on July 9, 2020, which was acknowledged by the Veteran's representative.

As a final introductory note, the grant of TDIU in this decision is based exclusively upon the Veteran's service-connected disability of PTSD, as indicated on the title page of this decision.  Consequently, entitlement to SMC pursuant to 38 U.S.C. § 1114(s)(1) has been raised by both the Veteran and the evidence of record as an issue and has added the issue to this appeal as ancillary to the rating claim.  Perciavalle v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 117, 122 (2019) ("It is true that SMC benefits 'are to be accorded when a veteran becomes eligible without need for a separate claim.'  VA's Adjudication Procedures Manual (M21-1) has long treated SMC as an 'ancillary benefit' or 'inferred issue,' meaning that adjudicators must consider a claimant's entitlement to it even where it was 'not specifically placed at issue by the claimant'" (quoting Bradley v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 280, 286 (2008) and Akles v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 118, 121 (1991)).

TDIU based exclusively upon service-connected PTSD

VA will grant a TDIU when the evidence shows that a veteran is precluded, by reason of his service-connected disabilities, from securing and following "substantially gainful employment" consistent with his education and occupational experience. 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.340, 3.341, 4.16. 

The central inquiry is, "whether the veteran's service-connected disabilities alone are of sufficient severity to produce unemployability."  Hatlestad v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 524, 529 (1993).  The Board must evaluate whether there are circumstances in a veteran's case, apart from any non-service-connected condition and advancing age, which would justify a total rating based on individual unemployability due solely to the service-connected conditions.  Van Hoose v. Brown, 4 Vet. App. 361, 363 (1993).

The regulations provide that if there is only one such disability, it must be rated at 60 percent or more, and if there are two or more disabilities, at least one disability must be rated at 40 percent or more, and sufficient additional disability must bring the combined rating to 70 percent or more.  38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a).

At the time that VA received the Veteran's December 11, 2020, VA Form 21-8940 ("Application for Increased Compensation Based on Unemployability"), he was in receipt of a combined rating of 90 percent.  During the Board hearing on April 11, 2025, the undersigned Veterans Law Judge, the Veteran, and his representative discussed that TDIU based exclusively on his service-connected PTSD would be a greater benefit than TDIU based on multiple disabilities, as this could assist in obtaining SMC pursuant to 38 U.S.C. § 1114(s)(1) as discussed below.  The service-connected PTSD has been rated 70 percent throughout the appeal period, thus meeting the schedular criteria of 38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a).  Therefore, the Board will address whether a TDIU based exclusively on this one disability is warranted.

The relevant question is then whether the Veteran's service-connected PTSD has, throughout the appeal period, precluded substantially gainful employment for which his education and occupational experience may otherwise qualify him.  

The term, "unable to secure and follow a substantially gainful occupation" is defined as having two components-one economic and one non-economic.  The economic component means an occupation earning more than marginal income (outside of a protected environment) as determined by the U.S. Department of Commerce as the poverty threshold for one person.  The non-economic component, as noted above, includes consideration of the Veteran's history, education, skill, and training; whether the veteran has the physical ability to perform the type of activities required by the occupation at issue; and whether the veteran has the mental ability to perform the activities required by the occupation at issue.  Ray v. Wilkie, 31 Vet. App. 58, 73 (2019).  

VA treatment records and progress notes beginning December 2019 show frequent consultations and interventions for severe symptoms of PTSD.  The Veteran engaged in group and individualized counseling.  The Veteran's psychoactive pharmaceutical regimen was monitored regularly to ensure maximal efficacy.  Providers indicated that the Veteran complain of depression, sadness, decreased concentration, decreased energy, and anhedonia.  These records also reflect an intensive course of trauma-based therapy, focusing of coping skills and alleviation of anxiety.  As to other associated symptomatology, the Veteran frequently complained/reported of nightmares, flashbacks, un-cued overreaction to stimuli (such as loud noises), intrusive memories, and general situational avoidance of activities in public.

In the Veteran's December 11, 2020, VA Form 21-8940, the Veteran indicated that his formal education was limited to one year of postsecondary education.  The Veteran reported that he had no specialized training of any kind.  Professionally, the Veteran's experience consisted of work as a school bus driver and work as a crane operator for a state port authority.  Emendating this, the Veteran conveyed to a VA psychologist in March 2021 that his compromised social functioning, marked hypervigilance in crowds and groups of people, and complete avoidance of places, including workplaces, where people gather, have made it unbearable to work with others.

Upon a March 2021 VA PTSD examination, the psychologist indicated that the Veteran's PTSD itself was productive of occupational and social impairment in most areas, such as work, family relations, judgment, thinking, and/or mood.  Symptoms included depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss, flattened affect, disturbances in motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing effective work and social relationships, difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, inability to establish and maintain effective relationships, suicidal ideation, and intermittent inability to perform activities of daily life (including minimal tasks of personal hygiene).  Behaviorally, the Veteran presented as depressed with flattened affect.

Bolstering the VA psychologist's findings as to the profound impairments upon the Veteran's occupational sphere, at the Board hearing a private medical report from Dr. M was presented and incorporated into the record by reference, thus entering the hearing docket as described above.  Dr. M not only addressed the severe occupational impairment of the Veteran's PTSD, but she also provided opinions/assessment as to other, related claims, in multiple VA AMA dockets.  Considering the complexity of the Veteran's disability picture and the afore-noted incorporation by reference at the Board hearing, the Board finds a basis for waiving the claims processing error as to the submission of the untimely private opinion received on January 28, 2025.  Cf. Bolds v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 359, 365-66 (2024) ("section 7113(b)'s and § 20.302(a)'s evidence submission limits are claims-processing rules subject to Secretarial waiver").  Dr. N underscored that the Veteran's near continuous panic, gross impairment in thought processes and communication severely limit his ability to adapt to any environment that puts him into contact with others.

At the Board hearing, the Veteran testified as to the severity of his PTSD symptom which have impacted all spheres of his life and have become so severe that they prevent him for working with others safely.  As both a bus driver and a crane operator, both the safety of the Veteran, the safety of children, and the safety of other employees were put at great risk of harm.

Throughout the period under consideration, the evidence of record reflects that the Veteran experienced severe PTSD symptoms which make it impossible for him to interact with other employees in any work setting.  Moreover, the severity of the Veteran's PTSD present viable hazards to both himself, others, and coworkers.  Panicking at every unexpected noise or disturbance and an inability to communication effectively and with propriety have hindered his abilities significantly.

As already discussed, Veteran's formal education is limited to one year of postsecondary education.  Otherwise, the Veteran has no specialized education or professional training.  In service, the Veteran performed tasks as a motor transport operator.  The transferrable skills of operating a large motor vehicle and operating a crane.  In short, the evidence of record fails to reflect that the Veteran possesses any specialist training beyond the realm of manual, on-foot "mechanical operation" labor, such as any degree of competence in computer usage or knowledge of any forms of digitized informational technology.  Considering the Veteran's educational background and nontransferable job skills, the above-reported, severe symptoms of his service-connected PTSD precludes the ability to secure and follow any substantially gainful employment consistent with the Veteran's specific occupational experience and education.  Withers v. Wilkie, 30 Vet. App. 139 (2018).  

In light of the above discussion of the symptoms of the Veteran's PTSD and his limited specific educational and occupational experience, the evidence is at least evenly balanced as to whether the Veteran's service-connected PTSD precludes substantially gainful employment for which his occupational experience and education might have otherwise qualified him.  As the reasonable doubt created by this relative equipoise in the evidence must be resolved in favor of the Veteran, entitlement to a TDIU due exclusively to service-connected right lower extremity radiculopathy throughout the appeal period is warranted.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102. 

SMC pursuant to 38 U.S.C. § 1114(s)(1)

Although the Veteran does not have a 100 percent rating for any single disability, based on the above decision he has a TDIU due exclusively to service-connected PTSD.  This rating satisfies the requirement for a single service-connected disability rated as total percent for SMC(s)(1) purposes.  Bradley, 22 Vet. App. at 293 ("section 1114(s) does not limit 'a service-connected disability rated as total' to only a schedular rating of 100%, and the Secretary's current regulation permits a TDIU rating based on a single disability to satisfy the statutory requirement of a total rating").

Throughout the appeal period, the Veteran has been in receipt of service connection for the following in addition to PTSD: lumbosacral strain at 40 percent; irritable bowel syndrome at 30 percent; right lower extremity radiculopathy at 10 percent; right lower extremity radiculopathy at 10 percent; and erectile dysfunction at a noncompensable rating.  These disabilities are "separate and distinct" from PTSD and the combined rating is higher than 60 percent.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.25(a).

Consequently, the Veteran now has entitlement to a TDIU based upon single disability, PTSD, and additional separate and distinct service-connected disabilities, rated at least at 60 percent disabling.  Id.  Thus, the Veteran has met the criteria for SMC pursuant to 38 U.S.C. § 1114(s)(1) throughout the appeal period.

 

 

Jonathan Hager

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	B. J. Komins, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability.  38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.