Citation Nr: A25034592
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 240626-452361
DATE: April 15, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for right knee meniscal tear (right knee disorder) is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from January 1977 to January 1980. 

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a rating decision issued in May 2024 by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office under the modernized appeals system known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA). 

In the June 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the direct review lane.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the May 2024 Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) decision.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  

However, because the Board is remanding the issue of entitlement to service connection for a right knee disorder, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of that claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Additionally, the Board acknowledges that the period to change AMA dockets per 38 C.F.R. § 20.202(c)(2) has not yet elapsed.  However, the Board finds that a docket switch letter pursuant to Williams v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 305 (2024) is not necessary because the Veteran will have an opportunity to submit additional evidence to be considered on remand and this remand is not considered a final adjudication of the issue on appeal.  Accordingly, there is no prejudice to the Veteran in proceeding with the remand.  Id.

Entitlement to service connection for a right knee disorder is remanded.

The Veteran contends that his current right knee meniscal tear is related to in-service right knee injuries. 

In the May 2024 rating decision, the AOJ favorably found that the Veteran has a diagnosis of right knee meniscal tear and an in-service injury.  The Board is bound by the AOJ's favorable findings under the AMA.  38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).  In support of this finding, the Board also notes that the March 2024 VA examination report shows a diagnosis of a right knee meniscal tear and service treatment records from October 1978, January 1979, and September 1979 document right knee injuries during service and a diagnosed torn medial meniscus. 

As to the nexus element, the Board finds that remand is necessary to correct a duty to assist error that occurred prior to the issuance of the May 2024 rating decision on appeal. 

In January 2024, the Veteran reported that he has a current right knee injury that began during service after jumping off a truck at Fort Hood.  

During the March 2024 VA examination, the examiner documented that the Veteran has a current right knee meniscal tear and the Veteran reported the date of onset in 1978.  The VA examiner noted that the Veteran stated his knee pain has been an ongoing issue, but he never sought treatment because "he knew he didn't want surgery and didn't think there was anything they could do for him."  The examiner opined that it is less likely than not that the Veteran's right knee meniscal tear was incurred in, or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness.  The examiner reasoned that although the Veteran stated that he has experienced right knee symptoms and his right knee has been "an ongoing issue," there are "no records of right knee complaints" following service.  Thus, the examiner opined that there was not "enough evidence to create chronicity of care and thus not enough evidence to create a nexus." 

Upon review, the Board finds the March 2024 VA medical opinion inadequate.  Specifically, the examiner largely relied on the lack of evidence of continuing right knee treatment following service, despite the Veteran's competent and credible testimony of continuing right knee symptomatology, and his reasoning for not seeking medical treatment following treatment in service.  See Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331, 1337 (Fed. Cir. 2006); Miller v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 249, 260 (2020). 

Accordingly, the Board finds that remand is necessary to obtain a medical opinion addressing whether the Veteran's current right knee disorder was incurred in, or caused by his in-service right knee meniscal tear. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Obtain an addendum opinion from a clinician who can provide a medical opinion as to the nature and etiology of the Veteran's right knee disorder.  A copy of the claims file, to include this Remand, must be made available to and reviewed by the examiner.  

The examiner is asked to provide a medical opinion addressing the following:

a)	Did the Veteran's right knee disorder have its onset during service or is it otherwise related to an in-service injury, event, or disease? The examiner must address the Veteran's contention that his right knee pain began in service and has continued to the present.

In doing so, the examiner should explicitly consider and discuss the Veteran's reports of right knee pain since service and his statements that he did not seek treatment for his knee condition because he knew that he did not want surgical intervention. 

The examiner is advised that the absence of evidence of a continuing treatment cannot serve as the sole basis for a negative opinion.  In this regard, if the examiner rejects the lay statements of record as to onset and/or a continuity of symptoms, he or she must provide a reason for doing so beyond the mere lack of corroborating records.

A rationale for any opinion must be provided.

 

 

Melanie J. Mann

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Webster, Rebecca

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.