Citation Nr: A25034165
Decision Date: 04/14/25	Archive Date: 04/14/25

DOCKET NO. 240322-426384
DATE: April 14, 2025

ORDER

New and relevant evidence having been received, readjudication of the claim of entitlement to service connection for a low back disability (claimed as lower back pain) is warranted.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a low back disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for facial scars is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

The December 2022 statement is new and relevant evidence to the issue of entitlement to service connection for a low back disability.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

New and relevant evidence has been received to readjudicate a claim for service connection for a low back disability. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from July 1980 to July 1984 and August 1990 to August 1991.

This case is before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from March 2023 and April 2023 rating decisions issued by a VA Regional Office (RO), which is an agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ).  The March 2023 rating decision found that new and relevant evidence was not received and continued the denial of service connection for a low back disability.  The April 2023 rating decision denied service connection for facial scars.

In the March 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran disagreed with the denial of service connection for a low back disability and facial scars.  The Veteran selected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, with regard to the claim for service connection for a low back disability, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2023 AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  For the claim for service connection for facial scars, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the April 2023 AOJ decision on appeal. Id.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision(s) on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

Because the Board is remanding the claims of entitlement to service connection for a low back disability and entitlement to service connection for facial scars, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

?

NEW AND RELEVANT EVIDENCE

VA will readjudicate a claim if new and relevant evidence is presented or secured. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  "Relevant evidence" is evidence that tends to prove or disprove a matter in issue. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501(a)(1).

Readjudication of the claim for service connection for a low back disability

The Veteran contends that he submitted evidence with his petition to reopen a claim for service connection for a low back disability that is new and relevant and warrants readjudication of the issue.

The Veteran was originally denied service connection for back pain in a September 2002 rating decision based on no in-service incurrence or nexus, which the Veteran did not appeal.  Therefore, this decision became final. 38 U.S.C. §§ 5108, 7105; 38 C.F.R. § 3.156. In August 2017, the Veteran filed a claim for service connection for lower back pain.  In a May 2018 rating decision, the RO confirmed and continued the denial of service connection for back pain (claimed as lower back pain).  The Veteran did not appeal and the therefore, the decision became final. Id. In December 2022, the Veteran filed a Supplemental Claim and requested that his claim for service connection for back pain be reopened.  In the March 2023 rating decision on appeal, the RO found that new and relevant evidence had not been received and again denied the claim for service connection for back pain (claimed as lower back pain).  

In this instance, the record contains a new December 2022 statement from the Veteran, submitted prior to the rating decision on appeal, in which he describes an injury to his back in November 1981 during his active military service that he believes led to the development of his current low back disability. See December 2022 Statement in Support of Claim.  The Veteran's statement tends to prove or disprove a matter at issue in the claim, specifically an in-service incurrence.  As such, the Board finds that new and relevant evidence has been received to readjudicate the Veteran's claim.  The appeal is granted to this extent.

Service connection will be granted if the evidence demonstrates that a current disability resulted from an injury or disease incurred in or aggravated by active military service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a).

Establishing service connection generally requires (1) evidence of a current disability; (2) medical or, in certain circumstances, lay evidence of in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) evidence of a nexus between the claimed in-service disease or injury and the present disability.  Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

Service connection may be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge, when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).

Except as otherwise provided by law, a claimant has the responsibility to present and support a claim for benefits under laws administered by the Secretary.  The Secretary shall consider all information and lay and medical evidence of record in a case before the Secretary with respect to benefits under laws administered by the Secretary.

When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of the matter, the Secretary shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; see also Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49, 53 (1990); Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to service connection for a low back disability

Having determined that new and relevant evidence has been received and readjudication of the claim for service connection for a low back disability is warranted, a remand is needed.  Because the AOJ did not reopen the claim, and therefore did not reach the merits of the underlying service-connection claim, it would be prejudicial for the Board to proceed with a decision in the first instance. Hickson v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 392 (2010).

However, the Board still has the duty to remand issues when necessary to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).  Prior to readjudication, the RO should correct the pre-decisional duty to assist error.

Service treatment records show the Veteran was treated for back pain in service in March 1982.  He reported hurting his back lifting weight and was diagnosed with back pain, secondary to a muscle strain.

The post-service medical evidence of record shows that during VA outpatient treatment in February 2017, the Veteran complained of chronic low back pain that dated back to his years in service in the early 1990s.  He was treated for low back pain again in November 2017 and diagnosed with bilateral low back facet joint pain and sacroiliac pain and given a steroid injection.  He continued to be treated for low back pain from 2017 - 2023. See November 2017, December 2022, and March 2023 CAPRI records.  In a December 2022 Statement in Support of Claim, he reported a back injury during active military service in November 1981. 

The Veteran has reported that he injured his back during active service in 1981, and that his back has been hurting since that 1981 injury and since the 1990's.  The Veteran is competent to report that he injured his back during active service and that he has continued to experience back pain since his separation from active service. Heuer v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 379 (1995); Falzone v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 398 (1995); Caldwell v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 466 (1991).

The Veteran was not provided a VA medical examination and opinion prior to the rating decision on appeal which denied his claim, to determine whether a currently diagnosed low back disability is related to his active military service.  VA is obliged to provide an examination or obtain a medical opinion in a claim of service connection when the record contains competent evidence that the claimant has a current disability, the record indicates that the disability may be associated with active service, and the record does not contain sufficient information to decide a claim. McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 81 (2006).  The evidentiary requirement that the record indicates that the claimed disability may be associated with active service is a "low threshold." Id. at 83.  Here, the Veteran has a current back disability, an in-service injury to the back, and statements asserting a continuity of symptoms therefrom. Accordingly, the Board finds that the low threshold has been met.

The AOJ's failure to provide an examination or obtain a medical opinion to determine the nature and etiology of any currently diagnosed low back disability is a pre-decisional duty to assist error. See 38 C.F.R. § 20.802.  As such, the Board will remand for a VA examination and medical opinion as to the etiology of any currently diagnosed low back disability.

2. Entitlement to service connection for facial scars

The Veteran contends that he has current facial scars related to his active military service.  He alleges that he was given a shaving profile due to severe symptoms he had after shaving and he now suffers from pocket-like, raised, tight scars that cover up to 25 percent of his facial area.  He also claims that he received a laceration to his face when he collided with another player whose teeth cut his face while playing football during active duty in Germany.  He was sent to a German hospital where he received approximately 8-9 stitches, but the stitches irritated him and had to be removed due to an infection and swelling, which had to be treated with antibiotic therapy.  He claims that he now has a scar that is 1 - 1.5 inches under his left eye. See November 2022 Statement in Support of Claim.

Post-service medical evidence does not show any facial scars. See November 2017, December 2022, and March 2023 CAPRI records.

Nonetheless, the Veteran is competent to describe current fascial scars as it is a readily observable condition. Similarly, the Veteran is competent to describe the terms of his service, namely getting a facial laceration in Germany that requires sutures and being given a shaving profile. Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 (Fed. Cir. 2007).  There is no evidence to the contrary.  His lay statements are sufficient for the purposes of obtaining a VA examination to investigate the nature and etiology of his claimed condition. See McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 84 (2006). Accordingly, a VA examination is warranted.

In remanding these issues, the Board makes no finding, implicit or otherwise, as to the credibility of the Veteran's assertions.  Neither the Veteran's credibility nor any lack thereof should be presumed in this remand.

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for an examination with an appropriate clinician to determine to the nature and etiology of his claimed low back disability.  The examiner must be provided access to the electronic claims file and indicate review of the claims file, including a copy of this REMAND.  The examiner should record the Veteran's self-reported history regarding the claim of service connection for a low back disability, and then review the Veteran's pertinent documented medical history.  The examiner must provide a comprehensive rationale in addressing a medical opinion on the following (as applicable):

Identify all current low back disabilities.  If a diagnosis cannot be provided but the Veteran's condition manifests in symptoms that cause a functional impairment of earning capacity, then the examiner shall consider them a "disability" for the purpose of providing the requested opinion(s) below. 

Provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not that any currently diagnosed low back disability either began during service; or, whether it is otherwise related to any injury or disease in service.

In providing this opinion, the examiner is referred to the Veteran's self-reported history in his December 2022, Statement in Support of Claim, and during VA outpatient treatment in February 2017, and summarized in the narrative portion of the remand above.

A complete rationale is required for the requested opinion.  If it is not possible to provide the requested opinion, without resorting to speculation, the examiner must state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training).

2. Schedule the Veteran for an examination with an appropriate clinician to determine to the nature and etiology of his claimed facial scars.  The examiner must be provided access to the electronic claims file and indicate review of the claims file, including a copy of this REMAND.  The examiner should record the Veteran's self-reported history regarding the claim of service connection for facial scars, and then review the Veteran's pertinent documented medical history.  The examiner must provide a comprehensive rationale in addressing a medical opinion on the following (as applicable):

The examiner should identify any facial scars the Veteran has presented at any time during the claim period. If a diagnosis cannot be provided but the Veteran's condition manifests in symptoms that cause a functional impairment of earning capacity, then the examiner shall consider them a "disability" for the purpose of providing the requested opinion(s) below. 

Provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not that any current facial scars either had their onset during service; or, whether they are otherwise related to any injury or disease in service.

The examiner should consider all medical and lay evidence of record.

In providing this opinion, the examiner is referred to the Veteran's self-reported history in his November 2022 Statement in Support of Claim and summarized in the narrative portion of the remand above.

A complete rationale is required for the requested opinion.  If it is not possible to provide the requested opinion, without resorting to speculation, the examiner must state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training).

 

Mike Sobiecki

Acting Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	F. Yankey, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.