Citation Nr: A25034518
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 240602-444782
DATE: April 15, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD), claimed as stomach, acid reflux, is denied. 

Entitlement to service connection for a respiratory disability, to include sinusitis and allergic rhinitis, is granted pursuant to the Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxics Act of 2022 (PACT Act).

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for migraine headaches is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that GERD began during active service or is otherwise related to an in-service injury or disease. 

2. Resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Veteran's respiratory disability is due to exposure to burn pits and fine particulate matter during service. 

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for service connection for GERD, claimed as stomach, acid reflux, have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.304.

2. The criteria for service connection for a respiratory disability, to include sinusitis and allergic rhinitis, have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.320

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Navy from May 2004 to May 2008 with service in Turkey.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a February 2024 rating decision and a March 2024 rating decision issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ).

In a June 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Regarding the claim for service connection for sinusitis, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the February 2024 AOJ decision on appeal. With respect to the claims for service connection for migraine headaches, rhinitis, and GERD, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2024 AOJ decision on appeal. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decisions on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of service connection for migraine headaches any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of this claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

The Board notes that the Veteran originally styled his claim for a respiratory disability as two separate claims for sinusitis and allergic rhinitis. Accordingly, the Board recharacterized the issues as entitlement to service connection for a respiratory disability as captioned above to better reflect the scope of the claims. See Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1 (2009) (claim of service connection encompasses all pertinent symptomatology, regardless of how that symptomatology is diagnosed).

Procedural History

The procedural history warrants discussion. In a November 2021 VA Form 21-526EZ, Application for Disability Compensation and Related Compensation Benefits, the Veteran claimed that during service, his stomach, acid reflux disability was due to anxiety and depression when armed Algieri guards held the Navy crew in April 2005. In an August 2022 rating decision, the AOJ conceded a GERD diagnosis but denied the claim finding no link to service.

In a December 2022 VA Form 21-526EZ, the Veteran claimed his migraine headaches were due to high stress and tinnitus; and his sinusitis and rhinitis were due to a toxic atmosphere and exhaust under the PACT Act of 2022. He asserted these disabilities began between 2005 and 2006 and were related to his deployments to an area off Africa. In a December 2022 VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, the Veteran reasserted his stomach, acid reflux claim under the PACT Act.

In a March 2023 rating decision, the AOJ denied the claims for sinusitis, rhinitis, and migraine headaches finding no current diagnoses; and denied the claim for GERD finding no link to service. In a July 2023 VA Form 20-0995, the Veteran resubmitted all four claims. In an accompanying July 2023 VA Form 21-4138, Statement in Support of Claim, the Veteran stated that, in the Spring of 2005, he was in Turkey where his ship had a scheduled port call and there for about one week. The PACT Act includes Turkey as a presumptive location for toxic exposure due to the use of burn pits and burn barrels for waste.

In a February 2024 Toxic Exposure Risk Activity (TERA) Memorandum, VA conceded the Veteran participated in TERAs in Turkey while aboard the U.S.S. Taylor FFG-50; and his military occupational specialty (MOS) OS-0000 had minimal asbestos exposure.

In the February 2024 rating decision on appeal, the AOJ conceded the TERA participation in a location under 38 U.S.C. § 1117 but determined there was no current diagnosis for sinusitis. The claims for migraine headaches, rhinitis, and GERD were deferred. 

Conversely, in the March 2024 rating decision on appeal, the AOJ denied the rhinitis claim finding no link to service or service in a presumptive location under Section 1117. However, as to the GERD claim, the AOJ conceded service in a presumptive location (Turkey), but GERD was not among the qualifying chronic disabilities and was not otherwise linked to service. Finally, the AOJ denied the claim for migraine headaches for lack of a diagnosis.

In response, the Veteran appealed to the Board in June 2024 and has continuously pursued these claims.

Service Connection

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from a disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by service. See 38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (a). To substantiate a claim of service connection, there must be evidence of (1) a current disability (for which service connection is sought); (2) incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury in service; and (3) a causal connection between the disease or injury in service and the current disability. See Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

Establishing service connection on a secondary basis requires evidence sufficient to show (1) that a current disability exists and (2) that the current disability was either (a) caused by or (b) aggravated by a service-connected disability. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310 (a)-(b). Secondary causation exists when, but for the service-connected disability, the non-service-connected disability was caused by a service-connected disability either in a direct, etiological way or via multiple steps in a causal chain. Spicer v. McDonough, 61 F.4th 1360, 1365 (Fed. Cir. 2023) (citations omitted). Secondary aggravation exists when the non-service-connected disability not caused by a service-connected disability would be less severe were it not for a service-connected disability. Id. at 1364. For example, secondary aggravation may be established where the natural progression of the non-service-connected disability could have been arrested or improved but for the service-connected disability. Id. Lay evidence may be competent evidence to establish incurrence. See Davidson v. Shinseki, 581 F.3d 1313 (Fed. Cir. 2009). However, competent medical evidence is necessary where the determinative question is one requiring medical knowledge. Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372 (Fed. Cir. 2007).

Service connection may also be granted on a presumptive basis for diseases listed in 38 C.F.R. § 3.309 under the following circumstances: (1) where a chronic disease or injury is shown in service and subsequent manifestations for the same disease or injury are shown at a later date unless clearly attributable to an intercurrent cause; or (2) where there is continuity of symptomatology since service; or (3) by showing that the disorder manifested to a degree of 10 percent or more within one year of the date of separation from service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.307; see also 38 C.F.R. 3.303(b).

Service connection may also be granted for a Persian Gulf veteran with a qualifying chronic disability that became manifest to any degree at any time. 38 U.S.C. § 1117 (a)(1); 38 C.F.R. § 3.317 (a)(1). A qualifying chronic disability is a chronic disability that may result from an undiagnosed illness or a medically unexplained chronic multi symptom illness (MUCMI). 38 C.F.R. § 3.317 (a)(2)(i). Moreover, a Persian Gulf veteran may be presumptively service connected for asthma, rhinitis, or sinusitis, to include rhinosinusitis, based on exposure to fine particulate matter pollution while in service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.320.

A Persian Gulf veteran is defined as a veteran who served on active military, naval or air service in the Southwest Asia theater of operations during the Persian Gulf War. 38 C.F.R. § 3.317 (e)(1). The Southwest Asia theater of operations refers to Iraq, Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, the neutral zone between Iraq and Saudi Arabia, Bahrain, Qatar, the United Arab Emirates, Oman, the Persian Gulf, the Arabian Sea, the Red Sea, and the airspace above these locations. Id. § 3.317(e)(2). The period of the Persian Gulf War is from August 2, 1990, through the present. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.2 (i). Additionally, for veterans diagnosed with an infectious disease as defined in 38 C.F.R. § 3.317(c)(2), the qualifying period of service also includes active military, naval, air, or space service in Afghanistan on or after September 19, 2001. 38 C.F.R. § 3.317(c)(3)(ii).

The PACT Act was enacted on August 10, 2022. Section 405 of the PACT Act reduces the threshold for establishing eligibility when considering presumptive service connection for Persian Gulf War veterans. Presumptive conditions under 38 C.F.R. § 3.317(a) and (b) may now manifest to any degree at any time. There is no longer a requirement for a chronic disability to manifest to a degree of 10 percent or more prior to December 31, 2026. The end date is no longer applicable. Additionally, the PACT Act expanded the definition of a Persian Gulf veteran to include those who served in the countries of Afghanistan, Israel, Egypt, Turkey, Syria, and Jordan, along with those who served in the Southwest Asia theater of operations as defined in 38 C.F.R. § 3.317 (e). Moreover, the previous restriction that presumptive conditions based on fine particulate matter manifest within 10 years of separation from active service has equally been removed, allowing for the presumption articulated in 38 C.F.R. § 3.320 to apply if a listed condition manifests to any degree at any time.

In rendering a decision on appeal, the Board must analyze the credibility and probative value of the evidence, account for the evidence which it finds to be persuasive or unpersuasive and provide the reasons for its rejection of any material evidence favorable to the claimant. Gabrielson v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 36, 39-40 (1994). When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, the Secretary shall give benefit of the doubt to the Veteran. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102. Further, when the evidence persuasively favors one side or the other, the evidence is not in approximate balance and, therefore, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply. See Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 781-82 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

1. Entitlement to service connection for GERD, claimed as stomach, acid reflux is denied.

The Veteran contends his GERD is related to service.

In the July 2023 VA Form 21-4138, the Veteran stated that he takes omeprazole for his GERD. Without the medication, his stomach burns; and diet is limited.

As stated above, VA conceded the Veteran has a current disability, GERD diagnosed around 2017, and participation in a TERA, including service in Turkey. These findings are binding on the Board. Because the Veteran has a currently diagnosed disability, the question before the Board is whether the Veteran's GERD was incurred in or aggravated by service and whether there is a nexus between service and the current disability.

Turning to the evidence, the service treatment records (STRs) are silent for any complaint, treatment, or diagnosis of any gastrointestinal illness. A January 2008 naval clinic record shows the abdomen had no tenderness, liver and spleen were not palpable; and bowel sounds were normal. 

Private treatment records from Dr. M from 2014 through 2017 show that, regularly, the Veteran did not have gastrointestinal issues; there was no abdominal pain, change in bowel habits, heartburn, vomiting, hematemesis, melena, diarrhea, or constipation. However, in October 2017, the Veteran's physician provided an ambulatory referral to gastroenterology for abdominal fullness; and a diagnosis of GERD was made. The Veteran was prescribed omeprazole.

VA treatment records show continued prescriptions for omeprazole for GERD throughout the period on appeal. Treatment records show the Veteran reported he was diagnosed with GERD in 2017; and Prilosec also worked for him in the past.

In a February 2024 VA stomach and duodenal conditions (not including GERD or esophageal disorders) disability benefits questionnaire (DBQ), the examiner determined the Veteran did not have nor has he ever had any stomach or duodenum condition. The Veteran reported that his GERD began around 2008-2009, based on overall poor eating habits including eating late at night and certain foods. The Veteran described frequent heartburn, regurgitation, persistent burping, nausea, dry cough, sore throat, bloating, and mid-chest pain. The Veteran reported treatment for GERD includes omeprazole, attempts to manage stress, sleep machine, sleep positions, chewing gum, watching what he eats, lifestyle changes, and posture. 

In the accompanying February 2024 medical opinion, the examiner opined that a stomach condition was less likely than not caused by the TERA after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments and the synergistic combined effect of all toxic exposure activities. The examiner reasoned there is no pathology to warrant a diagnosis or condition that can be related to the claimed TERA. 

In a February 2024 VA esophageal condition (including GERD, hiatal hernia, and other esophageal disorders) DBQ, the examiner noted a GERD diagnosis from 2017, repeated the Veteran's reports of his symptoms and treatment, and found the Veteran exhibited symptoms of pyrosis, reflux, and regurgitation. There were no esophageal stricture, spasm of esophagus, or an acquired diverticulum of the esophagus; there were no tumors or neoplasms. The examiner remarked that the Veteran's disability pattern is a diagnosable chronic multi symptom illness with a partially explained etiology. GERD is a digestive disorder caused by gastric acid flowing from the stomach back into the food pipe; heartburn is the most common symptom; some lifestyle issues that may cause GERD include being overweight, overeating, having caffeine and alcohol, and eating chocolate and spicy foods. 

In the February 2024 TERA medical opinion, the examiner noted there was non-deployment exposure given the Veteran's MOS, but incorrectly noted there was no evidence verifying the Veteran served in a presumptive location under § 1117. The examiner opined that GERD was less likely than not caused by the TERAs after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic combined effect of all TERAs of the Veteran. The examiner considered the Veteran's medical records and lay statements, medical literature related to burn pit exposure, and other risk factors and reasoned there is no medical or scientific evidence that provides any indication of a relationship between GERD and a TERA. GERD is a very common condition with risk factors including obesity, eating large meals, ETOH use, nicotine and caffeine intake.

In the February 2024 Gulf War General Medical Examination DBQ. The examiner indicated the Veteran had certain conditions that could represent undiagnosed illness or diagnosed medically unexplained chronic multi symptom illness, specifically, intestinal conditions and sinusitis/rhinitis or other conditions of the nose, throat, larynx, and pharynx. For the claimed stomach condition, there is no diagnosis because there are no findings, signs, and/or symptoms to support a diagnosis. Although the medical opinion incorrectly noted the Veteran did not have service in a presumptive location, this does not necessarily render the opinion inadequate or diminish its probative value. GERD is not among the presumptive illnesses considered by the PACT Act; thus, there is no prejudice. The Board finds the February 2024 medical opinions are adequate and probative as to the etiology of the Veteran's GERD.

In March 2024, a different VA examiner, Dr. C., reviewed the record and issued three medical opinions. As to direct service connection, Dr. C. opined it was less likely than not GERD was incurred in or caused by service. Dr. C. reasoned the STRs were silent for heartburn, GERD consults, and treatment; and there is a known etiology. Obesity poses a concern given the Veteran's excess weight, which can elevate stomach pressure and weaken the lower esophageal sphincter, thereby increasing the likelihood of acid reflux. Moreover, the abdominal fat distribution associated with obesity directly contributes to the onset or aggravation of GERD. 

Second, Dr. C. opined the Veteran's GERD was less likely than not caused by a TERA during service and reasoned there are risk factors outside of military service that far outweigh the factors identified in the TERA. GERD has a known etiology characterized by the reflux of stomach acid into the esophagus. Exposure to burn pits and particulate matter and fuel exposure are not known to cause GERD. The Veteran has a BMI of 32.42, which is classified as obese. Excess weight is linked to chronic GERD due to increased pressure on the lower esophageal sphincter. This caused the Veteran's condition and not his TERA. Therefore, there is no nexus. 

Third, Dr. C. opined the Veteran's claim for stomach conditions was less likely than not due to service, specifically burn pits and particulate matter because there is no other pathology to warrant a diagnosis of a condition that can be related to the claimed toxic exposure. The Board finds the March 2024 VA opinions are adequate and significantly probative and consider alternate theories of service connection.

The medical evidence overall is persuasive and significantly probative given the Veteran's admissions to his physicians and the near decade-long gap between the Veteran's separation from service and the onset of GERD.

Although there is no opinion addressing whether the Veteran's GERD was related to anxiety and high stress during service, the Veteran is not service connected for any psychiatric or mental health disability. Without a service-connected disability, there is no link to service on a secondary basis whether in a direct, etiological way, via multiple steps in a causal chain, or aggravation. See Spicer, 61 F.4th at 1365. The opinions offer a known etiology of the Veteran's GERD, namely, the Veteran's obesity and eating habits. Accordingly, under these circumstances, there is no duty to assist error for failure to obtain a medical opinion as to secondary service connection. See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 312 (2007).

The Board has considered the Veteran's lay statements and finds that he is competent and credible to describe observable gastric symptoms and when they began. See Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465 (1994). However, the Veteran is not competent to opine to the etiology of GERD or provide a medical nexus opinion. Jandreau, supra. GERD is a complex medical issue; thus, lay statements asserting etiology generally are assigned less weight. See Woehlaert v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 456 (2007).

The Board finds that there is a lack of medical evidence of record that indicates the Veteran's GERD is due to participation in a TERA or otherwise due to service. Moreover, the Board finds that GERD is not considered either an undiagnosed illness or a MUCMI because a specific diagnosis has been identified. Thus, presumptive service connection is not warranted under 38 U.S.C. § 1117 and 38 C.F.R. § 3.317.

The evidence weighs persuasively against the Veteran's claim; as such, the evidence is not in approximate balance; and the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply. See Lynch, supra. Accordingly, the claim for service connection for GERD, to include as due to toxic exposure, is denied.

2. Entitlement to service connection for a respiratory disability to include sinusitis and allergic rhinitis, is granted pursuant to the PACT Act.

The Veteran contends his respiratory disabilities are related to service and originally sought entitlement to service connection for sinusitis and rhinitis as two separate claims. 

In the July 2023 VA 21-4138, the Veteran stated that his sinusitis is documented; in the Navy, he used over-the-counter decongestants; and sinusitis and rhinitis are due to the toxic atmosphere of Turkey.

In the February 2024 rating decision, the AOJ denied the claim for sinusitis because there was no current diagnosis and conceded participation in a TERA. In the March 2024 rating decision, the AOJ found the Veteran was diagnosed with allergic rhinitis in February 2024. The Board will not disturb favorable findings. 

Turning to the evidence, the STRs show that at the August 2003 enlistment exam, the Veteran reported a history of ear, nose, or throat trouble. In 2004, the Veteran had colds, ear infections, congestion, and green mucus; and he was prescribed amoxicillin, motrin, and decongestants. STRs from 2006 show the Veteran regularly prescribed fluticasone propionate nasal spray and pseudoephedrine. In October 2006, the Veteran had abnormal nasal mucosa. A November 2006 record shows nasal turbinate abnormalities and nasal turbinate hypertrophied.

Four months before separation from service, a January 2008 private examination record noted septum midline with no purulence or polyps of the nose; there was mild edema possibly consistent with an inhalant allergy. There was clear mucoid secretion present with no obstructive pathology of the nasopharynx. 

A January 2008 Naval Branch Health Clinic evaluation shows the Veteran's head, face, nose, and mouth were within normal limits; and no sinusitis was detected. 

Private treatment records from Dr. M. show that between 2014 and 2016, the Veteran had instances of upper respiratory infections, nasal congestion, a plugged ear sensation, sinus pain, and sinus pressure. In June 2017, the Veteran did not have any sinus trouble or allergic rhinitis. Records from February 2019 show no reports of sinus trouble or allergic rhinitis. In August 2019, there was no shortness of breath; in March 2020, there was no allergic rhinitis or sinus trouble. April- and July 2021 records note the Veteran uses a nasal spray, but there was no allergic rhinitis or sinus trouble.

VA treatment records show that, in December 2023, the Veteran had a CT scan of the paranasal sinus showing mild mucosal thickening of the paranasal sinuses, grossly patent ostiomeatal units bilaterally, and leftward nasal septal deviation. A February 2024 treatment record notes the CT scan shows DNS to the left; turbinate hypertrophy; allergic mucosa, inferior turbinate hypertrophy. The Veteran was diagnosed with a deviated nasal septum, allergic rhinitis, and inferior turbinate hypertrophy. A February 2024 treatment record notes the Veteran saw ENT and was scheduled for surgery in April 2024 to correct a deviated septum. The Board notes that the scheduled surgery is outside the period currently on appeal.

In February 2024, the Veteran was afforded an in-person VA examination; the sinusitis/rhinitis and other conditions DBQ shows the Veteran reported the condition began in 2006 when he had chronic symptoms soon after returning from the Mediterranean cruise where he was exposed to poor air quality in Turkey and Africa. He suffered from runny/stuffy nose, severe headaches, pain under the eyes, drainage even while the nose feels stuffy, sneezing, experience at times, bad breath, and fatigue. The Veteran is prescribed fluticasone propionate for allergic rhinitis, cetirizine and uses a humidifier, sinus rinse, and warm towel for relief. The Veteran also reported the condition induces weariness, concentration difficulties, body aches, stress, and missing days from work.

The examiner indicated a diagnosis of rhinitis for February 2024 but does not list any other diagnoses despite those listed in the STRs, private treatment records, and VA treatment records. The examiner did not indicate whether the Veteran had any signs or symptoms of sinusitis, including headaches. The examiner indicated the Veteran had permanent hypertrophy of the nasal turbinates. The only imaging study of the sinuses listed is from February 2024, which confirmed features of chronic rhinitis on an otherwise negative paranasal sinus exam. 

The examiner remarked there was no pathology to support a diagnosis of sinusitis; however, the Veteran has a diagnosable chronic multi-symptom illness with a partially explained etiology. The examiner found the claimed condition is at least as likely as not caused by the indicated TERA and reasoned the Veteran has a diagnosis of chronic sinusitis or allergic rhinitis that is at least as likely as not caused by exposure to burn pits while deployed to SWA during service and is a known presumptive condition covered by the PACT Act. The examiner also offered medical literature to support the rationale.

In an accompanying February 2024 medical opinion, the VA examiner opined that the Veteran's sinusitis that was less likely than not caused by the TERA and reasoned there was no pathology to warrant a diagnosis or condition that can be related to the claimed toxic exposure. The examiner did not offer an opinion for service connection on a direct- or secondary basis. 

In the February 2024 Gulf War General Medical Examination DBQ. The examiner indicated the Veteran had certain conditions that could represent undiagnosed illness or diagnosed medically unexplained chronic multi symptom illness, specifically, intestinal conditions and sinusitis/rhinitis or other conditions of the nose, throat, larynx, and pharynx, but did not indicate the Veteran suffered any headaches. The examiner remarked for the claimed conditions of sinusitis and rhinitis, refer to the diagnosis section. 

In a March 2024 addendum, the examiner opined the Veteran's headaches may be caused by his allergic rhinitis due to nasal congestion and sinus pressure causing frontal sinus headaches.

In March 2024, a second VA examiner, Dr. C., provided a second TERA opinion following review of the record but without the benefit of an in-person examination. Dr. C. opined it was less likely than not the Veteran's allergic rhinitis was caused by the TERA. Dr. C. confirmed the Veteran participated in a TERA and the record did not indicate any risk factors outside of military service but reasoned there is no medical or scientific evidence available that provides any indication of a relationship between the development of the condition and the TERA. Exposure to burn pits and particulate matter is not known to cause allergic rhinitis which typically results from an immune system response to specific allergens rather than general particulate exposure. The Veteran travelled to multiple places, which increases the risks for exposure to various allergens such as pollen, dust, or animal dander during outdoor activities, triggering allergic reactions. The distinct nature of burn pit emissions and particulate matter does not align with the specific triggers associated with allergic rhinitis making it less likely to be a causative factor. Therefore, there is no nexus. Dr. C. offered no opinion as to whether service connection was warranted on a direct- or secondary basis.

The Board finds the March 2024 medical opinion is inadequate and has limited probative value because it ignores the presumption that signs and symptoms that may be a manifestation of an undiagnosed illness or a chronic multi symptom illness including those involving the upper and lower respiratory system, headaches, and fatigue. See 38 U.S.C. §§ 1117. Moreover, under the PACT Act, chronic sinusitis and chronic rhinitis are among diseases presumed to be service connected as associated with exposure to burn pits and other toxins. See 38 U.S.C. §§ 1119; 1120.

The Board finds the February 2024 positive VA medical opinion is adequate and has significant probative value. Although the examiner did not outline discuss the various respiratory disabilities noted in the medical records, the examiner identified a respiratory disability, namely, rhinitis, and noted permanent hypertrophy of the nasal turbinates. The examiner opined the Veteran has a diagnosable chronic multi-symptom illness with a partially explained etiology, which was at least as likely as not caused by the indicated TERA as supported by medical literature.

The medical evidence shows the Veteran exhibited symptoms of a respiratory disability during service and received treatment at that time; the symptoms also resumed within ten years of separation from service; and the Veteran has a current diagnosis of chronic allergic rhinitis.

VA conceded the Veteran served in the Southwest Asia Theater of Operations; thus, he is presumed to have been exposed to burn pits and fine particulate matter during that service. As such, the Veteran is entitled to presumptive service connection for his allergic rhinitis under 38 C.F.R. § 3.320, as expanded by the PACT Act. The claim for service connection for a respiratory disability, to include sinusitis and allergic rhinitis, is granted.

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Service connection for migraines headaches is remanded.

The Veteran contends his migraine headaches are related to service-connected disabilities.

In the July 2023 VA 21-4138, the Veteran stated that his migraine headaches occur more than three times per month; he was never examined by a VA contractor; and his migraines may be caused by anxiety and high stress. The Veteran referenced studies linking migraines to tinnitus.

In the March 2024 rating decision, the AOJ acknowledged new and relevant evidence was submitted. However, the AOJ denied the claim because there was no diagnosed disability. The AOJ conceded participation in a TERA; and the Veteran is service connected for tinnitus. The Board will not disturb a favorable finding.

Although the Board regrets the additional delay, further development of the record is required to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error. When the VA undertakes to provide a VA examination or obtain a VA opinion, it must ensure that the examination or opinion is adequate. Barr, 21 Vet. App. at 312; see also 38 U.S.C. § 5103(A)(d).

Turning to the evidence, the STRs are silent as to any complaint, treatment, or diagnosis of headaches. 

Private treatment records from Dr. M. from 2013 to 2021 are silent as to any complaint, treatment, or diagnosis of headaches. 

In December 2022, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination for hypertension. Although the issue of service connection for hypertension is not before the Board, the December 2022 hypertension DBQ notes relevant reports by the Veteran that he had consistent headaches in service and was told they were symptoms of a hypertensive crisis. He claimed he still experiences headaches. 

VA treatment records show that in April 2023, the Veteran complained of morning headaches. In June 2023, the Veteran called the VA clinic for medication for his hypertension. He stated he had been experiencing headaches, his blood pressure was running 133-135 over 86-89; and he had not been on medication for a while because he was trying to manage it by weight control and eating better. However, the headaches were more frequent and severe in nature. The Veteran asked if it might be possible to go back on a small dose of the medication to bring the numbers down and eliminate the headaches. During a June 2023 medical evaluation related to low back pain and blood pressure, the Veteran complained he suffered from mild headaches here and there. 

As indicated above, in February 2024, the Veteran was afforded an in-person VA examination; and his reports of headaches associated with his respiratory disabilities are noted in the sinusitis/rhinitis and other conditions DBQ. The Board does not repeat that here. 

In a February 2024, medical opinion for TERAs, the examiner opined the condition was less likely than not caused by the TERAs after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments and the synergistic combined effect of all TERAs. The examiner reasoned there is no pathology to warrant a diagnosis or condition that can be related to the claimed toxic exposure. 

In a February 2024 medical opinion for secondary service connection, the examiner found it was less likely than not that the Veteran's headaches were due to tinnitus because there was no pathology to warrant a diagnosis; and the enlistment exam showed no findings related to the claimed condition. 

As indicated above, in the March 2024 addendum to the February 2024 VA examination, the same examiner indicated the Veteran's headaches symptoms may be attributed to his allergic rhinitis due to nasal congestion and sinus pressure causing frontal sinus headaches.

The Board finds the February 2024 medical opinion and the March 2024 addendum are inadequate to adjudicate the claim of service connection for migraine headaches. First, the examiner did not provide an adequate rationale and improperly relied upon the absence of medical evidence. 

Second, the examiner failed to consider whether the Veteran's lay statements presented sufficient evidence of the etiology of his headache disability even without evidence of chronicity of care. See Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331, 1336 n.1 (Fed. Cir. 2006).  

The Board has considered the Veteran's lay statements. Although the Veteran is competent to report the symptoms he experiences and when the symptoms began, such as his headaches, he is not competent to opine as to whether there is a nexus between his service-connected disabilities and his present headaches or whether there was aggravation of a non service connected disability. See Jandreau, supra. Moreover, when assessing a claim, the Board may not consider the absence of evidence as substantive negative evidence. See Buczynski v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 221, 224 (2011). 

Finally, the VA examiner did not opine as to the etiology of the Veteran's headaches and failed to consider all theories of entitlement specifically direct- and secondary service connection, and aggravation due to tinnitus, hypertension, or respiratory disabilities. Causation and aggravation must be addressed in any medical opinion concerning secondary service connection. El-Amin v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 136, 140 (2013).

VA must consider all theories of entitlement either expressly raised by the claimant or that are reasonably raised by the record. See Robinson v. Shinseki, 557 F.3d 1355, 1362 (Fed. Cir. 2009). VA's duty to assist applies to the entire claim, which includes assistance in developing more than one theory in support of that claim. See Robinson v. Peake, 21 Vet. App. 545, 552 (2008). The record shows the Veteran is service connected for hypertension. See March 2024, Rating Decision Codesheet. In addition, as articulated above, the Board granted the Veteran's claim for service connection for a respiratory disability pursuant to the PACT Act. The Veteran was afforded several examinations and opinions to address hypertension, respiratory disabilities, and headaches. However, none of these opinions adequately address the issues of direct service connection or secondary service connection for migraine headaches, including whether the Veteran's headaches are due to or aggravated by his service-connected tinnitus, hypertension, or allergic rhinitis. Without a medical opinion as to the nexus to service or aggravation by a service-connected disability, the Board cannot reach a decision on this claim. 

Accordingly, the Board finds that it was a pre-decisional duty to assist error to not have afforded the Veteran a nexus opinion on direct service connection or secondary service connection, requiring remand under the AMA. See 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a). In doing so, the Board makes no determination, either positive or negative, concerning the credibility of the Veteran's lay statements of record.

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

The AOJ should schedule the Veteran for an examination with an appropriate VA clinician to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's headaches. Following review of the claims file and this remand, the examiner must address the following:

a)	Whether it is at least as likely as not (i.e., likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if no higher) that the Veteran's headaches had its onset during service or is otherwise causally or etiologically related to his active-duty service.

b)	Whether the Veteran's headaches are at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) caused- or aggravated (the opinion must address the concept of aggravation) by the Veteran's service-connected tinnitus, hypertension, or respiratory disabilities, including any medications taken for a service-connected disability. In providing this opinion, the examiner should consider the treatment records and the Veteran's lay statements.

c)	In assessing the Veteran's headache disability, consider the effects of the Veteran's service-connected disabilities of tinnitus and hypertension. Please state whether one or both service-connected disabilities cause or aggravate the Veteran's headache disability and explain whether the Veteran's headaches would be less severe and result in less functional impairment.

If the examiner opines that the headache disability would result in less functional impairment but for the service-connected disabilities, the examiner must attempt to establish a baseline level of severity of the diagnosed disability prior to aggravation by the primary service-connected disability.

d)	The examiner must provide complete rationales for any conclusions reached. The examiner must also reconcile any opinion with all pertinent medical evidence of record, including the Veteran's statements. The Veteran's reports including those of continuity of symptomatology, must be acknowledged and considered in formulating all opinions. Should the examiner reject any of the Veteran's reports, the examiner must provide an explanation for such rejection. 

All opinions must include a complete rationale. 

 

John R. Doolittle, II

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	L. Treadwell, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.