Citation Nr: A25034761
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 241016-483382
DATE: April 15, 2025

ORDER

Service connection for tinnitus is denied.

FINDING OF FACT

Tinnitus was not shown as chronic in service and did not manifest to a compensable degree within the first post-service year, continuity of symptomatology is not established, and the most probative evidence indicates that the Veteran's currently-reported tinnitus is not otherwise etiologically related to an in-service disease or injury.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for service connection for tinnitus have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1112, 1113, 1131, 1137, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.307, 3.309.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from July 1977 to March 1978.  

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an October 2023 rating decision of a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO), the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ), which denied service connection for tinnitus.  

In October 2024, the Veteran's attorney timely submitted a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) on the Veteran's behalf in which he elected the Direct review option and identified the issue of the denial of service connection for tinnitus from the October 2023 rating decision as the issue he wished to appeal.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the October 2023 AOJ decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

1. Entitlement to service connection for tinnitus

The Veteran contends that his reported tinnitus was caused by military noise exposure.

Service connection may be granted for disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by service.  38 U.S.C. § 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.  In addition, service connection may be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).  To establish direct service connection, there must be the existence of a present disability; in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service.  Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

Service connection for certain chronic diseases, including other organic diseases of the nervous system such as tinnitus or sensorineural hearing loss, may be established on a presumptive basis by showing that such a disease manifested to a degree of 10 percent or more within one year from the date of separation from service.  38 U.S.C. § 1112; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307(a)(3), 3.309(a).  In such cases, the disease is presumed to have had its onset in service even though there is no evidence of such disease during the period of service.  38 C.F.R. § 3.307(a).  For those listed chronic conditions, a showing of continuity of symptoms affords an alternative route to service connection.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(b); Walker v. Shinseki, 708 F. 3d 1331 (Fed. Cir. 2013).

Disability which is proximately due to or the result of a service-connected disease or injury shall also be service connected.  38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a).  Establishing service connection on a secondary basis requires evidence sufficient to show: (1) that a current disability exists; and (2) that the current disability was either (a) caused or (b) aggravated by a service-connected disability.  38 C.F.R. § 3.310; Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439, 448 (1995).

The Veteran's service treatment records are silent for complaints, diagnosis, or treatment related to tinnitus, hearing impairment, or ear problems generally.  At enlistment examination in December 1976 and discharge examination in February 1978, the Veteran's ears, generally, and ear drums were normal on clinical evaluation.  Similarly, audiometric testing data consistently demonstrated normal hearing for VA purposes with no more than a 10-decibel upward auditory threshold shift in any of the frequencies of 500, 1000, 2000, 3000, 4000 Hertz between enlistment examination in December 1976 and discharge examination in February 1978.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.385 (defining when impaired hearing will be considered to be a disability for VA compensation purposes).

The Veteran's DD Form 214, Report of Separation from Active Duty, lists his military occupational specialty (MOS) as mortarman.  His service personnel records list his primary duty from October 1977 to February 1978 as machine gunner and ammo man.

As an initial matter, the Veteran's exposure to hazardous noise during his active duty service is not in dispute.  In the rating decision on appeal, the RO conceded in-service noise exposure based on the Veteran's MOS.  The Board is bound by this favorable finding absent clear and unmistakable error.  38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).  

The issue in this case is whether the conceded in-service noise exposure caused a chronic tinnitus disability during active duty, whether tinnitus manifested within one year of separation from service, or whether his currently reported tinnitus is otherwise etiologically related to disease or injury in service.

Post-service medical evidence of record from the Nashville VA Medical Center (VAMC) reflects that the Veteran established medical care in January 2021.  A February 2021 social work note reflects the Veteran's report that his transition after recently completing a 17-year prison sentence was going well, and he was currently "doing maintenance at his job."  He did not disclose any occupational skills he developed or tasks he performed during his confinement.  During an April 2021 optometry visit, he denied any perceived tinnitus during a review of systems.  A May 2021 social work note reflects his report that he spoke with a veterans' service office and/or Veterans Benefits Administration representative and was starting to file a claim for "hearing" among other claimed disabilities.  In June and September 2021, he told VA medical personnel that he was working full-time rebuilding or refurbishing motors and paint machines.

In January 2023, VA received the Veteran's claim of service connection for tinnitus and hearing loss.  In accompanying correspondence, he described his military noise exposure during basic training and while performing his duties with artillery, firing various weapons.  He stated, "It was not always possible to wear hearing protection routinely or correctly because I was never provided hearing protection," adding that he "now [has] a low-pitched buzzing, humming, and ringing in both ears that is intermittent."

During a January 2023 VA audiological examination, the Veteran reported that his tinnitus began in 1982 and that he currently experienced periodic tinnitus mostly in the left ear.  He also estimated that he first noticed hearing loss in 1982.  He described his military noise exposure to various weapons, gunfire, grenades and grenade launchers, and helicopters, and denied using any hearing protective devices.  He also denied any occupational or recreational noise exposure.  The examining audiologist explained that the Veteran was unable and/or unwilling to provide consistent and reliable responses during audiometric testing.  Additionally, the puretone thresholds and speech reception thresholds were in poor agreement.  Therefore, due to the inconsistencies between test measures, the current test results carried poor reliability and were not suitable for medical determination of a hearing disability/impairment, and additional testing, including speech discrimination testing, was discontinued.

Following the attempted audiometric testing and a review of the Veteran's claims file, the audiologist explained that service treatment records revealed normal hearing sensitivity at separation examination.  The examiner elaborated that the audiogram is the objective standard for noise injury, and because the Veteran's hearing was normal at separation with no significant threshold shifts in hearing acuity having occurred during active duty service in either ear [when compared to enlistment audiometric testing], there was no evidence that the military noise exposure caused a permanent noise injury affecting hearing sensitivity.  Therefore, if the Veteran currently had a hearing loss disability, which could not be confirmed by the current testing, the audiologist reasoned that any such hearing loss was less likely as not caused by or a result of military noise exposure.

Regarding the reported tinnitus, the audiologist opined it was less likely than not caused by or a result of the conceded military noise exposure.  In support of that conclusion, the audiologist detailed that tinnitus is a subjective complaint with no objective measure existing to verify the presence or absence of tinnitus, and as a result, the etiology of tinnitus is typically inferred by patient history and a review of medical records.  The audiologist observed that the Veteran's service treatment records revealed no complaints or treatment for tinnitus, and during the present examination, he reported the onset of his tinnitus (and perceived hearing loss) occurring in 1982, which was [approximately four] years after his separation from active duty.  The audiologist next emphasized that military noise exposure had been conceded.  However, "it is widely accepted that noise-induced tinnitus occurs at the time of the noise exposure and does not develop years later."  Additionally, the audiologist indicated that "per the Institute of Medicine (2006), 'as the interval between a noise exposure and the onset of tinnitus lengthens, the possibility that tinnitus will be triggered by other factors increases.'"  

A March 2023 VA audiology note indicates the Veteran sought a hearing evaluation for a decrease in hearing bilaterally that had gradually progressed over the last couple years.  He also reported constant tinnitus bilaterally.  Following audiometric testing, the diagnosis was mild sloping to moderate sensorineural hearing loss in the right ear and mild sloping to moderately-severe sensorineural hearing loss in the left ear.  However, the audiologist explained that the hearing "thresholds may be slightly elevated, as the Veteran was slow to respond to stimuli.  His way of acknowledging he heard a beep was to look at [the] audiologist and nod.  He was unable/unwilling to say, 'Yes,' or push the button."  

Following the denial of his claims of service connection for tinnitus and hearing loss in the March 2023 rating decision, in June 2023, the Veteran submitted a supplemental claim in June 2023 seeking review of the March 2023 rating decision that denied service connection for tinnitus.  In support of his claim, he submitted a June 2023 medical opinion elicited from a private clinician from Florida, Amber Mauldin, DNP, AGACNP-BC, CCRN.

Ms. Mauldin observed that the Veteran's "personnel records confirm his MOS as an Infantry" and indicated he "reports a history of frequent and recurrent noise exposures in moderate to high [decibel] ranges from not only his MOS duties but from various other sources while undergoing general military training and other non-MOS military activities while in the service."  Ms. Mauldin also noted that he "has a formal diagnosis of bilateral tinnitus as conceded in the Veteran's Rating Decision Letter dated March 30, 2023, per VA examination on January 24, 2023."  Finally, Ms. Mauldin indicated that the Veteran's "enlistment exam is not available for review," but her opinion report reflects that she had the opportunity to review the lay statement he submitted to VA with his initial claim for tinnitus in January 2023.  The report suggests that the Veteran did not provide Ms. Mauldin with any other medical records, such as copies of his service treatment records, post-service VA treatment records, or the January 2023 fee-basis examination report.  Also, the June 2023 opinion report by Ms. Mauldin suggests that no physical examination of the Veteran's ears or audiological evaluation of his hearing acuity was performed.

Having purportedly reviewed the records provided to her and obtained information from the Veteran, Ms. Mauldin opined that the reported tinnitus was "at least as likely as not due to and/or related to military acoustic trauma during active duty military service."  

In support of the opinion, Ms. Mauldin mentioned a study in which "many people suffering from tinnitus present without typical cochlear damage, and thus exhibit normal parameters on audiograms.  This is indicative of what is known as 'hidden hearing loss;' normal hearing thresholds do not necessarily indicate absence of cochlear damage."  She also discussed a study, "'Impact of Noise on Hearing in the Military' [by] Yong and Wang (2015)," which detailed that military noise exposure can "induce severe hearing symptoms such as temporary threshold shifts (TTS), tinnitus, hyperacusis which is a decreased tolerance to normal environmental sounds, recruitment, and distortion of abnormal pitch perception with the prevalence of hearing loss and tinnitus in military population being greater than in the general public."  Ms. Mauldin indicated that the study also reported that "[n]oise not only increases hearing threshold, but it can also cause tinnitus and hyperacusis" and "be present in individuals with normal hearing thresholds but with cochlear neuropathy."  Next, Ms. Mauldin cited a study that supported the "commonly held theory that cochlear damage does occur in patients suffering from tinnitus, but that audiograms are not necessarily able to validate that damage definitively."  

Ms. Mauldin summarized that "all of the above indicates that an audiogram could be normal at 2 weeks or even months/years later following acoustic trauma and then years later, tinnitus could develop; related to the prior acoustic trauma, due to cochlear deterioration and damage that is undetectable by audiogram."  Lastly, she cited several abstracts of medical research publications relating to tinnitus without hearing loss; noise-induced tinnitus, including in military settings; and degeneration in the cochlea after noise damage but did not elaborate as to how these studies may be related to the Veteran's reported tinnitus or describe any medical findings as to whether he has been found to have cochlear damage in either ear.

In August 2023, the Veteran was afforded a VA fee-basis audiological evaluation.  The audiologist reported that audiometric testing and speech discrimination scores using the Maryland CNC Word List were valid for rating purposes, and testing revealed a current bilateral hearing loss disability for VA purposes.  38 C.F.R. § 3.385.  The diagnosis was sensorineural hearing loss in each ear.  Regarding his claimed disability, the Veteran reported that his tinnitus began in 1984 and that the ringing in his ears began during a training in which he was throwing hand grenades.  The audiologist commented that the 1984 date the Veteran provided regarding the onset of his tinnitus was not when he was on active duty.  The audiologist considered the Veteran's documented MOS of mortarman and his report of noise exposure from explosions (grenades and mortars), firearms (rifles and machine guns), artillery, helicopters, and heavy equipment while working in the infantry.  The Veteran related that he "utilized hearing protection whenever possible."  He denied other occupational or recreational noise exposure either before or after his discharge from military service.    

Following a review of the claims file and examination, the audiologist opined that it was less likely than not that the reported tinnitus was incurred in or caused by military noise exposure.  The audiologist reiterated that there was no complaint of tinnitus in the service treatment records, including the separation examination, and the Veteran himself reported that his tinnitus began after separation from duty.  In addition, although excessive noise exposure on active duty was conceded and the Veteran reported having tinnitus during the examination, the audiologist explained that there was no nexus to any auditory damage on active duty to relate the current report of tinnitus to military noise exposure.  The audiologist further opined that it was at least as likely as not that the reported tinnitus was a symptom associated with the currently diagnosed bilateral hearing loss, which is not service-connected.  However, the audiologist explained that service treatment records showed no significant permanent shift in hearing thresholds greater than normal measurement variability from entrance to separation, [which was] evidence of no permanent auditory damage on active duty.

In a September 2023 file memorandum, the AOJ concluded there was evidence in the Veteran's claims file of non-deployment related participation in toxic exposure risk activities (TERA) associated with his MOS as a mortarman during his eight months of active duty service from July 1977 to March 1978.

Accordingly, in October 2023, the AOJ obtained an addendum medical opinion from the audiologist who conducted the August 2023 VA fee-basis examination to address whether there was a link between the Veteran's reported tinnitus and any toxic exposure(s) associated with his duties as a mortarman.  Following a review of the claims file, the audiologist opined it was less likely than not that the reported tinnitus was caused by the Veteran's toxic exposure risk activities, after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran.  The audiologist explained there was no known connection between tinnitus and the Veteran's toxic exposure risk activities.  

Having considered the medical and lay evidence of record, the Board finds that service connection for tinnitus is not warranted on any basis.  First, the evidence of record demonstrates that an underlying hearing loss disability was not incurred during active duty service and was not manifested to a compensable degree within one year of separation from active duty service.  Here, in-service audiograms showed normal hearing for VA purposes at enlistment examination in December 1976 and at discharge examination in February 1978, and the January 2023 and August 2023 fee-basis audiologists indicated there was no significant threshold shift in hearing acuity beyond normal measurement variability between entrance and discharge audiograms.  The audiologists indicated that although the Veteran was exposed to hazardous noise during active duty, the consistency between his entrance and discharge audiograms was evidence that his noise exposure did not result in an injury or disability involving his ears or hearing acuity.

Second, the January 2023 and August 2023 opinions that the Veteran's tinnitus did not begin during service is consistent with his report to each examiner that his tinnitus began around 1982 or 1984, respectively, or approximately four years after discharge from service at the earliest.  The Veteran's consistent statements in this regard support the conclusion that his tinnitus did not manifest during military service or within one year of discharge from military service.

For the same reasons, the Board finds that there is no credible evidence of a continuity of tinnitus (or hearing loss) symptomatology that would support the conclusion that a chronic tinnitus disability manifested in service or within one year of separation from service and continued since that time.  Again, the Veteran consistently told two different fee-basis audiologists that his tinnitus began in 1982 or 1984.  Based on these facts, service connection for tinnitus is not warranted on a presumptive basis under the provisions of 38 C.F.R. § 3.309(a) relating to chronic diseases.

Similarly, service connection for tinnitus may not be granted as secondary to the Veteran's bilateral hearing loss because service connection has not been established for a bilateral hearing loss disability.  38 C.F.R. § 3.310.   

Finally, the Board finds the January 2023 and August 2023 fee-basis opinions are probative and persuasive because each was based on a review of the claims file and supported by an articulated medical explanation that is consistent with the remaining records.  See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 302-04 (2008) (holding that it is the factually accurate, fully articulated, sound reasoning for the conclusion that contributes to the probative value to a medical opinion).  Notably, the audiologists indicated that because there was no significant threshold shift in hearing acuity during the months that the Veteran was exposed to hazardous noise on active duty, there was no basis to attribute hearing loss or tinnitus to military noise exposure.  Similarly, because audiometric data at discharge examination showed that the Veteran's military noise exposure did not result in hearing loss during service and he reported that his tinnitus began around 1982 or 1984, it was less likely than not that the tinnitus was due to military noise exposure.

The Board also finds sufficient the October 2023 fee-basis opinion regarding a potential relationship between the Veteran's reported tinnitus and his TERA participation related to his duties as a mortarman.  The Veteran has not asserted that his tinnitus is related in any way to a toxic exposure risk activity related to his military duties, and the October 2023 fee-basis examiner stated there was no such relationship.  There is no medical opinion evidence to the contrary regarding the reported tinnitus and the Veteran's TERA participation. 

The Board considered the June 2023 medical opinion by Ms. Mauldin, who appeared to explain that tinnitus may occur in the presence or absence of an abnormal audiogram, and it may occur without typical cochlear damage or with cochlear neuropathy.  Unfortunately, Ms. Mauldin did not explain how these facts may be relevant to the in-service audiometric data at enlistment and discharge examinations, which she did not review; to the Veteran's consistent reports of tinnitus beginning in the early-1980s, several years after discharge from active duty; or to any post-service audiological examination findings and eventual diagnosis of bilateral sensorineural hearing loss.  Moreover, her report did not include examination findings related to the health or degeneration of the Veteran's cochleae or clarify which, if any, audiogram demonstrated normal hearing acuity but in the presence of a documented report of perceived tinnitus.  Therefore, the Board finds the June 2023 medical opinion from the private nurse is of less probative value than the VA medical opinions discussed above.   

Accordingly, the evidence is persuasively against the claim.  As there is not an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence, the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine is not applicable and service connection for tinnitus is not warranted.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc).

 

 

K. Conner

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	L. Kirscher Strauss

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.