Citation Nr: A25034501
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 210409-151484
DATE: April 15, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 40 percent for degenerative arthritis of the lumbar spine with intervertebral disc syndrome (low back disability) is remanded.

Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 10 percent for sciatic nerve radiculopathy of the left lower extremity is remanded.

Entitlement to a total disability rating based on individual unemployability due to service-connected disability (TDIU) is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the U.S. Army from September 1979 to January 1982. His decorations include the Army Service Ribbon. 

This matter originates from a March 2020 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO). The RO, in pertinent part, granted service connection for a low back disability and sciatic radiculopathy of the left lower extremity, evaluated as 40 and 10 percent disabling, respectively. Both awards were made effective from November 5, 2019. Following a denial of higher initial ratings for both disabilities on Higher-Level Review in March 2021, the Veteran timely appealed to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) by filing a VA Form 10182 (Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement)) in April 2021, selecting the hearing review option. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.201, 20.202(b)(2).

In April 2024, the Board sent a letter to the Veteran notifying him that he had been scheduled for a Board hearing in July 2024. That letter was returned by the postal service in early May 2024. Later that month, the Veteran confirmed that his address was correct; however, he did not report for the July 2024 hearing as scheduled. Subsequently, in a September 2024 submission, the Veteran's representative noted that the Veteran had missed the hearing scheduled for July 2024 and stated that he had been unable to reach him.

Thereafter, in October 2024, the Board sent the Veteran a letter, copied to his representative, requesting clarification as to whether he still wished to appear at a Board hearing concerning the issues on appeal. The Board informed the Veteran and his representative that if no response was received within 30 days of the date of the letter, the Board would assume that he did not want a hearing. To date, neither the Veteran nor his representative has responded to the Board's October 2024 hearing clarification letter. The request for a hearing is therefore deemed to have been withdrawn. 

When a request for hearing is withdrawn, the Board's decision is based on review of the evidence of record at the time of issuance of the rating decision on appeal and any evidence submitted by the Veteran or his representative within 90 days following receipt of the withdrawal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.302(b). The Board cannot consider (1) evidence submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal and before the withdrawal was received, or (2) evidence submitted more than 90 days after the withdrawal was received. 38 C.F.R. § 20.302. Here, the request for hearing is considered to have been withdrawn 30 days after the date of the Board's October 29, 2024, letter asking for clarification as to whether the Veteran still wished to appear at a hearing. 

That said, for the reasons set forth below, the Board is remanding the Veteran's claims to the AOJ for correction of pre-decisional duty to assist errors. The AOJ will consider any additional evidence that has been submitted when the claims are readjudicated. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

As a final introductory matter, the Board notes that in his December 2020 request for Higher-Level Review, the Veteran asserted that a 100 percent rating based on unemployability should be granted as part of his claim. In light of that assertion, the Board has expanded the appeal to include the matter of his entitlement to a TDIU. See Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447 (2009) (if, in connection with making a claim for the highest rating possible for a disability, a claimant submits evidence of a medical disability, and evidence of unemployability, the matter of the claimant's entitlement to a TDIU is considered a component of the claim for a higher rating). 

1. Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 40 percent for a low back disability is remanded.

In its March 2020 rating decision, the AOJ granted service connection for a low back disability and assigned an initial 40 percent rating. The Veteran generally contends that a higher rating is warranted. As noted, in his December 2020 request for Higher-Level Review, he indicated that a 100 percent rating should be granted based on unemployability. 

On review of the record, the Board finds that there are outstanding non-VA treatment records that are relevant to the evaluation of the Veteran's low back disability. In an October 2019 VA treatment record, a VA provider noted that the Veteran was being followed at Bellevue Neurology Clinic for back pain. The October 2019 VA treatment record reasonably identified the non-VA treatment records; to date, however, it does not appear that the AOJ has undertaken any action to assist the Veteran in obtaining a copy of the records from that facility. The Board finds that the AOJ's failure to assist the Veteran in obtaining reasonably identified, relevant, non-VA treatment records prior to the issuance of the March 2020 rating decision on appeal constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error that must be corrected. See, e.g., 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(e)(2) (if VA becomes aware of the existence of relevant records before deciding a claim, VA will, among other things, request that the claimant provide a release for the records). A remand on that basis is therefore required. 

2. Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 10 percent for sciatic nerve radiculopathy of the left lower extremity is remanded.

In its March 2020 rating decision, the AOJ granted service connection for sciatic radiculopathy of the left lower extremity and assigned an initial 10 percent rating therefor, consistent with mild severity. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8520. The Veteran contends that a higher rating is warranted. Specifically, in his December 2020 request for Higher-Level Review, he asserted that the medical records indicated that his left lower extremity radiculopathy was severe. 

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in connection with his claim in December 2019. With respect to radiculopathy, the examiner indicated that the Veteran had radicular pain and/or signs and/or symptoms of radiculopathy, indicating further that he had severe constant pain and moderate numbness in the left lower extremity. The examiner indicated further that there was no intermittent pain and no paresthesias and/or dysesthesias in the left lower extremity. In a later section of the examination, the examiner indicated that the overall severity of the Veteran's left lower extremity radiculopathy was mild. 

On review of the December 2019 VA examination report, the Board finds that the examiner did not provide sufficient detail to permit the Board to assess the relative severity of the Veteran's radiculopathy. The examiner indicated that the Veteran had severe constant pain and moderate numbness, but then indicated that the overall severity of the condition was mild. Although making a final assessment with regard to the severity of the Veteran's condition is an adjudicatory, and not a medical function, the Board must have adequate medical evidence before it to make that assessment. Here, the Board finds that the examiner's report appears to be internally inconsistent and lacking in sufficient detail. The AOJ's failure to afford the Veteran a fully adequate VA examination constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error that must be corrected. Under the circumstances, a remand for a new VA examination is warranted. 

3. Entitlement to a TDIU is remanded.

In his December 2020 request for Higher-Level Review, as well as in his April 2021 notice of disagreement, the Veteran contended that his low back disability and left lower extremity radiculopathy warranted a TDIU. The claims file indicates in various places that the Veteran is unemployed, and that he has been in receipt of Social Security Administration disability benefits since 2004.

To date, the Veteran has not submitted an application for a TDIU, which if completed, would contain information about his past work history, when he last worked, the disabilities which he believes prevent him from securing and/or following a substantial gainful occupation (if any in addition to his low back disability and left lower extremity radiculopathy), and the highest level of education he has completed. The Board notes, however, that the Veteran did not raise the issue of entitlement to a TDIU until December 2020, after the issuance of the March 2020 rating decision. Accordingly, the Board is unable to direct any development with respect to the Veteran's claim for a TDIU, to include directing the AOJ to solicit an application for a TDIU from the Veteran, as the AOJ did not make any pre-decisional duty to assist errors with respect to that issue. 

Nevertheless, in light of the Veteran's assertions, the Board finds that his claim for a TDIU is inextricably intertwined with his claims for increased ratings for a low back disability and left lower extremity radiculopathy, which are being remanded to the AOJ for additional development. See, e.g., Parker v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 116 (1994); Harris v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 180, 183 (1991) (issues are "inextricably intertwined" when a decision on one issue would have a "significant impact" on an appellant's claim for another issue). As such, the Board will remand the TDIU issue as well. 

These matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Ask the Veteran to provide an appropriate release for records of treatment from Bellevue Neurology Clinic. If he provides the necessary release, assist him in obtaining the records identified, following the procedures set forth in 38 C.F.R. § 3.159. Any new or additional (i.e., non-duplicative) evidence received should be associated with the record. 

2. After the foregoing development has been completed, arrange to have the Veteran scheduled for a VA examination for purposes of assessing the severity of the service-connected sciatic nerve radiculopathy of his left lower extremity. The examiner should review the record.

To the extent feasible, the examiner should offer a retrospective opinion as to the relative severity of the Veteran's sciatic nerve radiculopathy of the left lower extremity from November 5, 2019, forward, in terms of whether, in the examiner's medical assessment, the condition is best characterized as having been mild, moderate, moderately severe, or severe since November 5, 2019.

If the condition has varied in severity over time, the examiner should indicate at what point(s) in time the severity changed, if possible. The examiner should also provide an explanation of what factors he or she has taking into account in arriving at an assessment as to overall severity, and should comment on the findings in the report of the December 2019 VA examination report, to include the finding that the Veteran at that time had severe constant pain and moderate numbness in the left lower extremity.

if it is the examiner's conclusion that he or she cannot feasibly provide the requested opinion(s), even considering all of the available evidence, it must be so stated, and the examiner must provide the reasons why offering such opinion(s) is not feasible. It must be clear from the report that the examiner has considered all procurable and assembled data before stating that an opinion cannot be reached, and that the inability to provide an opinion reflects a limitation of knowledge in the medical community at large and not a limitation-whether based on lack of expertise, insufficient information, or unprocured testing-of the individual examiner.

A medical rationale for all opinions expressed must be provided. 

 

DAVID A. BRENNINGMEYER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	R. Oldroyd, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.