Citation Nr: A25034505
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 200402-79779
DATE: April 15, 2025

ORDER

An initial disability rating in excess of 30 percent for unspecified neurocognitive disorder with unspecified sleep-wake disorder (hereinafter, unspecified neurocognitive disorder) is denied.

A total disability rating based on individual unemployability due to service-connected disability (TDIU) prior to May 20, 2019, is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to special monthly compensation (SMC) based on loss of use of a creative organ pursuant to 38 U.S.C. § 1114(k) is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. During the period here at issue, the Veteran's unspecified neurocognitive disorder was manifested by occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks, without more severe manifestations that more nearly approximated occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.

2. The evidence of record establishes that the Veteran was employed on a full-time basis in a substantially gainful occupation prior to May 20, 2019.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for a rating in excess of 30 percent for unspecified neurocognitive disorder have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.126, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9310.

2. The criteria for entitlement to a TDIU prior to May 20, 2019, have not been met.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.340, 3.341, 4.16, 4.18, 4.25.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the U.S. Army from November 1982 to March 1997.  His decorations include the Southwest Asia Service Medal and the Kuwait Liberation Medal.

This matter comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a March 2019 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office, notification of which was sent on April 5, 2019.  The Veteran timely appealed to the Board by submitting a VA Form 10182 (Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement (NOD))) in April 2020, selecting the evidence submission review option. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.201, 20.202(b)(3).

In December 2023, the Board issued a decision that, in pertinent part, denied the Veteran's claim for a higher rating for his unspecified neurocognitive disorder.  He appealed the Board's decision to the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court).  In October 2024, the Court granted a Joint Motion for Partial Remand filed by the parties to the appeal (the Veteran, through an attorney, and representatives from VA General Counsel), thereby vacating the Board's decision to the extent it denied a rating in excess of 30 percent for unspecified neurocognitive disorder and remanding that matter for readjudication.

Under the evidence submission review option, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) rating decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or his representative with, or within 90 days following the receipt of, the VA Form 10182. 38 C.F.R. § 20.303.  The Board cannot consider (1) evidence submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal and before the VA Form 10182 was received, or (2) evidence submitted more than 90 days after the VA Form 10182 was received.  Id.

As set out below, the Board is entering a decision denying the Veteran's claims for a higher rating for his unspecified neurocognitive disorder, and for a TDIU prior to May 20, 2019.  If evidence was associated with the claims file during a period of time when additional evidence was not allowed, the Board has not considered it in its decision on those claims.  38 C.F.R. § 20.300.  If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was added to the claims file that the Board could not consider, he may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify that evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim(s), considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

As to the raised claim of entitlement to SMC based on loss of use of a creative organ, the Board is remanding that claim to the AOJ for correction of a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  The AOJ will consider any additional evidence that has been submitted when that claim is readjudicated.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

As a final introductory matter, the Board notes that the Veteran's attorney submitted requests for copies of records (Privacy Act requests) in September 2024, February 2025, and March 2025.  Action on those requests does not yet appear to have been completed.  However, the requests were clearly made in connection with claims other than those that are under consideration in the current appeal stream.  Accordingly, there is no need to delay action on the current appeal until such time as the requests for records are fulfilled.  Cf. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1200.

1. Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 30 percent for unspecified neurocognitive disorder

Disability evaluations are determined by the application of a schedule of ratings, which is in turn based on the average impairment of earning capacity caused by a given disability.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1.  Separate diagnostic codes identify the evaluations to be assigned to the various disabilities.

If there is a question as to which of two evaluations shall be applied, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating. Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7.  If different disability ratings are warranted for different periods of time over the life of a claim, "staged" ratings may be assigned.  Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007); Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119, 125-26 (1999).

The Veteran's neurocognitive disorder has been rated pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9310.  All psychiatric disabilities, other than eating disorders, are evaluated under a general rating formula for mental disorders.

Under the general rating formula, a 30 percent rating is warranted for occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks (although generally functioning satisfactorily, with routine behavior, self-care, and conversation normal), due to such symptoms as: depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks (weekly or less often), chronic sleep impairment, and mild memory loss (such as forgetting names, directions, or recent events).

A 50 percent rating is warranted for occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to such symptoms as: flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short- and long-term memory (e.g. retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; and difficulty in establishing effective work and social relationships.

A 70 percent rating is warranted for occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas such as work, school, family relations, judgment, or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such an unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a work like setting); and inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.

A total schedular rating of 100 percent is warranted for total occupational and social impairment due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of mental and personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; and memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name.

The list of symptoms in the rating criteria are meant to serve as examples of symptoms that would warrant the rating, but are not meant to be exhaustive, and the Board need not find all or even some of the symptoms to award a specific rating.  Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436, 442-43 (2002).  If the evidence shows that the Veteran suffers symptoms or effects that cause occupational or social impairment equivalent to what would be caused by the symptoms listed in the criteria for a particular rating, the appropriate, equivalent rating will be assigned.  Id. at 443.

At an initial mental health evaluation in September 2012, the Veteran reported that his only problem was that he did not sleep most nights.  He stated that he was nervous and investigated any little noise.  He described his mood as "pretty calm" most days and denied any prior psychiatric treatment.  He was currently employed.  The Veteran's mental status was noted as normal, cooperative, and fully oriented.  He was well groomed with normal speech.  His thought process was logical and goal oriented.  No suicidal ideation was noted.

According to a December 2012 mental health note, the Veteran reported little change insofar has he continued to have difficulty getting up earlier on days he did not work.  He reported that he was generally "okay" with his current status, although he wanted to address weight gain.  On observation, the Veteran was noted to be adequately groomed and cooperative, with a mildly dysphoric mood.  His insight and judgment were fair, and his thought processes were logical and goal oriented.  No suicidal ideation was noted.

In April 2013, the Veteran reported continued sleep difficulties.  He denied any recent irritability and stated he tended to become sad.  The Veteran was observed to be adequately groomed and cooperative, but anxious.  His insight and judgment were fair, and his thought processes were logical and goal oriented.  No suicidal ideation was noted.

A June 2013 mental health note reflects the Veteran's report that he had been "okay" and has been "hanging in there."  On observation, his insight and judgment were fair, and his thought processes were logical and goal oriented.  He was again found to be adequately groomed with normal speech.  His mood was "a little bit worse than usual," but his psychomotor was appropriate and no suicidal or homicidal ideation was noted.

In August 2013, the Veteran described difficulties adjusting to his sleep apnea diagnosis and using a CPAP.  He was observed to be euthymic and angry, but he was also cooperative and his psychomotor was normal.   His insight and judgment were fair, and his thought processes were logical and goal oriented.  No suicidal ideation was noted.

An October 2013 psychology note reflects that the Veteran described dysphoria and anxiety related to financial stress.  He expressed disappointment in his claims being denied.  He stated that his work was okay, but continued to have difficulty with being sleepy while working.  On observation, the Veteran was noted to be alert and cooperative, with normal attention and concentration.  His insight and judgment were fair, and his thought processes were logical and goal oriented.  No suicidal or homicidal ideation was noted.  An April 2014 treatment note reflects a finding of depression by history, but the Veteran denied any symptoms.

In June 2015, the Veteran underwent an initial posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) examination.  At the time, it was determined that he did not meet the diagnostic criteria for PTSD under the DSM-5.  Instead, the examiner diagnosed the Veteran with unspecified obstructive sleep apnea.  The examiner indicated that a mental condition had been formally diagnosed, but the symptoms were not severe enough either to interfere with occupational and social functioning or to require continuous medication.  The examiner noted that the Veteran maintained meaningful relationships.  He engaged in normal activities of daily living, good self-care, and conversation.  The examiner noted generally good occupational and social functioning with transient, mild, and expected reactions to psychosocial stressors.

In July 2016, the Veteran reported for a new initial mental health screening.  He reported decreased enjoyment in activities and marital difficulties, but still loved his wife.  He reported that he was employed full time.  He also reported no hallucinations, paranoid thoughts, or mania, and no suicidal or homicidal ideation.  He did report that depressive symptoms made it difficult to do his work, take care of things at home, and get along with others.

In October 2016, the Veteran reported taking Citalopram 20mg with improvement in his ability to relax; however, he still had symptoms of fidgetiness and difficulty concentrating at work.  He also reported continued issues falling asleep.  He denied any suicidal ideation.

A January 2017 psychology notes reflects that the Veteran was feeling a little bit better, other than the sleep.  The attending psychologist noted that compared to the initial assessment, symptoms were improving; anxiety was stable, and symptoms of depression were improved.  Relevant objective observations outside of normal limits were mildly depressed and anxious mood and mild restlessness.

In March 2017, the Veteran reported little improvement in his mood or anxiety.  He still struggled with falling and staying asleep.  He reported that his mind went to memories from the past.  He denied any suicidal ideation.

In a May 2017 mental health consult, the Veteran reported that his chief complaint was sleep disruption.  He reported that he was up five times per night due to dryness in his sinuses, worry about finances, and chronic pain or a need to urinate.  He reported full-time employment.  He denied any psychiatric hospitalization.  Clinically, he was observed to be adequately groomed and dressed.  His memory was grossly intact, but he reported issues with short-term memory.  He denied any hallucinations, delusions, or psychoses.  His thought process was logical, goal-directed, with no evidence of manic process and no evidence of impulse control problems.  His mood was dysthymic, his affect constricted, and he had poor to adequate judgment and insight.  No suicidal ideation was noted.

In August 2017, the Veteran was observed to be dressed appropriately with normal speech.  His memory, concentration, and attention were normal.  He had no hallucinations or delusional thoughts.  He was oriented to person, place, situation, and date.  His judgment and insight were good.  

In September 2017, the Veteran reported that his mood was stable and "ok," but that he was still having difficulty sleeping.  The Veteran was observed to be dressed appropriately with normal speech and no acute distress.  He was calm and cooperative.  His memory, concentration, and attention were normal.  His mood was depressed and irritable.  He had no hallucinations or delusional thoughts.  He was oriented to person, place, situation, and date.  His judgment and insight were good.  Similar findings were made in December 2017.

The Veteran was afforded a VA mental disorders examination in October 2017.  At the time, the examiner diagnosed him with major depressive disorder.  Noted symptoms were depressed mood, anxiety, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss, disturbances of motivation and mood, and difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances.  With regards to occupational impairment, the examiner noted that the Veteran had been employed full-time since May 2012.  The examiner also noted that the Veteran had been married to his second wife since 2009 and had an adult daughter.  Overall, the examiner assessed the Veteran's level of impairment as occupational and social impairment due to mild or transient symptoms which decrease work efficiency and ability to perform occupational tasks only during periods of significant stress, or symptoms controlled by continuous medication.

A March 2018 treatment note reflects that the Veteran was employed, had a strong marriage/partnership, and a supportive family.  His only barrier to care was his work schedule.  He posed no risk of danger to himself or others.

A July 2018 note reflects that the Veteran's work status had been the same for six years, but he failed increased responsibility.  He continued to report difficulty maintaining sleep related to sleep apnea and his CPAP.  He reported some ability to enjoy activities with his children and being easily distracted.  He reported no hallucinations or delusional thoughts.  His thought process was normal, linear, and goal oriented.  His memory was normal, and he was oriented to person, place, situation, and date.  His judgment and insight were good.

The Veteran underwent another VA examination in October 2018.  The examiner diagnosed unspecified neurocognitive disorder and unspecified sleep-wake disorder.  The examiner stated that the symptoms overlapped, and it was not possible to differentiate which symptoms were attributable to each diagnosis.  Noted symptoms were depressed mood, anxiety, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss, and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships.  With regards to occupational impairment, the examiner noted that the Veteran had been employed full time since 2012.  The examiner noted that the Veteran was currently married.  The Veteran reported that he did not have any friends and that he and his wife did not socialize because "we just don't feel like going out."  He reported spending most of his time at home with his wife, except for grocery shopping or visiting his wife's daughter.  Overall, the examiner assessed the Veteran's level of impairment as occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks, although generally functioning satisfactorily, with normal routine behavior, self-care, and conversation.

In October 2018, the Veteran reported that his chief complaint was his medical issues, such as a rash, aches, CPAP, and waking with a dry mouth.  He reported being dissatisfied with his job because he had not been promoted.  His mood was depressed because he was always tired and had pain in his neck and joints.  He reported no hallucinations or delusional thoughts.  His thought process was normal, linear, and goal oriented.  His memory was normal, and he was oriented to person, place, situation, and date.  His judgment and insight were good.  He made similar complaints in December 2018.

Following review of the record, the Board finds that the evidence is persuasively against the assignment of a rating in excess of 30 percent for the Veteran's neurocognitive disorder for any point during the period on appeal, to include on the basis of a "staged" rating.

In this regard, VA treatment records from 2012 to 2018 show that the Veteran struggled primarily with sleep issues related to his sleep apnea, CPAP, and joint problems.  He also reported problems related to claim denials and financial struggles.  VA treatment records continually showed that he was adequately groomed with normal speech.  His thought process was normal, linear, and goal oriented.  His memory was normal, and he was oriented to person, place, situation, and date.  His judgment and insight were good.  The Veteran regularly denied suicidal or homicidal ideation, delusions, and hallucinations.

The Board notes that mental status examinations, specifically in September 2017, reflect findings of the Veteran's mood being "depressed and irritable."  Nevertheless, he continued to report to his attending psychiatrist that his mood was stable and "ok."  Moreover, during the period on appeal, the evidence does not reflect, and the Veteran does not contend, that he suffered from unprovoked irritability with periods of violence or impaired impulse control.  As such, a review of the evidence of record shows that the severity, frequency, and duration of the Veteran's symptoms did not rise to the degree contemplated by a higher rating.  

While the October 2017 VA examiner noted that the Veteran's psychiatric disorder was productive of disturbances of motivation and mood, which is one of the symptoms listed in the criteria for a 50 percent rating, the examiner assessed that the overall frequency, severity, and duration of the Veteran's symptoms were such that his condition was productive of occupational and social impairment due to mild or transient symptoms which decreased work efficiency and ability to perform occupational tasks only during periods of significant stress, or that his symptoms were controlled by medication.  Although that assessment is not controlling, it is consistent with the other available evidence pertinent to that time.

The Board also notes that the October 2018 VA examiner related that the Veteran reported "zero friends," that he did not socialize, and that his disability was productive of difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, which is one of the symptoms listed in the criteria for a 50 percent rating.  Overall, however, the Board finds that his difficulty in establishing social relationships was not of such frequency, duration, and severity as to warrant a higher rating.

Although the parties to the JMPR filed with the Court indicated that the Veteran had "difficulty with making and maintaining friendships," the evidence does support that characterization.  In that regard, the Veteran clearly reported that he did not socialize because he and his wife, with whom he had been married since 2009, simply do not "feel like going out" and that they enjoy spending time together at home.  He reported that he was able to leave the house for chores and to visit his child.  There is nothing in the Veteran's report that he was unable to make or maintain friends; rather, he simply chose to spend his time with his wife at home.  The examiner otherwise assessed that the overall frequency, severity, and duration of the Veteran's symptoms were such that his condition was productive of occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks, although generally functioning satisfactorily, with normal routine behavior, self-care and conversation.  Again, that assessment is consistent with the other available evidence relative to that time.

The Board recognizes that the Veteran reported in a June 2020 statement that he had weekly mood swings; problems concentrating; feelings of being depressed all the time; fatigue and sleep problems; distrust and anxiety around others; thoughts of self-harm; disregard for personal hygiene; and flashbacks.  However, the Veteran's statement does not appear to pertain to (or be consistent with) the severity of the condition during the rating period here on appeal (which, as noted in the Board's December 2023 decision, ended in April 2019).  Therefore, the statement is not relevant to the severity of the Veteran's neurocognitive disorder during the rating period here at issue.

In this regard, the Board takes issue with the notion that the provisions of the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA) permitting an appellant to submit additional evidence during a prescribed evidentiary window extends the rating period beyond the date of issuance of the underlying rating decision.  Rather, what the AMA contemplates is that an appellant be permitted to submit additional evidence that pertains to and relates back to the rating period on appeal, which, as noted, ends when the rating decision is issued.  To interpret the law otherwise would lead to absurd results, to include evaluating the rating to be assigned for a disability for periods long after the underlying rating decision was issued, based on a selective evidentiary record (i.e., limited to only that evidence the Veteran and/or his representative submitted during a permissible evidentiary window, without regard to other evidence that might be available), without benefit of provisions of law that would otherwise permit development to ensure fulfillment of the duty to assist throughout the rating period.

In the Board's view, although the Veteran exhibited some symptoms of the type contemplated by a 50 percent rating during the period here at issue, his overall complex of symptoms more nearly approximated the criteria for a 30 percent rating in terms of their frequency, severity, and duration, as he was generally functioning satisfactorily, with normal behavior, self-care, and speech.  Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 11217 (Fed. Cir. 2013).  His symptoms of sleep impairment, anxiety, and depression appear to have been causative of no more than an occasional decrease in work efficiency and an intermittent inability to perform occupational tasks. 

The Board is aware that the parties to the JMPR referenced a May 23, 2019, VA Mental Health Outpatient Treatment record.  However, the May 2019 treatment record referenced by the parties was authored and generated during a closed AMA evidentiary period (i.e., after issuance of the April 2019 rating decision and before submission of the Veteran's April 2020 NOD).  See 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  The evidentiary windows established by Congress and set forth in 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.302(a) and 20.303, which exist as exceptions to the closed record contemplated under the AMA, are specific to evidence submitted by the Veteran and/or his representative.  Therefore, evidence from a source other than the Veteran and/or his representative that was not of record at the time of the AOJ decision on appeal (i.e., April 2019) is not part of the record on appeal, even if that evidence is associated with the claims file during an applicable evidentiary window.  Accordingly, the Board will not consider the May 2019 VA treatment record.  

For all of the foregoing reasons, the Board finds that the evidence is persuasively against the assignment of a rating in excess of 30 percent for the Veteran's service-connected neurocognitive disorder for the period at issue.  The appeal of this issue is denied.

2. Entitlement to a TDIU prior to May 20, 2019

In the JMPR filed with the Court, the parties agreed that the Board erred by limiting the appeal period before it to on or before April 5, 2019, for purposes of finding that a TDIU was not raised in the present appeal stream.  Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447 (2009).  In light of the JMPR and the May 2020 vocational assessment, the issue of entitlement to a TDIU is within the jurisdiction of the Board.

At the outset, the Board notes that in February 2025, while the current appeal was pending, the AOJ granted a TDIU, effective May 20, 2019 (the day following the date the Veteran last worked).  Although the February 2025 rating decision was entered after the evidentiary record on appeal closed under the AMA, such a determination is not considered new "evidence," but rather a new legal finding that the Board may consider.  The question presented for the Board's review is whether a TDIU is warranted prior to that date.

A TDIU is warranted where the evidence of record shows that a veteran is unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation, consistent with his education and occupational experience, as a result of service-connected disability, without regard to advancing age.  38 C.F.R. §§ 3.340, 3.341, 4.16(a).  Provided, however, that if there is only one such disability, the disability must be rated at 60 percent or more, and that if there are two or more disabilities, there shall be at least one disability ratable at 40 percent or more, and sufficient additional disability to bring the combined rating to 70 percent or more.  38 C.F.R. §§ 3.340, 3.341, 4.16(a).

For the above purpose of one 60 percent disability, or one 40 percent disability in combination, the following will be considered as one disability: (1) disabilities of one or both upper extremities, or of one or both lower extremities, including the bilateral factor, if applicable; (2) disabilities resulting from common etiology or a single accident; (3) disabilities affecting a single body system (e.g., orthopedic, digestive, respiratory, cardiovascular-renal, neuropsychiatric); (4) multiple injuries incurred in action; or (5) multiple disabilities incurred as a prisoner of war.  38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a).

In determining whether a Veteran can secure and follow a substantially gainful occupation, the term "unable to secure and follow a substantially gainful occupation" in § 4.16(b) is defined as to include two components: one economic and one noneconomic.  See Ray v. Wilkie, 31 Vet. App. 58, 73 (2019).  The economic component refers to an occupation earning more than marginal income (outside of a protected environment) determined by the U.S. Department of Commerce as the poverty threshold for one person.  Id.  The non-economic component includes consideration of the Veteran's history, education, skill, and training; whether the Veteran has the physical ability to perform the type of activities required by the occupation at issue; and whether the Veteran has the mental ability to perform the activities required by the occupation at issue, provided that discussion of any factor is only necessary if the evidence raises it.  Id.

Marginal employment may exist, on a fact found basis, where the applicant's income exceeds the poverty threshold but the work in performed in a "protected environment," defined as a "lower-income position that, due to the veteran's service-connected disability or disabilities, is shielded in some respect from competition in the employment market."  LaBruzza v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 111, 122 (2024).  The Board must consider whether the employment is shielded, at least partially, from the competitive market, looking to the extent the applicant's income exceeds the poverty threshold, the employer's intent in employing the applicant, and applicant's receipt of workplace accommodations under the Americans with Disabilities Act.  Id.

In the present case, the Veteran has met the criteria for consideration of a TDIU on a schedular basis since October 31, 2014.  Prior to that date, his combined disability rating was 40 percent, and he did not meet the schedular criteria.

A TDIU is generally not warranted if the Veteran is gainfully employed.  Here, the evidence of record reflects that the Veteran was gainfully employed for the period on appeal prior to May 20, 2019.  VA examinations in June 2015, October 2017, and October 2018 each reflect that he was employed at a resort.  VA treatment records further reflect that he was employed full-time at a resort prior to May 20, 2019.  See VA treatment records dated September 2012, July 2016, May 2017, and July 2018.  Furthermore, the Veteran's vocational assessment, submitted in May 2020, acknowledges that he worked from 2012 until he resigned in May 2019.

The Veteran does not allege, nor is there otherwise any indication or suggestion that his prior employment was considered marginal, at the poverty threshold, or in a protected environment.  There is also no indication that given his current education, training, and work history that his full-time job would not have been considered substantially gainful employment.

To the extent that the Veteran experienced difficulty in the workplace as a result of his service-connected disabilities, the rating schedule already contemplates industrial impairment.  Stated another way, evidence of occupational limitations is present in every case in which an evaluation has been assigned for a service-connected disability.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.1 (explaining that disability evaluation percentages "represent as far as can practicably be determined the average impairment in earning capacity resulting from such diseases and injuries and their residual conditions in civil occupations" and "degrees of disability specified are considered adequate to compensate for considerable loss of working time from exacerbations or illnesses proportionate to the severity of the several grades of disability"); see also Van Hoose v. Brown, 4 Vet. App. 361, 363 (1993). ("A high rating in itself is a recognition that the impairment makes it difficult to obtain and keep employment.").

Because the evidence persuasively establishes that the Veteran was gainfully employed in a full-time position prior to May 20, 2019, the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine is inapplicable.  The claim for a TDIU must be denied.

REASONS FOR REMAND

Entitlement to SMC based on loss of use of a creative organ is remanded.

The parties to the JMPR agreed that the Board failed to address the reasonably raised issue of entitlement to SMC based on loss of use of a creative organ.  See Robinson v. Peake, 21 Vet. App. 545, 553 (2008) (requiring the Board to consider all theories of entitlement to VA benefits that are either raised by the claimant or reasonably raised by the record), aff'd sub nom. Robinson v. Shinseki, 557 F.3d 1355 (Fed. Cir. 2009).  Here, the Veteran's attorney has asserted that the Veteran experienced erectile dysfunction, that his psychiatric disorder was the cause of his erectile dysfunction, and therefore that he should be entitled to the ancillary benefit of  SMC(k) due to loss of use of a creative organ.  See June 2020 Correspondence.

SMC at the (k) rate is granted if a veteran, as a result of service-connected disability, has suffered the anatomical loss or loss of use of one or more creative organs. 38 U.S.C. § 1114(k).  In order to establish entitlement to compensation under 38 U.S.C. § 1114 (k), "the ability of the creative organ to function must be diminished."  Bria v. Wilkie, 33 Vet. App. 228, 234 (2021).  In Payne v. Wilkie, the Court held that the plain text of 38 U.S.C. § 1114(k) does not limit potential entitlement to SMC(k) to Veterans with certain service-connected disabilities or preclude a theory of entitlement based on a "multi-link causal chain between the service-connected disability and the anatomical loss or loss of use of one or more creative organs."  31 Vet. App. 373, 385.

VA must adjudicate as part of a claim entitlement to any ancillary benefits that arise as a result of the adjudication decision, including entitlement to any additional benefits for complications of the claimed condition.  38 C.F.R. § 3.155(d)(2); Bailey v. Wilkie, 33 Vet. App. 188, 203 (2021) (holding that VA is required to develop and adjudicate related claims for secondary service connection for disabilities that are reasonably raised during the adjudication of an increased rating claim).  Significantly, the claimant need not assert entitlement to such ancillary benefits when the claim is filed.  Id.; see also Grimes v. McDonough, 34 Vet. App. 84 (2021) (holding that a claim for service connection may encompass a related condition the claimant initially referenced but was not diagnosed until later in the appeal stream).

Here, VA treatment records confirm a diagnosis of erectile dysfunction.  Further, the records reflect that the erectile dysfunction may be etiologically associated with the Veteran's unspecified neurocognitive disorder as he reported that Citalopram, prescribed for his psychiatric disorder, was making his erectile dysfunction worse.  See January 2017 VA treatment record.

The evidence reasonably raises the issue of entitlement to service connection for erectile dysfunction as secondary to unspecified neurocognitive disorder and, by extension, whether the Veteran has suffered the loss of use of a creative organ as the result of his disorder.  The Board notes that assessing the effect that one disability, or medications taken therefor, has upon another often involves complex medical issues.  Here, the Board finds that a medical opinion is necessary to assess the likelihood that the Veteran has suffered the loss of use of a creative organ as the result of his service-connected unspecified neurocognitive disorder.  As the AOJ did not develop or adjudicate that ancillary issue prior to issuing the March 2019 rating decision, remand is necessary for correction of a pre-decisional duty to assist error.

This matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Arrange to provide the claims file to an appropriate clinician for purposes of obtaining a medical opinion regarding the etiology of the Veteran's erectile dysfunction.  The examiner should review the record.

After reviewing the record, the examiner should offer an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (i.e., whether the likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's erectile dysfunction (a) was caused or (b) has been aggravated by the Veteran's service-connected acquired psychiatric disorder and/or medications taken therefor.

The need for an in-person examination, or telephone or video interview of the Veteran is left to the discretion of the examiner.

The examiner should be careful to address both causation and aggravation, specifically and separately.  A complete medical rationale for all opinions expressed must be provided.

 

 

DAVID A. BRENNINGMEYER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	R. Kettler, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.