Citation Nr: A25034155
Decision Date: 04/14/25	Archive Date: 04/14/25

DOCKET NO. 240406-432110
DATE: April 14, 2025

ORDER

The purported appeals seeking service connection for post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), bilateral hearing loss (BHL), and a left knee condition stemming from a September 2012 legacy rating decision are dismissed as untimely.

A 10 percent rating, but no more, for gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) is granted.

Entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for low back condition is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for right knee condition is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral foot condition is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for penile condition is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for depression is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran submitted an April 2024 VA Form 10182 Notice of Disagreement within the appeals modernization system purporting to appeal multiple issues contained in a September 2012 legacy rating decision, to include entitlement to service connection for PTSD, BHL, and a left knee condition. 

2. The Veteran's GERD manifests in infrequent episodes of epigastric distress, pyrosis, and substernal pain.

3. At no point has the Veteran been diagnosed with sleep apnea by clinical testing.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for dismissal due to untimely appeal of the issues seeking service connection for PTSD, BHL, and a left knee condition stemming from a September 2012 legacy rating decision have been met.  38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.2400, 20.203.

2. The criteria for a 10 percent rating, but no more, for GERD have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107, 5110; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.14, 4.114a, Diagnostic Code (DC) 7346.

3. The criteria for service connection for sleep apnea have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1154, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Marine Corps from August 1988 to July 1992.

These matters come before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a December 2023 rating decision issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).  

In an April 2024 VA Form 10182, Notice of Disagreement (NOD), the Veteran elected the direct review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record before the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) at the time of its decision on the issues on appeal.  See 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300(a), 301.  The Board will not consider evidence received after the AOJ decision unless the claimant files a timely request for a Board hearing or an opportunity to submit additional evidence on the NOD.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  The Veteran has not filed such a request.  If additional evidence was submitted after the AOJ decision, the Board will not consider it.  The Veteran is welcome to file a supplemental claim to have this evidence considered.  Cook v. McDonough, 36 Vet. App. 175 (2023).  As the low back condition, right knee condition, bilateral foot condition, penile condition, and depression claims are being remanded herein, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

The Board has limited the discussion below to the relevant evidence required to support its finding of facts and conclusions of law, as well as to the specific contentions regarding the case as raised directly by the Veteran and those reasonably raised by the record.  See Scott v. McDonald, 789 F.3d 1375, 1381 (Fed. Cir. 2015); Robinson v. Peake, 21 Vet. App. 545, 552 (2008).

The purported appeals seeking service connection for PTSD, BHL, and a left knee condition stemming from a September 2012 legacy rating decision are dismissed as untimely.

On his April 2024 NOD, the Veteran attempted to appeal multiple issues stemming from a September 2012 legacy rating decision, to include seeking service connection for PTSD, BHL, and a left knee condition.

An NOD must be filed within one year from the date of the mailing of an adverse decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.202, 20.203.  An extension for the filing period may be granted for good cause.  38 C.F.R. §20.203(c).  

The September 2012 rating decision was issued in the legacy system.  Long after expiration of the appeal period for the decision, the Veteran issued his NOD in the appeals modernization system.  No good cause for the delay in submitting the appeal and no proper appeal within the legacy system have been provided.  As such, the attempted appeal of these multiple issues from the September 2012 legacy rating decision is not properly before the Board.

The Board notes that the Veteran attempted to seek service connection for PTSD and a left knee condition in a November 2022 claim.  However, he was advised in an August 2023 communication that because these issues had been previously denied in the September 2012 rating decision, he needed to submit the claims on the proper form (VA Form 20-0996, Higher-Level Review; VA Form 20-0995, Supplemental Claim; or VA Form 10182 NOD, if the decision was less than one year ago) to have the claims readjudicated.  The Veteran did not submit a new form regarding the PTSD and left knee issues and, as such, the claims were not further developed.  Therefore, they are not in appellate status.  

If the Veteran wishes to seek service connection for PTSD, BHL, and a left knee condition, he is encouraged to submit a supplemental claim with new and relevant evidence seeking such.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5108; 38 U.S.C. §§ 101(35).  

Increased Rating

Service connection for the Veteran's GERD was granted at a noncompensable rate, effective August 10, 2022, pursuant to the "PACT Act" in the December 2023 rating decision on appeal.  See Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxics Act of 2022 (PACT Act), Pub. L. 117-168 (August 10, 2022).  The Veteran timely appealed the assigned evaluation.  Accordingly, the Board will consider entitlement to a compensable rating from the August 10, 2022, date of service connection.  

Disability evaluations are determined by the application of the facts presented to VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities (Rating Schedule) at 38 C.F.R. Part 4.  The percentage ratings contained in the Rating Schedule represent, as far as can be practicably determined, the average impairment in earning capacity resulting from diseases and injuries incurred or aggravated during military service and the residual conditions in civilian occupations.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.321(a), 4.1.

In evaluating the severity of a particular disability, it is essential to consider its history.  38 C.F.R. § 4.1; Peyton v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 282 (1991); Schafrath v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 589 (1995).  Whether the issue is one of an initial rating or an increased rating, separate ratings can be assigned for separate periods of time based on the facts found, a practice known as "staged" ratings.  See Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007).

In making all determinations, the Board must fully consider the lay assertions of record.  A layperson is competent to report on the onset and recurrence of his symptoms.  Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 470 (1994) (a veteran is competent to report on that of which he or she has personal knowledge).  

Where the schedule does not provide for a 0 percent rating, such an evaluation will be assigned when the requirements for a compensable evaluation have not been met.  38 C.F.R. § 4.31.

Any reasonable doubt regarding the degree of disability should be resolved in favor of the claimant.  38 C.F.R. § 4.3.  Where there is a question as to which of two evaluations shall be applied, the higher rating will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that evaluation.  Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7.

The Veteran's service-connected GERD is rated by analogy under 38 C.F.R. § 4.114, DC 7346, pertaining to hiatal hernia.  Amendments to the criteria for rating digestive disorders became effective on May 19, 2024.  See Schedule for Rating Disabilities: Digestive System, See 89 Fed. Reg. 19375.  However, as this regulatory change was enacted subsequent to the pendency of this appeal, the Board will only consider the pre-amended criteria.  

Under DC 7346, a 60 percent rating is warranted when there are symptoms of pain, vomiting, material weight loss, and hematemesis or melena with moderate anemia; or other symptom combinations productive of severe impairment of health.  A 30 percent rating is warranted where there is persistently recurrent epigastric distress with dysphagia, pyrosis, and regurgitation, accompanied by substernal or arm or shoulder pain, productive of considerable impairment of health.  A 10 percent rating is warranted when there are two or more of the symptoms for the 30 percent evaluation of less severity.

Notably, 38 C.F.R. § 4.114 provides that ratings under DCs 7301 to 7329, inclusive, 7331, 7342, and 7345 to 7348, inclusive, will not be combined with each other.  A single evaluation will be assigned under the DC which reflects the predominant disability picture, with elevation to the next higher evaluation where the severity of the overall disability warrants such elevation.

Descriptive words such as "moderate," "severe," and "considerable" are not defined in the Rating Schedule.  The Board finds, however, that these terms are unambiguous and, therefore, a plain dictionary meaning is an appropriate definition.  Cf. Kisor v. Wilkie, 139 S. Ct. 2400, 2415 (2019); see also 38 C.F.R. § 4.6 (noting, in general, the Board does not evaluate evidence by applying a mechanical formula, but rather conscientiously to the end that its decisions are equitable and just).  According to Merriam Webster's Collegiate Dictionary 999 (11th Ed. 2007), "moderate" means limited in scope or effect or average in amount, intensity, quality, or degree.  "Severe" means very painful or harmful or of a great degree.  "Considerable" is defined as "large in extent or degree."  Although a medical examiner's use of descriptive terminology such as "moderate" is an element of evidence to be considered by the Board, it is not dispositive of an issue.  The Board must evaluate all evidence in arriving at a decision regarding an increased rating.  38 C.F.R. §§ 4.2, 4.6.

In assigning a rating under DC 7346, the Board may not consider the ameliorative effects of medication.  See Jones v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 56, 63 (2012).  

The rating criteria are not successive or cumulative with that of the lower rating.  See Tatum v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 152, 155 (2009); see also Stankevich v. Nicholson, 19 Vet. App. 470, 472 (2006) (The Court recognized that disabilities rated by analogy will not show all objective criteria of the analogous rating).

Turning to the relevant evidence of record, an April 2023 VA treatment record noted that the Veteran had been on a proton pump inhibitor (PPI) for more than 5 years.  He was currently taking Omeprazole.  Clinicians discussed tapering down his current dosage and getting him off of the medication.  

In May 2023, the Veteran denied abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, blood in stool, and bowel changes to treating clinicians.  At a September 2023 appointment, he reported that his bowel pattern had been daily.  He denied abdominal pain, tenderness, and swelling; fever and chills; weight loss; nausea; vomiting; diarrhea; and constipation.  

A VA examination was conducted in October 2023.  The Veteran reported experiencing acid reflux, sensation of needing to belch frequently, and burning in his midline chest.  Current treatment included continuous medication of Omeprazole, 40 mg daily.  The examiner indicated that signs and symptoms of GERD included infrequent episodes of epigastric distress, pyrosis, reflux, and sleep disturbance occurring 3 times per year.  There were no other pertinent complications or findings.  The functional impact was noted to be difficulty with occupational functions like bending over frequently which exacerbated GERD and slowed production.  

A 10 percent rating, but no more, for GERD is granted.

Based on the foregoing, the Board finds that a 10 percent rating, but no more, for the Veteran's GERD is warranted throughout the appeal period.

As noted by the VA examiner, the Veteran experiences infrequent episodes of epigastric distress and pyrosis.  However, he also reported burning in his midline chest.  As such, his GERD results in two or more of the symptoms for the 30 percent criteria (epigastric distress, pyrosis, and substernal pain) of less severity.  Accordingly, a 10 percent rating is merited.

The criteria for a rating in excess of 10 percent have not been met at any point.  The Veteran's epigastric distress is only infrequent, not persistently recurrent.  Dysphagia and regurgitation are not present and there is no evidence that the condition is productive of considerable (large in extent or degree) impairment of health.  As his GERD symptoms were those listed in the 30 percent criteria of DC 7346 but of less severity than considerable impairment of health, a rating in excess of 10 percent is not warranted.  

Further, as the rating criteria under DC 7346 are not successive or cumulative, the Board also finds that the Veteran's presentation does not meet the criteria for a 60 percent rating.  See Tatum v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. at 155; see also Stankevich v. Nicholson, 19 Vet. App. at 472.  There is no evidence that the Veteran's GERD resulted in pain, vomiting, material weight loss, hematemesis, or melena with moderate anemia at any time.  Further, other GERD-associated symptomology has not been productive of severe (very painful or harmful or of a great degree) impairment of health.  As such, a higher rating based on the 60 percent criteria of DC 7346 cannot be awarded.

Accordingly, a 10 percent rating for GERD is warranted throughout the entire appeal period.  The Board determines that the disability is fully capable of evaluation under the rating schedule.  There is no applicable provision that would warrant a higher rating in this case.

Service Connection

Service connection may be granted if the evidence demonstrates that a current disability resulted from an injury or disease incurred or aggravated in active military service.  This means that the facts establish that a particular injury or disease resulting in disability was incurred coincident with service in the Armed Forces, or if preexisting such service, was aggravated therein.  38 U.S.C. § § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a).

Pertinent to a claim for service connection, such a determination requires a finding of current disability that is related to an injury or disease in service.  Watson v. Brown, 4 Vet. App. 309 (1993); see also Brammer v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 223, 225 (1992); Rabideau v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 141, 143 (1992).  Under applicable regulation, the term "disability" means functional impairment in earning capacity resulting from diseases and injuries and their residual conditions.  38 C.F.R. § 4.1.  See also Hunt v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 292, 296 (1991); Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439 (1995); Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356 (Fed. Cir. 2018).

The Veteran is a recipient of the Combat Action Ribbon.  Under 38 U.S.C. § 1154(b) all veterans who engaged in combat with the enemy in active service are entitled to a relaxed evidentiary standard where incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury during combat can be established by the veteran's own lay report even if there is no official record of such incurrence or aggravation in service as long as consistent with the circumstances, conditions, or hardships of such service and, shall resolve every reasonable doubt in favor of the veteran.

Further, special service connection rules exist for Gulf War Veterans.  38 U.S.C. § § 1117; 38 C.F.R. § 3.317.  The Southwest Asia theater of operations includes Iraq, Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, the neutral zone between Iraq and Saudi Arabia, Bahrain, Qatar, the United Arab Emirates, Oman, the Gulf of Aden, the Gulf of Oman, the Persian Gulf, the Arabian Sea, the Red Sea, and the airspace above these locations.  38 C.F.R. § 3.317(e)(2).  Additional locations were added in August 2022, including Afghanistan, Israel, Egypt, Turkey, Syria, or Jordan.  38 U.S.C. § 1117(f).

Under that section, service connection may be warranted for a Gulf War veteran who exhibits objective indications of a qualifying chronic disability that became manifest during active military, naval or air service in the Southwest Asia theater of operations during the Gulf War.  For disability due to undiagnosed illness and medically unexplained chronic multi-symptom illness, the disability must have been manifest either during active military service in the Southwest Asia theater of operations or to a degree of 10 percent or more not later than December 31, 2026.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.317(a)(1). 

For purposes of 38 C.F.R. § 3.317, there are two types of qualifying chronic disabilities: (1) an undiagnosed illness; (2) a diagnosed medically unexplained chronic multi-symptom illness (MUCMI) that is defined by a cluster of signs or symptoms such as chronic fatigue syndrome, fibromyalgia, and functional gastrointestinal disorders (excluding gastrointestinal diseases). With regard to "functional gastrointestinal disorders," this would include, but are not limited to, irritable bowel syndrome, functional dyspepsia, functional vomiting, functional constipation, functional bloating, functional abdominal pain syndrome, and functional dysphagia. 38 C.F.R. § 3.317(a)(2)(i)(B).  

An undiagnosed illness is defined as a condition that by history, physical examination and laboratory tests cannot be attributed to a known clinical diagnosis.  In the case of claims based on undiagnosed illness under 38 U.S.C. § § 1117 and 38 C.F.R. § 3.317, unlike those for direct service connection, there is no requirement that there be competent evidence of a nexus between the claimed illness and service.  Gutierrez v. Principi, 19 Vet. App. 1, 8-9 (2004).  Further, lay persons are competent to report objective signs of illness.  Id.  To determine whether the undiagnosed illness is manifested to a degree of 10 percent or more the condition must be rated by analogy to a disease or injury in which the functions affected, anatomical location or symptomatology are similar.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.317(a)(5); see also Stankevich v. Nicholson, 19 Vet. App. 470 (2006). 

On the other hand, the term "MUCMI" refers to a diagnosed illness without conclusive pathophysiology or etiology, that is characterized by overlapping symptoms and signs and has features such as fatigue, pain, disability out of proportion to physical findings, and inconsistent demonstration of laboratory abnormalities.  Chronic MUCMIs of partially understood etiology and pathophysiology, such as diabetes and multiple sclerosis, will not be considered "medically unexplained."  Id.

For purposes of section 3.317, disabilities that have existed for six months or more and disabilities that exhibit intermittent episodes of improvement and worsening over a six-month period will be considered chronic.  The six-month period of chronicity will be measured from the earliest date on which the pertinent evidence establishes that the signs or symptoms of the disability first became manifest.  38 C.F.R. § 3.317(a)(4).

Additionally, effective August 5, 2021, under 38 C.F.R. § 3.320, for veterans with qualifying service in the Southwest Asia theater of operations during the Persian Gulf War, service connection may be presumed for certain listed chronic diseases associated with exposure to fine, particulate matter, which listed diseases include: asthma, rhinitis, and sinusitis (to include rhinosinusitis).

Service connection may be presumed under 38 C.F.R. § 3.320 even though there is no evidence of a listed disease during the period of service if it becomes manifest to any degree (including noncompensable) at any time following separation.  Exposure to fine, particular matter shall be presumed under 38 C.F.R. § 3.320 for veterans with qualifying service in the Southwest Asia theater of operations during the Persian Gulf War.

Notwithstanding the foregoing presumption provisions, a claimant is not precluded from establishing service connection for a disability due to Gulf War exposures with proof of direct causation.  Combee v. Brown, 34 F.3d 1039, 1042 (Fed. Cir. 1994); Ramey v. Brown, 9 Vet. App. 40, 44 (1996), aff'd sub nom, Ramey v. Gober, 120 F.3d 1239 (Fed. Cir. 1997), cert. denied, 118 S. f 1171 (1998).

On August 10, 2022, a statute known as "the PACT Act" was signed into law expanding the scope of presumed in-service toxic exposures.  See Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxics Act of 2022 (PACT Act), Pub. L. 117-168 (August 10, 2022).  The PACT Act established standards for veterans exposed to toxic exposure risk activities (TERA).  

In making all determinations, the Board must fully consider the lay assertions of record.  A layperson is competent to report on the onset and continuity of his current symptomatology.  See Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 470 (1994) (a Veteran is competent to report on that of which he or she has personal knowledge).  Lay evidence can also be competent and sufficient evidence of a diagnosis or to establish etiology if (1) the layperson is competent to identify the medical condition; (2) the layperson is reporting a contemporaneous medical diagnosis; or (3) lay testimony describing symptoms at the time supports a later diagnosis by a medical professional.  Davidson v. Shinseki, 581 F.3d 1313, 1316 (Fed. Cir. 2009); Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d at 1376-77.  When considering whether lay evidence is competent the Board must determine, on a case-by-case basis, whether the Veteran's particular disability is the type of disability for which lay evidence may be competent.  Kahana v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 428 (2011); see also Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d at 1376-77. 

In rendering this decision, the Board has reviewed all evidence of record whether discussed in detail.  See Newhouse v. Nicholson, 497 F.3d 1298, 1302 (Fed. Cir. 2007) (holding the Board must only discuss the evidence which is relevant to the issues on appeal).  

A veteran is entitled to the benefit of the doubt when the evidence is in approximate balance or "nearly equal," and does not require that the evidence be in exact equipoise.  Evidence is in approximate balance when the evidence in favor of and opposing the veteran's claim is found to be almost exactly or nearly equal.  Lynch v. McDonough, 999 F.3d 1391 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

Turning to the relevant evidence of record, the Veteran's August 1987 service enlistment examination indicated a normal throat and lungs.  On an accompanying report of medical history, he denied frequent trouble sleeping.  

Service treatment records (STRs) were negative for any sleep- or fatigue-related complaints.  

At a May 1992 separation examination, the Veteran's throat and lungs were normal.  He denied frequent trouble sleeping.

Military personnel records reflected the Veteran's military occupational specialty (MOS) of rifleman, Combat Action Ribbon, and Southwest Asia service from August 1990 to July 1991.  

Post-service, the Veteran sought a sleep study from VA clinicians in July 2023.  An in-lab polysomnogram was conducted in August 2023.  The results were normal and were not consistent with sleep apnea.  Specifically, there were zero instances of hypopneas, obstructive apneas, mixed apneas, and central apneas.

A VA examination was conducted in October 2023.  The Veteran stated that his wife started noticing loud snoring and leg twitching movement while he was sleeping.  He often felt tired during the day.  The examiner concluded that the Veteran did not have any significant obstructive sleep apnea on the basis of the August 2023 polysomnogram.  Given the negative sleep study results, no etiology opinion was provided.

Subsequent treatment records did not demonstrate development of sleep apnea.  

Entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea is denied.

Based on the foregoing, the Board finds that service connection for sleep apnea is not warranted.  

Competent medical evidence is evidence provided by a person who is qualified through education, training, or experience to offer medical diagnoses, statements, or opinions.  Competent medical evidence may also include statements conveying sound medical principles found in medical treatises and statements contained in authoritative writings, such as medical and scientific articles and research reports or analyses.  38 C.F.R. § 3.159(a)(1).

Competent lay evidence is any evidence not requiring that the proponent have specialized education, training, or experience.  Lay evidence is competent if it is provided by a person who has knowledge of facts or circumstances and conveys matters that can be observed and described by a lay person.  38 C.F.R. § 3.159(a)(2).  This may include some medical matters, such as describing symptoms or relating a contemporaneous medical diagnosis.  Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372 (Fed. Cir. 2007).  When considering whether lay evidence is competent the Board must determine, on a case by case basis, whether a veteran's particular disability is the type of disability for which lay evidence may be competent.  Kahana v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 428 (2011); see also Jandreau v. Nicholson, supra.

Here, the Veteran is competent to describe his experienced symptomology of loud snoring, leg twitching, and daytime tiredness.  However, he is not competent to diagnose a complex respiratory condition concerning an internal physical process extending beyond an immediately observable cause-and-effect relationship which requires medical training and expertise.  

At no point has the Veteran been diagnosed with sleep apnea via clinical testing.  The Board observes that sleep apnea is defined as transient periods of cessation of breathing during sleep.  The two primary types are central sleep apnea and obstructive sleep apnea.  See Dorland's Illustrated Medical Dictionary, 118 (31st ed. 2007).  Obstructive sleep apnea is defined as sleep apnea resulting from collapse or obstruction of the airway with the inhibition of muscle tone that occurs during REM sleep.  Id.  

The August 2023 polysomnogram was explicitly negative for obstructive, central, and mixed sleep apnea.  The Veteran's treating clinician and the VA examiner both determined that these results were negative for sleep apnea.  Therefore, with no competent evidence of record suggesting a sleep apnea disability, service connection cannot be granted.  See Brammer v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. at 225; Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d at 1356.

Accordingly, service connection is denied.

REASONS FOR REMAND

1.	Entitlement to service connection for low back condition is remanded.

2.	Entitlement to service connection for right knee condition is remanded.

3.	Entitlement to service connection for bilateral foot condition is remanded.

4.	Entitlement to service connection for penile condition is remanded.

5.	Entitlement to service connection for depression is remanded.

The Veteran explicitly contended on his August 2023 claim form that a low back condition, right knee condition, bilateral foot condition, penile condition, and depression were the result of combat service.  The Board finds that pre-decisional duty to assist errors occurred with regard to each issue which must be corrected before decisions may be rendered on the claims, namely the lack of VA examinations.  See 38 C.F.R. § 20.802.

The Veteran's STRs are generally negative for the claimed conditions.  However, as noted above, his personnel records reflect combat service and Southwest Asia service.  

Under 38 U.S.C. § 1154(b) all veterans who engaged in combat with the enemy in active service are entitled to a relaxed evidentiary standard where incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury during combat can be established by the veteran's own lay report even if there is no official record of such incurrence or aggravation in service as long as consistent with the circumstances, conditions, or hardships of such service and, shall resolve every reasonable doubt in favor of the veteran.  

In Reeves v. Shinseki, 682 F.3d 988, 998 (Fed. Cir. 2012), the Federal Circuit further expanded on the 3-step sequential test of 1154(b) as follows: 

1.	The Veteran must offer credible evidence of in-service incurrence or aggravation of an injury or disease (during said combat events), then 

2.	The Board must determine that the evidence is consistent with the circumstances, condition, or hardships of such service. 

3.	If (1) and (2) are met, then the Board must presume the Veteran's injury or disease was incurred or aggravated in service unless rebutted by "clear and convincing evidence to the contrary" considering all potentially applicable laws and presumptions. 

See Reeves v. Shinseki, 682 F.3d 988, 998 (Fed. Cir. 2012).  

The Veteran has not been offered VA examinations in connection with his claims.  With the evidence of combat and Southwest Asia service and the assertion of current disabilities resulting from that service, the low threshold to necessitate affording VA examinations has been met.  See McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 81 (2006).  

Accordingly, upon remand, VA examinations are needed which consider the circumstances of the Veteran's service, including his combat and Southwest Asia service, and his relevant medical history.  

While the Board is remanding these matters at this time, it is mindful of the holding in Smith v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 332 (2020), and the impact of implicit credibility determinations within remand orders.  The Board does not at this time make any determinations regarding the credibility of any evidence currently of record, to include those described in this remand.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for VA examinations with an appropriate clinician(s) to determine the etiology of his claimed low back condition, right knee condition, bilateral foot condition, penile condition, and depression.  The claims folder should be made available to and be reviewed by the examiner.  All indicated tests and studies should be performed.  Following a review of the record, the examiner is asked to:

(a.) Determine whether the Veteran currently has, or had at any point during the appeal period, any low back, right knee, bilateral foot, or penile condition, or any symptomology causing a functional impairment in earning capacity.  The examiner is advised that pain alone can be a disability for VA purposes if such pain causes functional impairment of earning capacity.  

(b.) Determine whether the Veteran currently has, or had at any point during the appeal period, a diagnosis of depression or any other psychiatric disorder.    

(c.) Solicit from the Veteran the circumstances of the in-service onset of his claimed low back condition, right knee condition, bilateral foot condition, penile condition, and depression.  

(d.) If the claimed low back condition, right knee condition, bilateral foot condition, penile condition, and / or depression began during the context of his combat service, then determine whether there is "clear and convincing evidence" (i.e., undebatable) that his claimed low back condition, right knee condition, bilateral foot condition, penile condition, and / or depression were not incurred in service.  

(e.) If the claimed low back condition, right knee condition, bilateral foot condition, penile condition, and / or depression began during active duty, but not necessarily in the context of combat, determine whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the claimed conditions are etiologically related to his active service, to include his presumed exposure to Gulf War toxins.  

NOTE: The health care provider shall consider the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran.  

(f.) If no such nexus is appropriate, alternatively, determine whether the Veteran's claimed low back condition, right knee condition, bilateral foot condition, penile condition, and / or depression are at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) the result of an "undiagnosed illness" or a diagnosed MUCMI.  

NOTE:  An "undiagnosed illness" is defined as a condition that by history, physical examination and laboratory tests cannot be attributed to a known clinical diagnosis whereas the term "MUCMI" refers to an illness where either the etiology or the pathophysiology of the illness is inconclusive.

(g.) The examiner is advised that an opinion based solely on a lack of documented complaints in service is not sufficient for adjudicative purposes.  

(h.) In considering any lay statements of record, the examiner should note that the Veteran is competent to attest to matters of which he had first-hand knowledge, including observable symptomatology.  If there is a medical basis to support or doubt the history provided by the Veteran, the examiner should provide a fully reasoned explanation.  

(i.) If medical literature is relied upon, the examiner should identify and specifically cite each reference material used and discuss how it relates to the Veteran's particular medical history.  The examiner should specifically discuss any contradictory evidence in the claims file and reconcile that evidence with their findings.

(j.) All opinions should be accompanied by supporting rationale explaining how the examiner arrived at the conclusions expressed. 

(k.) If the examiner determines that s/he cannot provide an opinion without resorting to speculation, s/he should explain the inability to provide an opinion, identifying precisely what facts could not be determined.  In particular, he/she should comment on whether an opinion could not be provided because the limits of medical knowledge have been exhausted or whether additional testing or information could be obtained that would lead to a conclusive opinion.

2. After the above development, and any additionally indicated development, has been completed, readjudicate the claims.

 

 

SHEREEN M. MARCUS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Rachel E. Jensen, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.