Citation Nr: A25034393
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 241216-494761
DATE: April 15, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral hearing loss (BHL) is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for tinnitus is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that BHL began during active service or is otherwise related to an in-service injury or disease.

2. The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that tinnitus began during active service or is otherwise related to an in-service injury or disease.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for service connection for BHL are not met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

2. The criteria for service connection for tinnitus are not met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran had active service from January 1966 to December 1968.

In the December 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Initially the Board was unable to adjudicate the case until such time as the Veteran's period to select a different Board review lane had elapsed.  See Williams v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 305 (2024).  In February 2025 the Veteran submitted a waiver of his right to select a new appeal lane, and therefore the case is now ripe for adjudication.

The Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the November 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

1. Entitlement to service connection for BHL is denied.

The Veteran asserts that he is entitled to service connection for BHL.  The Board finds that the evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran's current BHL is the result of an in-service incurrence.  

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from personal injury suffered or disease contracted, or for aggravation of a preexisting injury suffered or disease contracted, in the line of duty in active military, naval, or air service. 38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a).

To establish service connection the following elements must be satisfied: (1) the existence of a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service (the medical "nexus" requirement).  Holton v. Shinseki, 557 F.3d 1363, 1366 (Fed. Cir. 2009); 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a).

As to the first element of service connection, the AOJ made a favorable finding that the Veteran has a current disability of BHL, and that element is conceded here.

As to the second element of service connection, the AOJ made favorable findings that the Veteran's MOS had a high probability of noise exposure, and that the Veteran had toxic exposure risk activity during service.  Therefore, the element of an in-service incurrence is similarly conceded.

There must still be found a medical nexus between the current disability and the in-service incurrence.  The possibility of a nexus between the conceded in-service noise exposure and the current disability will be analyzed first.

There is one medical opinion in the evidence of record which addresses a nexus between in-service noise exposure and the Veteran's current BHL.  The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in October 2023.  The examiner reviewed the Veteran's available health records as well as conducted an in-person examination.  The examiner concluded that it was less likely than not that the Veteran's current BHL was the result of in-service noise exposure.  The rationale offered to support this conclusion was that the Veteran did not have any complaints, diagnosis, or treatments for hearing loss during service.  Additionally, the examiner noted, the Veteran's service treatment records did not show that there was a shift in hearing thresholds during service that would provide objective evidence of auditory damage.  The examiner is deemed to be credible and competent to offer such an opinion and therefore the opinion is afforded high probative value.

The only medical opinion in the evidence of record which addresses a nexus between in-service noise exposure and the current disability of BHL found that there was no link.  That opinion was afforded high probative value.  Thus, the evidence of record persuasively weighs against a finding that there is a nexus between the conceded in-service noise exposure and current disability.  Without a finding of a nexus a claim for service connection cannot be supported.

Next, whether a nexus has been established between the conceded in-service toxic exposure risk activity and the current disability of BHL will be analyzed.

The Veteran was scheduled for a VA examination to address whether his current BHL was the result of in-service toxic exposure risk activity.  However, records show that in October 2023 the Veteran requested to cancel his appointment for an examination.  The Board is sympathetic that the Veteran may have misapprehended the nature of the examination and thought that it was duplicative of the earlier examination, as noted in the record, and the Veteran is encouraged to contact his regional office to reschedule the examination if he wishes.  Nevertheless, the Veteran's voluntary cancellation of the examination is not deemed to be good cause for failure to report to an examination, and the claim will be decided on the evidence of record as it currently stands.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.655.

There are no medical opinions in the evidence of record which assert a nexus between toxic exposure risk activity and the Veteran's current diagnosis.  The evidence of record therefore persuasively weighs against the finding of a nexus between the Veteran's in-service incurrence of toxic exposure risk activity and current disability of BHL.  Without the finding of a nexus, a claim for service connection cannot be supported.

Certain chronic diseases, including BHL, which are manifested to a compensable degree within one year of discharge from active duty, shall be presumed to have been incurred or aggravated in service, even though there is no evidence of such diseases during the period of service.  See 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307(a)(3), 3.309. Alternatively, if a chronic disease listed is not noted during service or the presumptive period, then a showing of continuity of symptomatology after service is required for service connection.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(b); Walker v. Shinseki, 708 F.3d 1331 (Fed. Cir. 2013).

The Veteran's service treatment records do not contain any complaints, diagnosis, or treatments for BHL.  No evidence has been submitted that report or demonstrate BHL in the year following service either.  Thus, in order to be entitled to service connection for BHL on a presumptive basis there must be found a continuity of symptomatology since the period of service.

The Veteran's original claim form notes the types of noise exposure he experienced, and lack of hearing protection provided, but does not make a contention concerning the onset of symptoms beyond generally listing the period of service.  At his October 2023 VA examination, the Veteran also did not state he experienced an onset of symptoms during service as he only noticed symptoms of hearing loss in more recent years.  The evidence of record therefore persuasively weighs against a finding that there has been a continuity of symptomatology for BHL since service.  Without a finding of continuity of symptomatology, entitlement to service connection cannot be found on a presumptive basis.

For the above reasons, the Board finds that the evidence is neither evenly balanced nor approximately so with regard to whether entitlement to service connection for BHL is warranted.  Rather, the evidence persuasively weighs against entitlement to service connection.  The benefit of the doubt doctrine, see 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b), is therefore not for application.  Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc) (only when the evidence persuasively favors one side or another is the benefit of the doubt doctrine not for application).  The appeal is hereby DENIED.

2. Entitlement to service connection for tinnitus is denied.

The Veteran asserts that he is entitled to service connection for tinnitus.  The Board finds that the evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran's current diagnosis of tinnitus is the result of an in-service incurrence.  

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from personal injury suffered or disease contracted, or for aggravation of a preexisting injury suffered or disease contracted, in the line of duty in active military, naval, or air service. 38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a).

To establish service connection the following elements must be satisfied: (1) the existence of a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service (the medical "nexus" requirement).  Holton v. Shinseki, 557 F.3d 1363, 1366 (Fed. Cir. 2009); 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a).

As to the first element of service connection, the AOJ made a favorable finding that the Veteran has a current disability of tinnitus, and that element is conceded here.

As to the second element of service connection, the AOJ made favorable findings that the Veteran's MOS had a high probability of noise exposure and also that the Veteran had toxic exposure risk activity during service.  Therefore, the element of an in-service incurrence is similarly conceded.

There must still be found a medical nexus between the current disability and the in-service incurrence.  The possibility of a nexus between the conceded in-service noise exposure and the current disability will be analyzed first.

There is one medical opinion in the evidence of record which addresses a nexus between in-service noise exposure and the Veteran's current tinnitus.  The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in October 2023.  The examiner reviewed the Veteran's available health records as well as conducted an in-person examination.  The examiner concluded that it was less likely than not that the Veteran's current tinnitus was the result of in-service noise exposure.  The rationale offered to support this conclusion was that the Veteran did not have any complaints, diagnosis, or treatments for tinnitus during service and that the Veteran's service treatment records showed normal hearing sensitivity at separation.  Additionally, the examiner opined that as the Veteran reported that tinnitus symptoms had a gradual onset in the post-service period and medical literature does not support late onset noise-induced tinnitus.  The examiner is deemed to be credible and competent to offer such an opinion and therefore the opinion is afforded high probative value.

The only medical opinion in the evidence of record which addresses a nexus between in-service noise exposure and the current disability of tinnitus found that there was no link.  That opinion was afforded high probative value.  Thus, the evidence of record persuasively weighs against a finding that there is a nexus between the conceded in-service noise exposure and current disability.  Without a finding of a nexus a claim for service connection cannot be supported.

Next, whether a nexus has been established between the conceded in-service toxic exposure risk activity and the current disability of tinnitus will be analyzed.

The Veteran was scheduled for a VA examination to address whether his current tinnitus was the result of in-service toxic exposure risk activity.  However, records show that in October 2023 the Veteran requested to cancel his appointment for an examination.  The Veteran's voluntary cancellation of the examination is not deemed to be good cause for failure to report to an examination, and the claim will be decided on the evidence of record as it currently stands.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.655.

There are no medical opinions in the evidence of record which assert a nexus between toxic exposure risk activity and the Veteran's current diagnosis.  The evidence of record therefore persuasively weighs against the finding of a nexus between the Veteran's in-service incurrence of toxic exposure risk activity and current disability of tinnitus.  Without the finding of a nexus, a claim for service connection cannot be supported.

Certain chronic diseases, including tinnitus, which are manifested to a compensable degree within one year of discharge from active duty, shall be presumed to have been incurred or aggravated in service, even though there is no evidence of such diseases during the period of service.  See 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307(a)(3), 3.309.  Alternatively, if a chronic disease listed is not noted during service or the presumptive period, then a showing of continuity of symptomatology after service is required for service connection.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(b); Walker v. Shinseki, 708 F.3d 1331 (Fed. Cir. 2013).

The Veteran's service treatment records do not contain any complaints, diagnosis, or treatments for tinnitus.  No evidence has been submitted that report tinnitus in the year following service either.  Thus, in order to be entitled to service connection for tinnitus on a presumptive basis there must be found a continuity of symptomatology since the period of service.

The Veteran's original claim form notes the types of noise exposure he experienced, and lack of hearing protection provided, but does not make a contention concerning the onset of symptoms beyond generally listing the period of service.  At his October 2023 VA examination, the Veteran stated that his tinnitus had a gradual onset in the post-service period.  As such, the only specific contention by the Veteran as to the onset of symptoms notes they began in the post-service period rather than having a continuity with the service period.  The evidence of record therefore persuasively weighs against a finding that there is a continuity of symptomatology.  Without a finding of continuity of symptomatology, entitlement to service connection cannot be found on a presumptive basis.

For the above reasons, the Board finds that the evidence is neither evenly balanced nor approximately so with regard to whether entitlement to service connection for tinnitus is warranted.  Rather, the evidence persuasively weighs against entitlement to service connection.  The benefit of the doubt doctrine, see 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b), is therefore not for application.  Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc) (only when the evidence persuasively favors one side or another is the benefit of the doubt doctrine not for application).  The appeal is hereby DENIED.

(This space intentionally left blank.  VLJ signature on next page.)

 

J.P. Norman

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Arner, Jonathan T.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.