Citation Nr: A25034483
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 240822-466036
DATE: April 15, 2025

ORDER

An effective date of October 14, 2022, but no earlier, for a 100 percent rating for service-connected other specified trauma and stressor related disorder (psychiatric disorder) is granted.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. An original claim for increase rating for the psychiatric disorder was received on October 14, 2022, and has been continuously pursued since then.

2. The service-connected psychiatric disability more nearly approximated the requirements for a higher 100 percent rating for the entire increase rating period on appeal from October 14, 2022.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for an effective date of October 14, 2022, but no earlier, for a 100 percent disability rating for the service-connected psychiatric disorder have been met.  38 U.S.C. § 5110; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.400, 3.2500.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran, who is the Appellant, served on active duty from June 1985 to April 1988.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an August 2023 rating decision from the Regional Office (RO).  In the August 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement (NOD)), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket; therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the May 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Earlier Effective Date for 10 percent Rating for Psychiatric Disorder

The effective date of rating for compensation, or dependency and indemnity compensation based on an original claim, a claim reopened after a final disallowance, or a claim for increase will be the date of receipt of the claim or the date entitlement arose, whichever is the later.  38 U.S.C. § 5110(a); 38 C.F.R. § 3.400.

For appeals governed by the Appeals Modernization Act, the effective date will be the date VA received a veteran's initial claim or the date entitlement arose, whichever is later, if a veteran continuously pursues an issue by timely filing in succession any of the available review options as specified in § 3.2500(c) within one year of the issuance of the decision.  See 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.1(p), 3.2500(h).

The Veteran appeals for an effective date earlier than April 25, 2023 for a 100 percent disability rating for the service-connected psychiatric disorder.  The attorney representative argues that the Veteran has continuously pursued the claim for an increase rating since the original October 2022 claim.  The attorney representative further asserts that the evidence shows worsening symptoms that support a higher 100 percent rating prior to April 2023, so the effective date should be the date of the October 2022 claim for increase.  See August 2024 NOD. 

On October 14, 2022, VA received a formal claim for increase rating for the psychiatric disorder.  A January 2023 rating decision proposed to decrease the psychiatric disorder from 70 to 50 percent.  Thereafter, the Veteran submitted a supplemental claim in February 2023, indicating that the psychiatric disorder did not improve and has continued to worsen.  In a May 2023 rating decision, based on the facts found in the April 2023 VA examination, the RO granted a 100 percent rating for the psychiatric disorder effective April 25, 2023.  On May 18, 2023, the Veteran submitted a request for higher level review.  In an August 2023 Higher Level Review Rating Decision, the RO denied an effective date prior to April 25, 2023 for a 100 percent rating for the psychiatric disorder.  The Veteran timely appealed this decision in an August 2024 NOD.  

Regarding the date of claim, VA received a formal claim for increase rating for the psychiatric disorder in October 2022.  The Veteran has not contended otherwise and seeks an effective date for the higher 100 percent rating based on the October 2022 claim.  A review of the record and AMA filings shows that the Veteran has continuously pursued the claim for increase rating from October 2022.  As such, the date of application is considered the date of the filing of the initial application for the benefit under 38 U.S.C. § 5110(a)(2)(B).  

Regarding the date of entitlement, the AOJ granted the 100 percent rating based on April 2023 VA mental health examination showing increased symptomatology that more nearly approximated total occupational and social impairment.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.7, 4.130 (General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders), Diagnostic Code 9411.  Under the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders, a 100 percent rating is assigned for total occupational and social impairment due to symptoms such as gross impairment in thought processes or communication, persistent delusions or hallucinations, grossly inappropriate behavior, a persistent danger of hurting herself or others, an intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene), disorientation to time or place, and memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name.  38 C.F.R. § 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411.

The symptoms listed in the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders are not meant to be an exhaustive list of symptoms, but rather serve as examples of the type and degree of the symptoms, or effects, that would justify a particular rating. The Board has considered the symptoms indicated in the rating criteria as examples of symptoms "like or similar to" a veteran's psychiatric symptoms in determining the appropriate schedular rating assignment and has not required the presence of a specified quantity of symptoms in the Rating Schedule to warrant the assigned rating for major depressive disorder.  See Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436 (2002).

Considerations in rating a mental disorder include the frequency, severity, and duration of psychiatric symptoms, the length of remissions, and a veteran's capacity for adjustment during periods of remission.  The rating must be based on all evidence of record that bears on occupational and social impairment rather than solely on an examiner's assessment of the level of disability at the moment of the examination.  38 C.F.R. § 4.126(a).  Although the extent of social impairment is a consideration in determining the level of disability, the rating may not be assigned solely on the basis of social impairment.  38 C.F.R. § 4.126(b).

In Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 117 (2013), the Federal Circuit held that VA "intended the General Rating Formula to provide a regulatory framework for placing veterans on a disability spectrum based upon their objectively observable symptoms."  The Federal Circuit stated that "a veteran may only qualify for a given disability rating under § 4.130 by demonstrating the particular symptoms associated with that percentage, or others of similar severity, frequency, and duration." It was further noted that "§ 4.130 requires not only the presence of certain symptoms but also that those symptoms have caused occupational and social impairment in most of the referenced areas."

In considering the evidence of record under the laws and regulations as set forth above, the Board finds that an effective date of October 14, 2022, but no earlier, is warranted for the 100 percent rating for other specified trauma or stressor related disorder. 

A review of the VA treatment records during the relevant rating period shows that the Veteran has a history of depression and anger management issues that have required psychotropic medications; however, the Veteran reported "no clear benefits" from the psychotropic medications.  Specifically, the Veteran endorsed feeling depressed all the time with anhedonia, low energy, low motivation, decreased appetite, and nightmares with poor sleep.  The Veteran reported that he often did not want to get out of bed and was having panic attacks three to four times a day.  He endorsed problems with paranoia and that he tended to stay to himself due to difficulties getting along with others, including his coworkers, noting "everybody is out to get me."  Although the Veteran had been married since 2002, he was currently separated from his wife.  The Veteran acknowledged problems with domestic violence, indicating that his spouse had called the cops on him a few times, but no charges were filed.  Overall, the Veteran endorsed little interest or pleasure in doing things, feeling depressed and hopeless, feeling tired with little energy, and trouble concentrating nearly every day.  The Veteran also endorsed thoughts that he would be better off dead and thoughts of hurting himself for several days, but he denied any active plans.  See October 2022, December 2022, March 2023 VA Treatment Records.  

In December 2022, a friend of the Veteran's reported that she was acting as his caregiver due to his problems with anxiety attacks, lack of motivation, and difficulties with daily activities such as dressing and bathing.  The Veteran's friend reported that she had to prompt and encourage the Veteran to attend to hygiene and grooming, especially when he is depressed.  The friend reported handling most of the household chores and meal planning.  The friend indicated that when the Veteran "flips out" or detaches he tends to stare off into space and that she worries about escalation.  The Veteran also required repeated prompting and redirection to stay on tasks due to being easily distracted.  The Veteran's friend reported that when she tries to leave him along, he will "freak out" and call her back to back.  The mental health clinician noted that the Veteran has passive, fleeting suicidal ideation, depression, anxiety, and poor frustration tolerance, noting that his friend was providing some activities of daily living assistance, as well as daily, regular instruction and supervision to support adaptive coping.  The clinician noted chronic maladaptive coping patterns in spite of previous outpatient therapy.  See December 2022 VA Treatment Record. 

At a VA Examination was provided in November 2022, the Veteran reported that he had problems with lashing out at coworkers and that he was suspended from coaching due to lashing out at referees.  The Veteran reported that he was prone to irritability, anxiety, pessimism, and always thinks the worst, and endorsed persistent problems with sleep.  The VA examiner assessed symptoms of depressed mood, anxiety, chronic sleep impairment, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, and difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances.  See November 2022 VA Examination Report.

A new VA examination was provided in April 2023, during which the Veteran reported that he has been separated from his wife for three years due to mood swings and "snapping" on her when she would ask him questions.  The Veteran reported seeing someone since then but indicated that he "ran her off too."  The Veteran reported that he prefers to socially isolate and does not trust others.  He endorsed irritability and difficulty interacting with directors and coworkers.  He continued to endorsed lack of motivation noting that he cannot get out of bed at least once a month.  The Veteran also reported suspiciousness of others, and impaired impulse control, noting that he kicks things around the house when angry.  Further, the Veteran endorsed neglect of personal hygiene on occasion and thoughts of wanting to hurt his coworkers, but no intent.  See April 2023 VA Examination Report. 

The VA examiner assessed symptoms of depressed mood; anxiety; suspiciousness; panic attacks more than once a week; chronic sleep impairment; mild memory loss such as forgetting names, directions, or recent events; flattened affect; impaired judgment; disturbance of motivation and mood; difficulty establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships; difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances; impaired impulse control, such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence; spatial disorientation; persistent danger of hurting self or others; and intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living, including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene.  Id. 

The evidence shows persistent anxiety and depressive symptoms including low frustration tolerance, impaired impulse control with irritability and periods of violence, such kicking things around the home when he is angry, and difficulties with interpersonal relationships.  The Veteran has acknowledged separation from his spouse, in part, due to mood swings and domestic violence, noting that his spouse had called the cops on his on more than one occasion.  He has social withdrawal and paranoid thoughts of feeling like others are "out to get [him]."  Additionally, the Veteran's friend also endorsed fear that the Veteran would escalate things when he "flips out" or detaches.  The Veteran has also endorsed chronic thoughts of harming himself or being better off dead.  The record also reflects that the Veteran has endorsed daily depression, anhedonia, low energy, and low motivation, noting that sometimes he does not want to get out of bed.  The Veteran's friend reported having to encourage the Veteran to tend to his hygiene and grooming, particularly when he is in depressive state.  The Veteran's friend also reported assisting him with some daily activities, such as household chores and meal prepping; having to redirect and prompt the Veteran often due poor concentration and tendency to get off task; and that the Veteran relied on her for daily supervision due to poor adaptive coping among other symptoms.  

Overall, the lay and medical evidence during the relevant rating period reflects symptoms like or similar too persistent danger of harming self or others, suicidal ideation, impaired impulse control (such as irritability with periods of violence), inability or difficulty establishing or maintaining work or social relationships, intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintaining minimal hygiene), near continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, disturbance of motivation and mood, paranoid thoughts and suspiciousness, mild memory loss, flattened affect, and impaired judgment, among other symptoms. 

When the symptoms and functional impairment of the psychiatric disorder that were reported throughout the period on appeal are considered as a whole, the disability picture of the psychiatric disorder more nearly approximates a (maximum) 100 percent schedular disability rating for the service-connected psychiatric disorder.  In this case, because a complete claim for increase rating was received October 2022, an effective date of October 14, 2022 is warranted for the 100 percent rating for the psychiatric disability.  38 CFR §§ 3.400, 3.2500.

 

 

J. PARKER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Moore, S.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.