Citation Nr: A25034967
Decision Date: 04/16/25	Archive Date: 04/16/25

DOCKET NO. 240729-461206
DATE: April 16, 2025

ORDER

Eligibility for a specially adapted housing grant is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran has a permanent and total disability that results in the loss of use of both lower extremities so as to preclude locomotion without the aid of braces, crutches, canes, or a wheelchair.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for eligibility for a specially adapted housing grant are met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 2101(a), 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.159, 3.809.

?

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran had active service from January 1970 to December 1975.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from a June 2024 rating decision by a U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office adjudicating eighteen different claims.  In July 2024, the Veteran submitted a timely Decision Review Request: Board Appeal, VA Form 10182, appealing only the issue of eligibility for assistance in acquiring specially adapted housing.  The Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Thus, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal (i.e., June 4, 2024).  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  If evidence was associated with the claims file during a period of time when additional evidence was not allowed, the Board has not considered it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. § 20.300.

The Board acknowledges this decision is being issued prior to the expiration of the period in which the Veteran may elect to switch dockets pursuant to the holding in Williams v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 305 (2024).  However, as this decision results in a full grant of the benefit sought, there is no prejudice to the Veteran in promulgating this decision without further delay.

The Veteran contends he is eligible for assistance in acquiring specially adapted housing.  For the reasons that follow, the Board agrees.

Assistance in acquiring specially adapted housing is available to a veteran who is entitled to compensation for a service connected disability that is rated as one of the following: (1) a permanent and total disability that is due to the loss, or loss of use, of both lower extremities such as to preclude locomotion without the aid of braces, crutches, canes, or a wheelchair; (2) a permanent disability that is due to blindness in both eyes, having central visual acuity of 20/200 or less in the better eye with the use of a standard correcting lens; (3) a permanent and total disability that is due to the loss or loss of use of one lower extremity together with residuals of organic disease or injury which so affect the functions of balance or propulsion as to preclude locomotion without the aid of braces, crutches, canes, or a wheelchair; (4) a permanent and total disability that is due to the loss or loss of use of one lower extremity together with the loss or loss of use of one upper extremity which so affect the functions of balance or propulsion as to preclude locomotion without the aid of braces, crutches, canes, or a wheelchair; (5) a permanent and total disability that is due to the loss, or loss of use, of both upper extremities such as to preclude use of the arms at or above the elbows; (6) a permanent and total disability that is due to full thickness or subdermal burns that have resulted in contractures with limitation of motion of two or more extremities or of at least one extremity and the trunk; or (7) a 100 percent evaluation for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis under 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8017.  See 38 U.S.C. § 2101(a); 38 C.F.R. § 3.809(a), (b), (d). 

For purposes of this section, "preclude locomotion" means the necessity for regular and constant use of a wheelchair, braces, crutches or canes as a normal mode of locomotion although occasional locomotion by other methods may be possible.  38 C.F.R. § 3.809(c).  Additionally, a "loss of use" exists when there is "deprivation of the ability to avail oneself" of that extremity without the use of an assistive device; in making this determination, VA should consider the functional impairment caused by pain, weakness, or incoordination.  See Jensen v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 66, 78-79 (2017).  However, the use of an assistive device alone is not dispositive.  Rather, to receive specially adaptive housing based on "loss of use" as specified in 38 C.F.R. § 3.809(b)(1), an individual must (1) have a permanent and total disability (2) due to a disorder that (3) involves both lower extremities and (4) causes a loss of use so severe that it precludes locomotion without the regular and constant use of assistive devices.  Id.

Specially adapted housing may also be available to veterans who served on or after September 11, 2001 and who on or after such date incurred a permanent disability that results in the loss of use of one or more extremities such that ambulating without the aid of braces, crutches, canes, or wheelchairs is precluded, regardless of whether the disability is evaluated at 100 percent.  38 U.S.C. § 2101(a)(2)(C).  This provision is not applicable in this appeal.

?

In this case, the Veteran is in receipt of Dependents' Educational Assistance, so the AOJ has made a favorable finding that the Veteran's service-connected Parkinson's Disease is permanently and totally disabling.  See, e.g., May 2024 Rating Decision.  Absent any clear and unmistakable error in this finding, which the Board cannot find here, the Board is bound by it.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).

The evidence further establishes that the Veteran has lost the use of both lower extremities such as to preclude locomotion without the aid of a wheelchair.  In this regard, the Board observes the Veteran is wheelchair bound, and his wheelchair use is described as "constant" in his May 2024 VA examinations; this wheelchair use is attributed directly and solely to the Veteran's Parkinson's Disease.  See May 2024 Parkinson's Disease Examination (noting the Veteran is wheelchair bound and has severe balance impairment, bradykinesia, and rigidity in his lower extremities); May 2024 VA Back Conditions Examination (noting constant wheelchair use due to Parkinson's Disease with limited mobility); May 2024 VA Central Nervous System and Neuromuscular Diseases Examination (with the same notation attributing the wheelchair use to the Veteran's Parkinson's Disease). 

VA treatment records also confirm the Veteran's loss of use of his lower extremities such as to preclude locomotion without the use of a wheelchair due to his Parkinson's disease.  Specifically, a December 2023 record indicates the Veteran's Parkinson's Disease "has progressed to inability to walk and notable rigidity."  The same record indicates the Veteran is unable to stand and is unlikely to return to ambulating.  VA facilitated the acquisition of a lift for transfers at that time.  A May 2024 VA treatment record states the Veteran requires maximum assistance with activities of daily living, is wheelchair bound, and is awaiting the arrival of a motorized wheelchair.  

Accordingly, based on the evidence of record at this time, the Board finds the Veteran (1) has a permanent and total disability (2) due to his service-connected Parkinson's disease that (3) affects both lower extremities and (4) causes a loss of use so severe that it precludes locomotion without the regular and constant use of a wheelchair.  See Jenson, supra; 38 C.F.R. § 3.809(b)(1).  The Veteran is therefore eligible for assistance in acquiring specially adapted housing.  See 38 U.S.C. § 2101(a); 38 C.F.R. § 3.809(a), (b).  In other words, the benefit is granted.

Where eligibility for specially adapted housing is not established, a veteran may nevertheless qualify for a special home adaptation grant.  Here, however, because the Board has granted the Veteran's claim for specially adapted housing, the law precludes a separate award of a special home adaptation grant under 38 U.S.C. § 2101(b); and in any event, the Veteran has not appealed that issue to the Board.  Accordingly, the Board need not address the issue of eligibility for this lesser benefit, as this grant herein renders that issue moot. 

In so reaching the above conclusions, the Board has appropriately applied the benefit of the doubt doctrine in this case.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

 

 

MARTIN B. PETERS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	A. Kuhns

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.