Citation Nr: A25034003
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 230223-326812
DATE: April 11, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a lumbar spine disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for right hip strain is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for left hip strain is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran, who is the appellant in this case, served on active duty from April 1980 to May 1983.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a November 2022 rating decision of a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO), of which the Veteran was notified in December 2022 (hereinafter referred to as "December 2022 rating decision").

In February 2023, the Veteran filed a VA Form 10182 (Decision Review Request: Board Appeal) and requested direct review by the Board.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the December 2022 rating decision.  38 C.F.R. §?20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the December 2022 rating decision cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  However, because the Board is remanding the claims, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the RO in the adjudication of the claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

In a January 2024 correspondence, the Veteran reported that her previously appointed agent retired as a VA representative.  Additionally, the Veteran indicated she did not intend to acquire a new representative.  Further, in February 2024, VA notified the Veteran that it no longer recognized the accreditation of her former agent.  Therefore, the Board finds that the Veteran chooses to currently represent herself.

1. Entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea is remanded.

The Veteran asserts she is entitled to service connection for sleep apnea.  The Board finds that remand is necessary to cure a pre-decisional duty to assist error by the RO.

In an April 2022 private treatment record, the Veteran endorsed "some issues with snoring at nighttime but she also states that she is fatigued in the daytime.  She is concerned about having sleep apnea based on doctor[']s recommendation."  The private treatment provider diagnosed sleep disorder breathing and referred the Veteran for a sleep study.  In her July 2022 claim application, the Veteran endorsed always feeling tired and snoring during service.  In a July 2022 lay statement, the Veteran reported she was officially diagnosed with sleep apnea in June 2022, but that she believes her condition began during military service, noting that she would fall sleep and be very sleepy in the daytime, and that her spouse (at that time) told her she would snore and stop breathing while sleeping.  In a July 2022 lay statement, the Veteran's ex-spouse, who was married to the Veteran during her military service, said he observed her snoring and that sometimes "she would [be] really qui[et] and I would shake her to wake her up."  The Veteran and ex-spouse are competent to report what they witnessed firsthand.

To date, VA has not obtained a medical examination or opinion for this claim.  Based on the foregoing evidence, the Board finds that the RO erred in not providing the Veteran a VA examination prior to adjudicating the claim, and that a VA examination and medical opinion must be provided on remand.  See McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006).  

Additionally, in her July 2022 lay statement, the Veteran reported she was referred to Dr. Yune-Gill Jeong for sleep apnea treatment.  Records from Dr. Jeong are not currently associated with the claims file.  Prior to adjudicating the claim, the RO should have attempted to obtain these potentially relevant treatment records.  On remand, the RO should provide the Veteran a VA Form 21-4142, Authorization for Release of Information, so that VA may obtain these private treatment records.

2. Entitlement to service connection for a lumbar spine disability is remanded.

The Veteran asserts she is entitled to service connection for a lumbar spine disability.  In the December 2022 rating decision, the RO made a favorable finding that private treatment records show a past medical history of lumbar spine pain.  Having found no clear and unmistakable error, the Board is bound by this favorable finding.  38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).  On review, the Board finds that remand is necessary to cure a pre-decisional duty to assist error by the RO.

In a February 2022 private treatment record, the Veteran was assessed with low back pain radiating to both legs, and physical examination revealed spasms, tenderness, and decreased range of motion of the lumbar spine.  In an April 2022 private treatment record, the Veteran was diagnosed with low back pain, and the provider (a physical therapist) determined that the mechanism of injury was that the osteoarthritis in the Veteran's bilateral knees was causing her back pain over time.  In her July 2022 claim application, the Veteran asserted that her current lumbar spine disability was due to "[m]arching and pounding" in physical training during service.  In a July 2022 lay statement, the Veteran wrote, "While serving in the military I was constantly walking and running up and down stairs [d]uring physical training at least three times per week.  My training included, but [was] not limited to[,] mountain climbing, sit ups, push-up[s,] [and] running at least five miles in full combat g[ear], sometimes with your rifle.  Sleeping on the ground in your sleeping bag on field training weeks.  I began noticing problems with my back around the late 80's [and] at the time I didn't see a doctor, because I could take a pain pill and it would go away.  The pain began to get worse around the 90's, where my doctor would beg[i]n giving me steroid injections.  My doctor sent me to physical therapy a couple of times.  I am in bed at least 5 to 6 times per month from the pain."

To date, VA has not obtained a medical examination or opinion for this claim.  Based on the foregoing evidence, the Board finds that the RO erred in not providing the Veteran a VA examination prior to adjudicating the claim, and that a VA examination and medical opinion must be provided on remand.  See McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006).  The Board finds that VA medical opinions should be obtained as to direct service connection and secondary service connection by the Veteran's service-connected bilateral knee disabilities.

3. Entitlement to service connection for right hip strain is remanded.

4. Entitlement to service connection for left hip strain is remanded.

The Veteran asserts she is entitled to service connection for right and left hip strain.  In the December 2022 rating decision, the RO made the following favorable findings: (1) the Veteran is currently diagnosed with bilateral hip strain, and private treatment records show a past medical history of bilateral hip pain; and (2) the claimed primary disability (bilateral pes planus) is service connected.  Having found no clear and unmistakable error, the Board is bound by these favorable findings.  38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).  On review, the Board finds that remand is necessary to cure a pre-decisional duty to assist errors by the RO.

In November 2022, the Veteran was provided a VA examination for her claimed right and left hip strain.  The VA examiner provided a negative nexus opinion in November 2022.  Notably, the RO only requested a VA medical opinion as to whether the Veteran's bilateral hip disability was caused by her service-connected bilateral pes planus and did not request an opinion as to secondary aggravation.  See October 2022 "Exam Request" document; November 2022 VA medical opinion.  The Board finds that this renders the November 2022 VA medical opinion inadequate under El-Amin v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 136, 140-41 (2013).  On remand, the RO must obtain opinions as to both avenues for secondary service connection of the right and left hip strain by the Veteran's service-connected bilateral pes planus.

Additionally, the Board notes that in an April 2022 private treatment record, the Veteran was diagnosed with decreased bilateral hip range of motion, and the provider (a physical therapist) determined that the mechanism of injury was that the osteoarthritis in the Veteran's bilateral knees was causing her hip pain over time.  In a July 2022 lay statement, the Veteran indicated that she believed her hip pain "is a derivative of" her flat feet and osteoarthritis in the right and left knees. Based on the foregoing evidence, the Board finds that, prior to adjudicating the claims, the RO should have obtained VA medical opinions as to secondary service connection by the Veteran's service-connected bilateral knee disabilities.  This must be accomplished on remand.

Furthermore, in her July 2022 claim application, the Veteran asserted that her current bilateral hip disability was due to "[m]arching and pounding" in physical training during service.  In a July 2022 lay statement, the Veteran wrote, "I believe all the running I did while on active duty contribute[d] to my hip pain.  Running on rough and uneven terrain during PT on uneven terrain as well.  Carry[ing] my duffle bag with all of my gear on my back and weapon at parade rest for five sometimes ten miles (two-three times per month) ... My unit would go out in the field to perform on different types of o[bstacle] courses.  These courses would involve[] jumping up and down off high objects and low crawling on the ground."  

Based on the foregoing evidence, the Board finds that, prior to adjudicating the claims, the RO should have obtained VA medical opinions as to direct service connection for the Veteran's right and left hip strain.  This must be accomplished on remand.

Accordingly, the matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Provide the Veteran a VA Form 21-4142, Authorization for Release of Information, for completion, to obtain any outstanding private treatment records regarding the Veteran's sleep apnea from Dr. Yune-Gill Jeong.

2. Provide the Veteran a VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of her claimed sleep apnea.  The claims file, including a copy of this Remand, must be made available to, and be reviewed by, the examiner.

After a thorough review of the entire claims file and examination of the Veteran, the examiner is asked to:

(a)	Elicit from the Veteran and the record the history of her sleep disturbance symptoms during and since active service.

(b)	Identify all diagnoses pertaining to the Veteran's claimed sleep apnea.

(c)	For each diagnosis, provide an opinion as to whether it at least as likely as not (at least an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence) had its onset during or is otherwise related to the Veteran's active service, including physical training therein.

In providing this opinion, please consider the following evidence:

"	In an April 2022 private treatment record, the Veteran endorsed "some issues with snoring at nighttime but she also states that she is fatigued in the daytime.  She is concerned about having sleep apnea based on doctor[']s recommendation."  The private treatment provider diagnosed sleep disorder breathing and referred the Veteran for a sleep study.  

"	In her July 2022 claim application, the Veteran endorsed always feeling tired and snoring during service.  

"	In a July 2022 lay statement, the Veteran stated she was officially diagnosed with sleep apnea in June 2022, but that she believes her condition began during military service, noting that she would fall sleep and be very sleepy in the daytime, and that her spouse (at that time) told her she would snore and stop breathing while sleeping.  

"	In a July 2022 lay statement, the Veteran's ex-spouse, who was married to her during her military service, said he observed her snoring and that sometimes "she would [be] really qui[et] and I would shake her to wake her up."  

3. Provide the Veteran a VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of her claimed lumbar spine disability.  The claims file, including a copy of this Remand, must be made available to, and be reviewed by, the examiner.

After a thorough review of the entire claims file and examination of the Veteran, the examiner is asked to:

(a)	Elicit from the Veteran and the record the history of her low back symptoms during and since active service.

(b)	Identify all current lumbar spine diagnoses.

(c)	For each current diagnosis, provide an opinion as to the following:

a.	Whether it at least as likely as not (at least an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence) had its onset during or is otherwise related to the Veteran's active service.

b.	Whether it is at least as likely as not (at least an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence) caused by the Veteran's service-connected right total knee arthroplasty and/or left knee osteoarthritis.

c.	Whether it is at least as likely as not (at least an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence) aggravated (any incremental increase in disability regardless of permanence) by the Veteran's service-connected right total knee arthroplasty and/or left knee osteoarthritis

The examiner must consider any causal link between the Veteran's claimed lumbar spine disability and her service-connected right total knee arthroplasty and/or left knee osteoarthritis.

In providing these opinions, please consider the following evidence:

"	In a February 2022 private treatment record, the Veteran was assessed with low back pain radiating to both legs, and physical examination revealed spasms, tenderness, and decreased range of motion of the lumbar spine.  

"	In an April 2022 private treatment record, the Veteran was diagnosed with low back pain, and the provider (a physical therapist) determined that the mechanism of injury was that the osteoarthritis in the Veteran's bilateral knees was causing her back pain over time.  

"	In her July 2022 claim application, the Veteran asserted that her current lumbar spine disability was due to "[m]arching and pounding" in physical training during service.  

"	In a July 2022 lay statement, the Veteran wrote, "While serving in the military I was constantly walking and running up and down stairs [d]uring physical training at least three times per week.  My training included, but [was] not limited to[,] mountain climbing, sit ups, push-up[s,] [and] running at least five miles in full combat g[ear], sometimes with your rifle.  Sleeping on the ground in your sleeping bag on field training weeks.  I began noticing problems with my back around the late 80's at the time I didn't see a doctor, because I could take a pain pill and it would go away.  The pain began to get worse around the 90's, where my doctor would beg[i]n giving me steroid injections.  My doctor sent me to physical therapy a couple of times.  I am in bed at least 5 to 6 times per month from the pain."

4. Obtain an addendum VA medical opinion regarding the nature and etiology of the Veteran's right hip strain.  The claims file, including a copy of this Remand, must be made available to, and be reviewed by, the examiner.  If another examination is indicated, one must be provided to the Veteran.

After a thorough review of the entire claims file, the examiner is asked to provide opinions as to the following:

(a)	Whether the Veteran's right hip strain at least as likely as not (at least an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence) had its onset during or is otherwise related to the Veteran's active service.

(b)	Whether the Veteran's right hip strain is at least as likely as not (at least an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence) caused by her service-connected bilateral pes planus, right total knee arthroplasty, and/or left knee osteoarthritis.

(c)	Whether the Veteran's right hip strain is at least as likely as not (at least an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence) aggravated (any incremental increase in disability regardless of permanence) by the Veteran's service-connected bilateral pes planus, right total knee arthroplasty, and/or left knee osteoarthritis.

The examiner must consider any causal link between the Veteran's claimed right hip strain and her service-connected bilateral pes planus, right total knee arthroplasty, and/or left knee osteoarthritis.

In providing these opinions, please consider the following evidence:

"	In an April 2022 private treatment record, the Veteran was diagnosed with decreased bilateral hip range of motion, and the provider (a physical therapist) determined that the mechanism of injury was that the osteoarthritis in the Veteran's bilateral knees was causing her hip pain over time.  

"	In her July 2022 claim application, the Veteran asserted that her current bilateral hip disability was due to "[m]arching and pounding" in physical training during service.  

"	In a July 2022 lay statement, the Veteran indicated that she believed her hip pain "is a derivative of" her flat feet and osteoarthritis in the right and left knees.  She also wrote, "I believe all the running I did while on active duty contribute[d] to my hip pain.  Running on rough and uneven terrain during PT on uneven terrain as well.  Carry[ing] my duffle bag with all of my gear on my back and weapon at parade rest for five sometimes ten miles (two-three times per month) ... My unit would go out in the field to perform on different types of o[bstacle] courses.  These courses would involve[] jumping up and down off high objects and low crawling on the ground."  

5. Obtain an addendum VA medical opinion regarding the nature and etiology of the Veteran's left hip strain.  The claims file, including a copy of this Remand, must be made available to, and be reviewed by, the examiner.  If another examination is indicated, one must be provided to the Veteran.

After a thorough review of the entire claims file, the examiner is asked to provide opinions as to the following:

(a)	Whether the Veteran's left hip strain at least as likely as not (at least an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence) had its onset during or is otherwise related to the Veteran's active service.

(b)	Whether the Veteran's left hip strain is at least as likely as not (at least an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence) caused by her service-connected bilateral pes planus, right total knee arthroplasty, and/or left knee osteoarthritis.

(c)	Whether the Veteran's left hip strain is at least as likely as not (at least an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence) aggravated (any incremental increase in disability regardless of permanence) by the Veteran's service-connected bilateral pes planus, right total knee arthroplasty, and/or left knee osteoarthritis.

The examiner must consider any causal link between the Veteran's claimed left hip strain and her service-connected bilateral pes planus, right total knee arthroplasty, and/or left knee osteoarthritis.

In providing these opinions, please consider the following evidence:

"	In an April 2022 private treatment record, the Veteran was diagnosed with decreased bilateral hip range of motion, and the provider (a physical therapist) determined that the mechanism of injury was that the osteoarthritis in the Veteran's bilateral knees was causing her hip pain over time.  

"	In her July 2022 claim application, the Veteran asserted that her current bilateral hip disability was due to "[m]arching and pounding" in physical training during service.  

"	In a July 2022 lay statement, the Veteran indicated that she believed her hip pain "is a derivative of" her flat feet and osteoarthritis in the right and left knees.  She also wrote, "I believe all the running I did while on active duty contribute[d] to my hip pain.  Running on rough and uneven terrain during PT on uneven terrain as well.  Carry[ing] my duffle bag with all of my gear on my back and weapon at parade rest for five sometimes ten miles (two-three times per month) ... My unit would go out in the field to perform on different types of o[bstacle] courses.  These courses would involve[] jumping up and down off high objects and low crawling on the ground.

 

 

S. B. MAYS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	C. M. Gill, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.