Citation Nr: A25034499
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 240610-446219
DATE: April 15, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to special monthly compensation based on the need for regular aid and attendance is remanded.

Entitlement to special monthly compensation based on housebound status is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from December 1979 to November 1982.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a January 2024 decision issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In the June 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the January 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of entitlement to special monthly compensation, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Special Monthly Compensation

Special monthly compensation (SMC) is an additional level of compensation available to veterans, above the basic levels of compensation, for various types of losses or levels of impairment due solely to service-connected disabilities.  See 38 U.S.C. § 1114; see Breniser v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 64 (2011).  

In this case, the Veteran is service-connected for the following disabilities: persistent depressive disorder, lumbar strain with degenerative arthritis, right knee arthritis, chronic urinary tract infections, and menorrhagia.  In December 2023, she submitted a VA Form 21-2680, Examination for Housebound Status or Permanent Need for Regular Aid and Attendance, completed by Nurse Practitioner B.S.  See VA Form 21-2680 dated October 5, 2023.  B.S. listed the following conditions as permanent and totally disabling: systemic lupus, degenerative disc disease, and osteoarthritis of the knee.  The Board notes that the Veteran is not service-connected for systemic lupus, and the types of losses or levels of impairment due solely to her service-connected disabilities is not clear from the October 2023 examination.     

In addition to the above, the Veteran submitted a statement from her spouse attesting to being her caretaker for the last two years.  See Affidavit dated July 19, 2023.  The Veteran's spouse reported that the Veteran was unable to perform activities of daily living due to her service-connected mental disorder.  He stated that he managed her medication, and assisted her with bathing, dressing, preparation of food, and cleaning.  The statement from the Veteran's spouse does not appear to be consistent with contemporaneous VA treatment records, which note that the Veteran was independent in mobility, eating, toilet use, and personal hygiene.  See August 2023 VA note.  Notwithstanding such inconsistencies, later VA treatment records indicate the Veteran's family assisted her with bathing, dressing, cleaning, and cooking.  See September and October 2023 VA notes.   

The January 2024 decision on appeal denied the Veteran's claim for entitlement to SMC based on the need for regular aid and attendance.  The Board adds that, prior to issuing the January 2024 decision on appeal, the matter of entitlement to SMC based on housebound status was raised by the evidence.  However, the AOJ did not afford the Veteran a VA examination to determine the types of losses or levels of impairment due solely to her service-connected disabilities prior to issuing the decision on appeal.  In light of the evidence discussed above, the Board finds that remand is necessary to afford the Veteran a VA examination to correct this pre-decisional duty to assist error.  

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Schedule the Veteran for an appropriate examination to determine eligibility for SMC based on the need for regular aid and attendance of another person due to service-connected disabilities, or eligibility for SMC due to being housebound as a result of service-connected disabilities.  The examiner is asked to address the following types of losses or levels of impairment due solely to service-connected disabilities, including:

(a.) the inability to dress or undress herself and keep herself ordinarily clean and presentable;

(b.) requiring frequent adjustment of any special prosthetic or orthopedic appliances that cannot be done without aid;

(c.) inability to feed herself through loss of coordination of upper extremities or through extreme weakness, or inability to attend to the wants of nature;

(d.) incapacity, physical or mental, that requires care or assistance on a regular basis to protect her from hazards or dangers incident to her daily environment;

(e.) disability that requires that she remain in bed; 

(f.) substantial confinement to her dwelling and/or the immediate premises, and it is reasonably certain that the disability or disabilities and resultant confinement will continue throughout her lifetime.

 

 

M. C. WILSON

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	B. Mask, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.