Citation Nr: A25034754
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 231012-384117
DATE: April 15, 2025

ORDER

Service connection for a gastrointestinal disorder, to include chronic diarrhea, is granted.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a chronic fatigue disorder is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a chronic pain disorder is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

Resolving reasonable doubt in favor of the Veteran, his chronic diarrhea is the result of his active service.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for service connection for chronic diarrhea have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1117; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.304, 3.317.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from March 2001 to July 2001, February 2003 to January 2004, January 2004 to May 2005, May 2005 to April 2006, and June 2008 to August 2009, to include service in Southwest Asia. The Veteran was awarded the Meritorious Service Medal, Army Commendation and Achievement Medals, Afghanistan Campaign Medal, and Combat Action Badge among numerous others.

The rating decision on appeal was issued in October 2023 and constitutes an initial decision; by law, the modernized review system, governed by the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.

In an October 2023 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. By law, for claims appealed in this docket, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the October 2023 Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted after this time, then, by law, the Board was not permitted to consider that evidence in this decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

Because the Board is remanding the service connection claims for a chronic fatigue disorder and a chronic pain disorder, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of these claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Service Connection

Legal Criteria

Service connection is warranted for a disability due to a disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service. 38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.

To substantiate a claim of direct service connection there must be competent evidence showing: (1) the existence of a claimed disability; (2) incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury in active service; and (3) a causal relationship between the present claimed disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during active service. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

Certain chronic diseases may be presumed to be service connected if manifested as chronic in service or to a compensable degree within a specified period after active service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1112, 1113, 1137; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307, 3.309(a).  For chronic diseases listed in 38 C.F.R. § 3.309(a), service connection may be established by showing continuity of symptoms. See Walker v. Shinseki, 718 F.3d 1331 (Fed. Cir. 2013).

VA will pay compensation to a Persian Gulf veteran who exhibits objective indications of a qualifying chronic disability that manifest "during service on active duty in the Armed Forces in the Southwest Asia theater of operations during the Persian Gulf War" or to a degree of 10 percent or more before December 31, 2021. 38 U.S.C. § 1117; see 38 C.F.R. § 3.317(a); 82 Fed. Reg. 49121 (Oct. 24, 2017). A qualifying chronic disability is as a chronic disability that results from an undiagnosed illness or a medically unexplained chronic multisymptom illness (excluding structural gastrointestinal diseases). 38 C.F.R. § 3.317(a)(2)(i). 

A "medically unexplained chronic multisymptom illness" has been defined as a "diagnosed illness without conclusive pathophysiology or [cause], that is characterized by overlapping symptoms and signs and has features such as fatigue, pain, disability out of proportion to physical findings, and inconsistent demonstration of laboratory abnormalities." 38 C.F.R. § 3.317(a)(2)(ii). "Chronic multisymptom illnesses of partially understood [cause] and pathophysiology, such as diabetes and multiple sclerosis, will not be considered medically unexplained."  Id. 

Along with the three examples of a medically unexplained chronic multisymptom illness provided by Section 1117(a)(2)(B), Congress has provided a list of signs or symptoms that may be a manifestation of a medically unexplained chronic multisymptom illness that includes: skin symptoms, headaches, muscle pain, joint pain, neurologic symptoms, neuropsychological symptoms, respiratory system symptoms, sleep disturbances, gastrointestinal symptoms, cardiovascular symptoms, abnormal weight loss, and menstrual disorders. 38 U.S.C. § 1117(g); 38 C.F.R. § 3.317(b).

In addition, the Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxics Act of 2022 (PACT Act) provides that, if a veteran submits a claim for service connection with evidence of disability and evidence of participation in a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA), then VA shall obtain a medical opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not that there is a relationship between the disability and the TERA.

Factual Background

The Veteran asserted that he had chronic gastrointestinal disorder (also claimed as irritable bowel syndrome or IBS) due to his active service, to include his service in Southwest Asia. He reported that this condition was due to unsanitary conditions, stressful situations, fatigue, and fear.  See VA Form 21-526EZ June 23, 2023.

In April 2020, VA determined that the Veteran's service treatment records (STRs) from February 2003 to January 2004 and May 2005 to April 2006 were unavailable for review. 

In a case like this in which a claimant's service records are unavailable through no fault of his own, there is a heightened obligation for VA to assist the Veteran in the development of his claim and to provide reasons or bases for any adverse decision rendered without these records. See O'Hare v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 365, 367 (1991). However, this heightened obligation does not establish a heightened "benefit of the doubt" or lower the legal standard for proving a claim of service connection; rather, it increases the Board's obligation to evaluate and discuss in its decision all the evidence that may be favorable to the Veteran. See Russo v. Brown, 9 Vet. App. 46 (1996); Ussery v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 64 (1995).

In July 2023, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination. After reviewing the claims file, interviewing the Veteran, and conducting an examination, the examiner diagnosed the Veteran with chronic diarrhea. The examiner found that the Veteran's chronic diarrhea resulted in a functional impact that required him to be close to a bathroom all the time. While the examiner found that the Veteran did not have a diagnosis of irritable bowel syndrome, the examiner did not provide an opinion regarding the cause of the Veteran's chronic diarrhea.

Analysis

As discussed above, the Veteran had service in Southwest Asia.

The Veteran provided competent and credible reports about his objectively observable symptoms. He reported that he experienced diarrhea during his active service and continued to experience diarrhea to the present. The Board affords his statements significant probative value.

Accordingly, the Board finds the Veteran's symptoms associated with his diarrhea began in active service and persisted since that time, thus establishing a causal link to his active service. 

The evidence for and against the Veteran's claim that his chronic diarrhea began during his active service and persisted since his active service is at least evenly balanced ("in relative equipoise"). In these circumstances, the regulations dictate that reasonable doubt is to be resolved in the Veteran's favor.

Accordingly, the criteria are met to establish service connection for chronic diarrhea, and the claim is granted.

REASONS FOR REMAND

Regarding the Veteran's service connection claims for a chronic fatigue disorder and a chronic pain disorder, at a July 2023 VA examination, he reported having debilitating fatigue, generalized muscle aches or weakness, fatigue lasting 24 hours or longer after exercise, headaches, migratory joint pain, neuropsychological symptoms, sleep disturbance, and anger. The examiner reported that the Veteran did not have a diagnosis of either chronic fatigue syndrome or fibromyalgia. Unfortunately, the examiner did not consider whether any chronic fatigue and chronic pain complaints were an undiagnosed illness or a medically unexplained chronic multisystem illness.

Accordingly, the failure to properly develop the record in order to determine the cause of, if any, a chronic fatigue disorder or a chronic pain disorder, whether there is a relationship between any fatigue and pain complaints and the Veteran's TERA, or whether the Veteran's fatigue and pain complaints were an undiagnosed illness or a medically unexplained chronic multisystem illness is a pre-decisional duty to assist error, which requires a remand for corrective action.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Please request a medical opinion from a qualified clinician, regarding the nature and etiology of the Veteran's chronic fatigue disorder and chronic pain / fibromyalgia conditions.  A TERA examination and opinion pursuant to 38 U.S.C. § 1168(a) to ascertain whether any chronic fatigue disorder and/or chronic pain disorder is directly related to his active service, particularly his toxic exposure in Southwest Asia.

The entire claims file, including a copy of this remand, must be made available to the clinician, and the clinician should confirm that such records were reviewed.  If the clinician believes that a physical examination should be conducted to provide the requested opinions, one should be provided.

1. The clinician should address the following:

(a.) Identify by diagnosis each current fatigue disorder and pain disorder found on examination.

Diagnoses of chronic fatigue syndrome and fibromyalgia must be ruled in or excluded.

(b.) Are the fatigue and pain conditions at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) related to the Veteran's in-service exposure to toxins.

When providing this opinion, the examiner must consider:

(1) the total potential exposure through all applicable deployments; and

(2) the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran.

(c.) Is the current cluster of symptoms the Veteran is experiencing i) an undiagnosed illness; or ii) a medically unexplained chronic multisymptom illness that is defined by a cluster of signs or symptoms, such as: (1) chronic fatigue syndrome; or (2) fibromyalgia?  Why or why not?

(d.) If any fatigue disorder or pain disorder is determined to NOT be related to his active service, to include any TERA, is determined to NOT be an undiagnosed illness, and is determined to NOT be a medically unexplained chronic multisystem illness, identify the cause for the disability that is more likely, and explain why.

In rendering the opinions, the clinician should consider and include an analysis of the relevant treatment and medical records, including the service treatment records showing a diagnosis of fatigue or pain symptoms.  

The clinician should specifically address the Veteran's contention that his fatigue and pain resulted from exposure to unsanitary conditions, stress, or fear while serving in Southwest Asia/Afghanistan.  The clinician should consider all appropriate theories of causation.  If the clinician rejects the Veteran's lay statements, he/she should provide a reason for doing so.

A complete rationale for any opinions rendered must be provided.  If it is not possible for the clinician to provide an opinion without resorting to speculation, he or she should expressly indicate such, and provide a supporting rationale as to why that is so.

The examiner should discuss the findings of the previous VA examiner and the lay statements of the Veteran.

 

 

Colleen M. Glaser-Allen

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	T. Berryman, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.