Citation Nr: A25034776
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 240710-455590
DATE: April 15, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a lumbar spine condition is remanded.  

Entitlement to service connection for a bilateral knee condition is remanded.  

Entitlement to service connection for a bilateral hip condition is remanded.  

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Marine Corps from June 1972 to June 1976 and in the Air Force from February 1990 to June 1990.  

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a June 2024 rating decision issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).  In July 2024, the Veteran perfected appeal to the Board by filing a VA Form 10182 Notice of Disagreement (NOD), selecting Direct Review of the evidence by a Veterans Law Judge.  Thus, the Board will review evidence as of the date of the June 2024 rating decision.  

As a preliminary matter, the Board notes that while in a July 2024 statement, the Veteran was said to have expressed that the July 2024 NOD was submitted in error, and a July 2024 VA Form 20-0995 Supplemental Claim Application was intended to be submitted, an August 2024 VA notification letter informed the Veteran that his appeal was pending before the Board.  In this regard, the Board notes that a claimant or his or her authorized representative, if any, who disagrees with a prior VA decision may file a Supplemental claim by submitting in writing or electronically a complete application on a form prescribed by the Secretary any time after the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) issues notice of a decision, regardless of whether the claim is pending or has become finally adjudicated.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  

Hence, the Board refers the matter of the July 2024 VA Form 20-0995 Supplemental Claim Application back to the AOJ.  

On the other hand, an appeal may be withdrawn as to any or all issues involved in the appeal at any time before the Board promulgates a decision.  38 C.F.R. § 20.205.  Withdrawal may be made by the appellant or by his authorized representative.  Id.  However, the Veteran's July 2024 statement does not rise to the level of withdrawal of the current appeal.  A withdrawal of a claim must be "explicit, unambiguous, and done with full understanding of the consequences of such action on the part of the claimant."  DeLisio v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 45, 57 (2011).  To explain, appeal withdrawals must include the name of the veteran, the name of the claimant, the applicable VA file number, and a statement that the appeal is withdrawn. § 20.205.  If the appeal involves multiple issues, the withdrawal must specify that the appeal is withdrawn in its entirety, or list the issue(s) withdrawn from the appeal.  Id.  Here, the July 2024 statement did not indicate that the appeal is withdrawn.  Hence, the appeal is properly before the Boards jurisdiction for review.  

1. Entitlement to service connection for a lumbar spine condition is remanded.  

2. Entitlement to service connection for a bilateral knee condition is remanded.  

3. Entitlement to service connection for a bilateral hip condition is remanded.  

The Veteran contends that his claimed lumbar spine, bilateral knee and bilateral hip conditions are related to service, including as due to performing his military occupational specialty duties (MOS) of parachutist, tactical aircraft maintenance specialist and field radio operator, which required jumping.  

Turning to the service medical record of evidence, the June 1972 Report of Medical History does not reflect any pertinent reported symptoms or complaints, and the accompanying June 1972 report of medical examination for enlistment notes normal findings upon clinical evaluation.  A December 1972 service treatment record (STR) reflects the Veteran's report of pain in bilateral lower left and right quadrant.  A January 1974 STR reflects the Veteran's report of a right knee injury.  A July 1974 report of medical examination for jumping reflects normal findings upon clinical evaluation.  An October 1974 STR notes the Veteran's complaint of left knee pain.  A March 1975 STR reflects the Veteran's report of pain to the left shoulder and mid back.  The record notes that the Veteran performed a jump and pulled something.  An April 1976 STR reflects the Veteran's report of a lump on the left knee.  The Veteran's June 1976 report of medical examination notes normal findings upon clinical evaluation.  

A November 1987 Reserves treatment record notes that the Veteran has had left knee pain after running, since 1976.  

The Veteran underwent a VA back examination in May 2024, at which time a diagnosis of degenerative changes of the lumbar spine was rendered.  

The Veteran underwent a VA knee and lower leg conditions examination in May 2024, at which time a diagnosis of bilateral knee joint osteoarthritis was rendered.  

The Veteran underwent a VA hip and thigh conditions examination in May 2024, at which time a diagnosis of bilateral hip degenerative changes was rendered.  

The May 2024 examiner of the above examinations opined that the claimed conditions were less likely than not incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event or illness.  The examiner rationalized that there is no chronic arthritis/degenerative joint disease/degenerative condition noted in the STRs or on separation.  The examiner found that chronic care was not sought for the claimed conditions in the immediate years after leaving active duty.  The examiner indicated that the current x-rays did not reveal residual findings of an old injury from service.  The examiner gathered that the bilateral knee degenerative joint disease, degenerative changes of the bilateral hips and back are all age expected findings and unrelated to active duty from 1972 to 1976.  

Here, the Veteran essentially contends that his current degenerative conditions were incurred in service and have since continued.  For the showing of chronic disease in service there is required a combination of manifestations sufficient to identify the disease entity, and sufficient observation to establish chronicity at the time, as distinguished from merely isolated findings or a diagnosis including the word "Chronic."  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(b).  When the disease identity is established (leprosy, tuberculosis, multiple sclerosis, etc.), there is no requirement of evidentiary showing of continuity.  Id.  Continuity of symptomatology is required only where the condition noted during service (or in the presumptive period) is not, in fact, shown to be chronic or where the diagnosis of chronicity may be legitimately questioned.  Id.  When the fact of chronicity in service is not adequately supported, then a showing of continuity after discharge is required to support the claim.  Id.  

In this case, the May 2024 VA examiner did not discuss any of the STRs, beyond indicating that chronic conditions are not noted during the Veteran's first period of service.  The examiner then failed to acknowledge the Veteran's second period of service.  In so doing, the examiner also failed to address the Veteran's contention that his claimed conditions are due to his MOS responsibility that includes jumping.  

Under the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA) system, remand is required only to correct pre-decisional duty to assist errors.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802.  As part of its duty to assist, the assistance provided shall include providing a medical examination or obtaining a medical opinion when such an examination or opinion is necessary to make a decision on the claim.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(d).  

The Board finds that such is the case with the current appeal.  Specifically, here, the Board finds that the May 2024 VA opinion is inadequate, as the examiner failed to discuss the complete evidence of record, including discussing the STRs which note back, right knee, left knee and bilateral lower quadrant pain.  In each case where a veteran is seeking service-connection for any disability due consideration shall be given to the places, types, and circumstances of such veteran's service as shown by such veteran's service record, the official history of each organization in which such veteran served, such veteran's medical records, and all pertinent medical and lay evidence.  38 U.S.C §1154.  Accordingly, the Board finds that the examiner's rationale fails to provide a clear conclusion with supporting data and a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two.  Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 301 (2008).  Thus, the opinion is inadequate.  

Here, the Board finds that the record is insufficient to decide the claim.  With chronic disease shown as such in service so as to permit a finding of service connection, subsequent manifestations of the same chronic disease at any later date, however remote, are service connected, unless clearly attributable to intercurrent causes.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(b).  This rule does not mean that any manifestation of joint pain, any abnormality of heart action or heart sounds, any urinary findings of casts, or any cough, in service will permit service connection of arthritis, disease of the heart, nephritis, or pulmonary disease, first shown as a clearcut clinical entity, at some later date.  Id.  Thus, an adequate medical opinion is needed to address whether the Veteran's in-service symptoms were manifestations of his later diagnosed conditions.

Accordingly, VA is required to obtain an opinion when there is insufficient medical evidence to decide the claim, but the record otherwise contains competent evidence of a disability or recurrent symptoms, evidence of an in-service event, and evidence of an indication of a nexus.  See McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App.79, 83 (2006).  

The Board finds that a remand is necessary to obtain an adequate examination and/ or opinion.  

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Forward the claims file to an appropriately qualified VA clinician and request the clinician to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's claimed lumbar spine condition, bilateral knee and bilateral hip conditions.  The evidentiary record, including a copy of this remand, must be made available to and reviewed by the clinician.  The opinion must include a notation that this record review took place.  The necessity of an in-person examination is left to the discretion of the examiner.  The examiner is asked to provide an opinion as to:

Whether it is at least as likely as not that the claimed lumbar spine condition, bilateral knee and bilateral hip conditions had an onset during active service or is otherwise related to active service.  The examiner is asked to directly address the complete evidence of record, including the service treatment records that show treatment for the Veteran's back, right knee, left knee and bilateral lower quadrant pain, as well as the Veteran's contention that his claimed conditions are related to jumping in service.  

A complete rationale for all opinions provided is required.  

 

 

DELYVONNE M. WHITEHEAD

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Alli, Q.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.