Citation Nr: A25034470
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 231214-401806
DATE: April 15, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for low back disorder is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for radiculopathy, right lower extremity, to include as secondary to service-connected disability, is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from August 1971 to May 1973.

This matter comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a rating decision issued in August 2023 by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In May 2023, the Veteran submitted VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR) and requested review of a December 2022 rating decision.  In August 2023, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued an HLR decision, which considered the evidence of record at the time of the December 2022 rating decision.

In December 2023, the Veteran submitted a Notice of Disagreement using VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal and elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the December 2022 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision, which was subject to HLR. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  However, because the Board is remanding the claims on appeal, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

The Board notes the Veteran's representative submitted a letter to VA on October 31, 2024, indicating that she was withdrawing her representation of the Veteran.  VA regulations provide that, after the AOJ has certified an appeal to the Board, a representative may not withdraw services as representative in the appeal unless good cause is shown on motion.  38 C.F.R. § 20.608(b)(2).  In the instant case, the Veteran's representative has not presented good cause for the withdrawal and, therefore, for the sole express purpose of this adjudication of the Veteran's appeal, she remains recognized as the Veteran's representative in the issues noted on the title page of this decision.

1. Entitlement to service connection for back disorder is remanded.

2. Entitlement to service connection for radiculopathy, right lower extremity, to include as secondary to service-connected disability, is remanded.

The Veteran contends he started experiencing lower back pain in 1973 and reports that his current symptoms include pain from his lower back to his right knee, continuous itching and numbness, and pain that occasionally affects his left leg.  

In the August 2023 rating decision, the AOJ favorably found that a qualifying event, injury, or disease had its onset during the Veteran's service, as service treatment records documented treatment for lower back pain.  Also, the Veteran has been diagnosed with a disability.  Specifically, post-service private medical evidence from A.Z. shows a diagnostic assessment of lumbar degenerative disc disease with stenosis and radiculopathy of the bilateral lower extremities, and the VA examination documents a chronic lumbosacral strain and radiculopathy of the bilateral lower extremities.

During the March 1973 medical treatment, the Veteran reported lower back problems during a medical appointment while on active duty.  During the medical appointment, the Veteran reported that when lying down the pain would spread all up and down the Veteran's spine even to the stomach.  The Veteran also reported experiencing pain to the right side of the neck.  During another medical appointment in March 1973, the Veteran reported experiencing muscle spasms, and the examiner noted a long history of this problem that was treated with Valium.

A June 2019 VA treatment records noted the Veteran experiences constant, chronic and dull lower back pain at level of two out of 10.  Also, treatment records dated from December 2018 to May 2022 indicate the Veteran was being treated for chronic lower back/spine problem that was described as including aching and sharp pain that radiated to the Veteran's right leg and to his foot with a pain level of nine out of 10.  Further, during health screenings the Veteran had noted issues with falling due to weakness in his legs.  Treatment notes also show that an assessment plan was established to treat his low back pain due to his lumbar degenerative joint disease.

The Veteran was seen by a private practitioner, A. M., from January 2020 to November 2022.  During a June 2022 private examination, the Veteran complained of lower back/spine pain.  During the examination, a lumbar X-ray showed evidence of L3-L4 spondylolisthesis and L4-S1 degenerative disc disease.  Further, the physician noted that the Veteran would continue to be treated for back pain/lumbar radiculopathy. 

In August 2022, the Veteran was evaluated by a private physician for atherosclerosis of both lower extremities with intermittent claudication.  Further, the physician noted the Veteran's symptoms most likely are associated with radiculopathy stemming from his lumbar spine, and it was recommended that he continue to see an orthopedist.  

Per an October 2022 Disability Benefits Questionnaire, the Veteran was examined and diagnosed with radiculopathy bilateral lower extremity (femoral).  The VA examiner also noted a lumbosacral strain condition that was diagnosed in March 1973.  The examiner noted the Veteran's report that he started having lower back pain in 1973, and he currently experiences pain that is increased by prolonged sitting due to his inflammatory back pain strain.  Further, the examiner reviewed documentation that showed the Veteran reported some improvement with pain and spasms first reported in March 1973.  Further, the examiner noted that the Veteran's symptoms have stayed the same.

According to a December 2022 medical opinion, a VA examiner conducted a records review.  The examiner reported that the Veteran served on active duty from August 1971 to May 1973.  Further, the examiner noted the Veteran started having lower back pain in 1973, and he reviewed documentation showing some improvement with pain and spasms since March 1973.  In this regard, the examiner found relevant that there was no chronicity of care, with a 49-year gap.  Thus, the examiner opined it was less probable that the Veteran's current back condition was due to his in-service back condition.

Upon review, the Board finds the December 2022 opinion inadequate for the purpose of determining entitlement to service connection.  Here, the VA examiner failed to address the Veteran's lay statements regarding his symptoms since service and, instead, relied mainly on the absence of documentation of treatment.  The failure to obtain an adequate opinion constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  Additionally, as there is evidence that the Veteran's radiculopathy is secondary to his current back disorders, the issue of entitlement to service connection for such is inextricably intertwined with the remanded issue.  Therefore, remand is warranted for an addendum opinion addressing such matters. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action: 

Forward the record, to include a copy of this Remand, to an appropriate clinician for an addendum opinion addressing the nature and etiology of any current back disorder and associated radiculopathy.  After a review of the record, the clinician should address the following inquiries:

(a.) Identify all separate and distinct diagnoses related to the Veteran's lumbar spine, to include radiculopathy. 

(b.) For each diagnosis, provide an opinion as to whether it is at least at likely as not (likelihood is in approximate balance) that such had its onset in, or is otherwise related to, the Veteran's military service, to include any in-service lumbar injury and reports of chronic back pain. 

(c.) For the Veteran's lumbar degenerative disc disease, provide an opinion as to whether such manifested within one year of his separation from active duty in June 1966 (i.e., by June 1967).  If so, please describe the manifestations of such.

In offering such opinions, the clinician should consider the Veteran's reports regarding the onset and continuity of relevant symptomatology.  The clinician is advised that the sole basis of a negative opinion cannot be the lack of post-service treatment records demonstrating a continuity of care.

A rationale for any opinion offered should be provided.

 

M. M. Celli

Acting Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Simmons, Shanita K.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.