Citation Nr: A25034423
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 231220-459607
DATE: April 15, 2025

ORDER

New and relevant evidence having not been received, readjudication of the claim of entitlement to service connection for bilateral hearing loss is not warranted, and the claim is denied.  

Entitlement to service connection for a traumatic brain injury (TBI) is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for vision issues is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea as secondary to deviated septum (also claimed as acquired nasal deformity) is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for pyoderma is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a personality disorder is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for anxiety disorder is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for depression is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for dysthymia is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. In an unappealed November 2019 rating decision, service connection was denied for bilateral hearing loss.

2. At no time during the pendency of the claim does the Veteran have a current diagnosis related to a TBI and the record does not contain a recent diagnosis of disability prior to the Veteran's filing of the claim. 

3. At no time during the pendency of the claim does the Veteran have a current diagnosis related to vision issues and the record does not contain a recent diagnosis of disability prior to the Veteran's filing of the claim. 

4. At no time during the pendency of the claim does the Veteran have a current diagnosis related to sleep apnea and the record does not contain a recent diagnosis of disability prior to the Veteran's filing of the claim.

5. At no time during the pendency of the claim does the Veteran have a current diagnosis related to pyoderma and the record does not contain a recent diagnosis of disability prior to the Veteran's filing of the claim. 

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. New and relevant evidence has not been presented or secured sufficient to readjudicate a claim of service connection for bilateral hearing loss. 38 U.S.C. § 5108 (2024); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.156, 3.2501 (2024).

2. The criteria for service connection for a TBI have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107 (2024); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303 (2024).

3. The criteria for service connection for vision issues have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107 (2024); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303 (2024).

4. The criteria for service connection for sleep apnea have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107 (2024); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303 (2024).

5. The criteria for service connection for pyoderma have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107 (2024); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303 (2024).

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from April 2004 to November 2005.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a June 2022 rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In December 2023, the Veteran submitted VA Forms 10182 and appealed the June 2022 decision to the Board and elected the Direct Review option. In May 2024, the Veteran requested an extension of the one-year filing period of an appeal. In August 2024 correspondence, the Board determined that good cause was shown that permitted the Board to extend the one-year filing period for the filing of the VA Forms 10182. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the June 2022 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.302(a).

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

The Board notes that the claims for service connection for TBI, vision issues, sleep apnea as secondary to deviated septum (also claimed as acquired nasal deformity), pyoderma, a personality disorder, anxiety disorder, depression, and dysthymia were previously denied in a November 2019 decision. In the June 2022 rating decision, the AOJ determined that new and relevant evidence had been submitted with regard to these claims. The Board is bound by the AOJ's favorable findings. 38 U.S.C. § 5104A (2024); 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c) (2024).

New and Relevant Evidence - Bilateral Hearing Loss

In the November 2019 rating decision, entitlement to service connection for bilateral hearing loss was denied based on a VA examiner's opinion who found that bilateral hearing loss was less likely than not incurred in or caused by service. 

In the June 2022 rating decision, the AOJ determined that the previously denied claim of entitlement to service connection for hearing loss was not reopened based a on finding that the evidence submitted was not material because it had "no legitimate influence or bearing" regarding service connection for hearing loss. The AOJ did not find a link between his claimed right ear hearing loss disability and military service; determined that the Veteran did not have a left ear hearing loss disability for VA compensation purposes; and that the evidence did not show that the claimed hearing loss disability developed to a compensable degree within the specified time period after release from service to qualify for the presumption of service connection. Of note, left ear hearing loss was diagnosed at the time of the November 2019 rating decision. 

Evidence added to the record since the November 2019 rating decision includes additional private treatment reports and VA opinions. The private treatment reports do not include any opinions linking hearing loss to service and the new VA opinions are related to the claimed psychiatric disabilities. 

The Board finds that the additional evidence, while new, is not relevant. In this regard, the new evidence does not tend to prove or disprove a matter at issue in the claim of entitlement to service connection for bilateral hearing loss. As noted above, the presence of a current bilateral hearing loss disability was noted at the time of the November 2019 rating decision and a VA examiner opined that it was less likely than not incurred in or caused by service. Moreover, the additional private treatment reports added to the claims file since the November 2019 rating decision do not include an opinion linking bilateral hearing loss to service.  

Therefore, the Board finds that new and relevant evidence has not been presented or secured, and readjudication of the claim is not warranted. 38 U.S.C. § 5108; 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.

Service Connection Claims

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303. Service connection may be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).

The three-element test for service connection requires evidence of: (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166-67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

Service connection may also be established on a secondary basis for a disability which is proximately due to, or the result of, a service-connected disability. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a). Secondary service connection may also be established for a disorder which is aggravated by a service-connected disability; compensation may be provided for the degree of disability (but only that degree) over and above the degree of disability existing prior to the aggravation. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(b); Allen v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 374 (1995).

In order to prevail in a secondary service connection claim, the record must show: (1) evidence of a current disability; (2) evidence of a service-connected disability; and (3) medical nexus evidence establishing a connection between the service-connected disability and the current disability. See Wallin v. West, 11 Vet. App. 509, 512 (1998); see also Allen, 8 Vet. App. at 374.

In determining whether service connection is warranted for a disability, VA is responsible for determining whether the evidence supports the claim or is in relative equipoise, with the claimant prevailing in either event. See 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

1. TBI

The Veteran claimed entitlement to service connection for a TBI to include headaches.

As an initial matter, a claim for entitlement to service connection for headaches was addressed by the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) as a separate issue and is the subject of another Board decision and will therefore not be addressed as part of the claim for a TBI in this decision.

A review of the Veteran's service treatment reports (STRs) includes a normal clinical evaluation of the head at the Veteran's March 2004 entrance examination. The Veteran sustained head trauma in a motor vehicle accident in February 2005. A computed tomography (CT) scan of the head obtained in February 2005 was negative. The Veteran indicated that he was unsure whether he lost consciousness during the accident but noted he recalled staring blankly at the floor when treated at the hospital. He was going 45-50 miles per hour in a parking lot and struck the concrete base of a light pole when he looked down at his CD player. He reported some episodes of slurred speech, some numbness in his legs bilaterally, feeling as if he was in a dream-like state, and blurry vision. He was assessed with postconcussion syndrome and advised to avoid physical activity and further trauma. In early March 2005, the Veteran reported some occasional memory problems. He was assessed with postconcussion syndrome which was slightly improved. Later in March 2005, the Veteran reported some difficulty with smell, occasional poor memory, and depressed mood. The Veteran was assessed with postconcussion syndrome.  Clinical evaluation of the head was normal at the Veteran's September 2005 separation examination. The Veteran reported a head injury, memory loss, or amnesia and a period of unconsciousness or concussion on a report of medical history form prepared in conjunction with the separation examination. The examiner noted no loss of consciousness and decreased memory of the event, no seizures, and occasional twitching of hands. 

In October 2019, a VA examiner reviewed the Veteran's claims file and included a detailed recitation of the Veteran's in-service head trauma from his motor vehicle accident. The examiner, a physiatrist, indicated that the Veteran has never had a TBI. The examiner indicated that the available medical records do not clearly establish whether the Veteran met the criteria for a mild TBI/concussion condition or diagnosis. The examiner reported that the STRs and post service treatment reports are silent for a chronic, disabling TBI/concussion condition.  

Post service treatment reports from Corizon Health do not include any complaints, findings, or treatment for a TBI. 

In the present case, the evidence of record fails to demonstrate a current diagnosis related to a TBI at any time during the appeal period, and there is no probative evidence of a recent diagnosis of such disorder prior to the Veteran's claim. McClain v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 319 (2007); Romanowsky v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 289 (2013).

The Board has reviewed the record and concludes that the competent evidence of record does not reflect that the Veteran has a diagnosed TBI. Moreover, there is no evidence of record that suggests that the Veteran's symptoms were sufficient to cause any resulting disability or functional impairment. See Saunders v. Wilkie, No. 886 F.3d. 1356 (Fed. Cir. 2018). In the absence of proof of a present disability there can be no valid claim. Gilpin v. West, 155 F.3d 1353 (Fed. Cir. 1998); Brammer v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 223, 225 (1992).

The Board acknowledges the Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) holding in Saunders but does not find a basis for determining that there is functional impairment related to a diagnosis of a TBI. See Saunders v. Wilkie, supra. The Veteran's treatment records do not show that the Veteran has symptoms which impact his earning capacity as due to a TBI. As such, the Veteran's complaints of a TBI do not amount to a functional impairment of earning capacity, and Saunders is not applicable in this case. In addition, the record does not reflect, and the Veteran did not allege, that he suffered from impairment of earning capacity due to his claimed TBI nor impairment that was of similar severity, frequency, and duration as those VA has determined by regulation would cause impaired earning capacity in an average person. Wait v. Wilkie, 33 Vet. App. 8 (2020).

The Board notes that the Veteran is competent to report his own symptoms or matters within his personal knowledge. See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372 (Fed. Cir. 2007); Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331 (Fed. Cir. 2006). In addition, laypersons may, in some circumstances, opine on questions of diagnosis and etiology. See Davidson v. Shinseki, 581 F. 3d 1313 (Fed. Cir. 2009).

However, the matter of a medical diagnosis for a disability not capable of lay observation, such as that of TBI is a matter within the province of trained medical professionals. See Jones v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 134 (1994). In the instant case, there is no suggestion that the Veteran has developed an expertise in the diagnosis of a TBI. Therefore, as the Veteran does not have the appropriate medical training and expertise to competently diagnose a TBI, the lay assertions in this regard have no probative value. Jandreau, supra at 1377 n.4 ("[s]ometimes the layperson will be competent to identify the condition where the condition is simple, for example a broken leg, and sometimes not, for example, a form of cancer"); see also Woehlaert v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 456 (2007).

The Board emphasizes that Congress has specifically limited entitlement to service connection for disease or injury to cases where such incidents have resulted in disability. See 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131. Thus, where, as here, the probative evidence indicates that the Veteran does not have current diagnosis of a TBI for the entire appeal period, there can be no valid claim for service connection. See Gilpin v. West, supra; Brammer v. Derwinski, supra.

Accordingly, the Board finds that the benefit-of-the-doubt rule is not applicable as the evidence is not in approximate balance, and entitlement to service connection for a TBI is not warranted. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b) (2024); Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc).

2. Service Connection - Vision Issues, Sleep Apnea

The Veteran claimed entitlement to service connection for vision issues and sleep apnea. 

A review of the Veteran's STRs reveals normal clinical evaluations of the eyes and lungs at the Veteran's March 2004 entrance examination and September 2005 separation examination. The Veteran's corrected near and distant vision was 20/20 at both examinations. The Veteran was noted to require glasses on a report of medical history form prepared in conjunction with the separation examination. The Veteran did not have any complaints, findings, or treatment related to vision issues and sleep apnea. 

Post service treatment reports from Corizon Health do not include any reference to complaints, findings, or treatment for visions issues and sleep apnea. 

In the present case, the evidence of record fails to demonstrate current diagnoses related to vision issues and sleep apnea at any time during the appeal period, and there is no probative evidence of recent diagnoses of such disorders prior to the Veteran's claims. McClain v. Nicholson, supra; Romanowsky v. Shinseki, supra.

The Board has reviewed the record and concludes that the competent evidence of record does not reflect that the Veteran has diagnosed vision issues or sleep apnea. Moreover, there is no evidence of record that suggests that the Veteran's symptoms were sufficient to cause any resulting disability or functional impairment. See Saunders v. Wilkie, No. 886 F.3d. 1356 (Fed. Cir. 2018). In the absence of proof of a present disability there can be no valid claim. Gilpin v. West, 155 F.3d 1353 (Fed. Cir. 1998); Brammer v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 223, 225 (1992).

The Board acknowledges the Court's holding in Saunders but does not find a basis for determining that there is functional impairment related to a diagnosis of vision issues and sleep apnea. See Saunders v. Wilkie, supra. The Veteran's treatment records do not show that the Veteran has symptoms which impact his earning capacity as due to vision issues and sleep apnea. As such, the Veteran's complaints of vision issues and sleep apnea do not amount to a functional impairment of earning capacity, and Saunders is not applicable in this case. In addition, the record does not reflect, and the Veteran did not allege, that he suffered from impairment of earning capacity due to his claimed vision issues and sleep apnea nor impairment that was of similar severity, frequency, and duration as those VA has determined by regulation would cause impaired earning capacity in an average person. Wait v. Wilkie, 33 Vet. App. 8 (2020).

The Board notes that the Veteran is competent to report his own symptoms or matters within his personal knowledge. See Jandreau v. Nicholson, supra; Buchanan v. Nicholson, supra. In addition, laypersons may, in some circumstances, opine on questions of diagnosis and etiology. See Davidson v. Shinseki, supra.

However, the matter of a medical diagnosis for a disability not capable of lay observation, such as that of vision issues and sleep apnea is a matter within the province of trained medical professionals. See Jones v. Brown, supra. In the instant case, there is no suggestion that the Veteran has developed an expertise in the diagnosis of vision issues and sleep apnea. Therefore, as the Veteran does not have the appropriate medical training and expertise to competently diagnose vision issues and sleep apnea, the lay assertions in this regard have no probative value. Jandreau, supra at 1377 n.4 ("[s]ometimes the layperson will be competent to identify the condition where the condition is simple, for example a broken leg, and sometimes not, for example, a form of cancer"); see also Woehlaert v. Nicholson, supra.

The Board emphasizes that Congress has specifically limited entitlement to service connection for disease or injury to cases where such incidents have resulted in disability. See 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131. Thus, where, as here, the probative evidence indicates that the Veteran does not have current diagnosis of vision issues and sleep apnea for the entire appeal period, there can be no valid claim for service connection. See Gilpin v. West, 155 F.3d 1353 (Fed. Cir. 1998); Brammer v. Derwinski, supra.

Accordingly, the Board finds that the benefit-of-the-doubt rule is not applicable as the evidence is not in approximate balance, and entitlement to service connection for vision issues and sleep apnea is not warranted. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b) (2024); Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc).

3. Service Connection - Pyoderma

The Veteran claimed entitlement to service connection for pyoderma. 

A review of the Veteran's STRs reveals a normal clinical evaluation of the skin at the Veteran's March 2004 entrance examination. The Veteran was assessed with pyoderma in November 2004. Clinical evaluation of the skin was normal at the Veteran's September 2005 separation examination. 

Post service private treatment reports from Corizon Health do not reveal any complaints, findings, or treatment for any skin conditions including pyoderma. 

At a VA examination in October 2019, the examiner noted that the Veteran was treated for pyoderma on one occasion during service with no evidence of a chronic or current skin condition. Clinical evaluation of the skin was normal with no visible characteristic lesions. The examiner indicated that the claimed skin condition did not cause any functional impact. The examiner concluded that there were no current complaints or objective findings to support a diagnosis for the claim of pyoderma. The examiner indicated that based on the available medical records and Veteran report, there is a lack of medical evidence with grossly normal examination findings to support a diagnosis for a chronic skin or pyoderma condition. The longitudinal medical evidence available for review revealed one acute self-limited episode in November 2004 of pyoderma that was treated and not likely to result in a chronic disability. 

In the present case, the evidence of record fails to demonstrate a current diagnosis related to pyoderma or any other skin condition at any time during the appeal period, and there is no probative evidence of a recent diagnosis of such disorder prior to the Veteran's claim. McClain v. Nicholson, supra; Romanowsky v. Shinseki, supra.

The Board has reviewed the record and concludes that the competent evidence of record does not reflect that the Veteran has a diagnosed skin condition including pyoderma. Moreover, there is no evidence of record that suggests that the Veteran's symptoms were sufficient to cause any resulting disability or functional impairment. See Saunders v. Wilkie, No. 886 F.3d. 1356 (Fed. Cir. 2018). In the absence of proof of a present disability there can be no valid claim. Gilpin v. West, 155 F.3d 1353 (Fed. Cir. 1998); Brammer v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 223, 225 (1992).

The Board acknowledges the Court's holding in Saunders but does not find a basis for determining that there is functional impairment related to a diagnosis of pyoderma. See Saunders v. Wilkie, supra. The Veteran's treatment records do not show that the Veteran has symptoms which impact his earning capacity as due to pyoderma. As such, the Veteran's complaints of pyoderma do not amount to a functional impairment of earning capacity, and Saunders is not applicable in this case. In addition, the record does not reflect, and the Veteran did not allege, that he suffered from impairment of earning capacity due to his claimed pyoderma nor impairment that was of similar severity, frequency, and duration as those VA has determined by regulation would cause impaired earning capacity in an average person. Wait v. Wilkie, 33 Vet. App. 8 (2020).

The Board notes that the Veteran is competent to report his own symptoms or matters within his personal knowledge. See Jandreau v. Nicholson, supra; Buchanan v. Nicholson, supra. In addition, laypersons may, in some circumstances, opine on questions of diagnosis and etiology. See Davidson v. Shinseki, supra.

However, the matter of a medical diagnosis for a disability not capable of lay observation, such as that of pyoderma is a matter within the province of trained medical professionals. See Jones v. Brown, supra. In the instant case, there is no suggestion that the Veteran has developed an expertise in the diagnosis of pyoderma. Therefore, as the Veteran does not have the appropriate medical training and expertise to competently diagnose pyoderma, the lay assertions in this regard have no probative value. Jandreau, supra at 1377 n.4 ("[s]ometimes the layperson will be competent to identify the condition where the condition is simple, for example a broken leg, and sometimes not, for example, a form of cancer"); see also Woehlaert v. Nicholson, supra.

The Board emphasizes that Congress has specifically limited entitlement to service connection for disease or injury to cases where such incidents have resulted in disability. See 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131. Thus, where, as here, the probative evidence indicates that the Veteran does not have current diagnosis of pyoderma for the entire appeal period, there can be no valid claim for service connection. See Gilpin v. West, 155 F.3d 1353 (Fed. Cir. 1998); Brammer v. Derwinski, supra.

Accordingly, the Board finds that the benefit-of-the-doubt rule is not applicable as the evidence is not in approximate balance, and entitlement to service connection for pyoderma is not warranted. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b) (2024); Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc).

REASONS FOR REMAND

A review of the claims file reveals that a remand is necessary to correct predecisional duty to assist errors with regard to the claims for service connection for a personality disorder, anxiety disorder, depression, and dysthymia.

A review of the Veteran's STRs reveals various diagnoses during service including a personality disorder, anxiety disorder, depression, and dysthymia. The Veteran's March 2004 entrance examination and September 2005 separation examination revealed normal psychiatric evaluations. The Veteran endorsed nervous trouble of any sort (anxiety or panic attacks) and depression or excessive worry on a report of medical history form prepared in conjunction with the separation examination.   

Post service private treatment reports from Fulton State Hospital reveals diagnoses of psychotic disorder not otherwise specified, rule out schizoaffective disorder, and rule out paranoid type schizophrenia in December 2010. 

At a VA examination in March 2021, the Veteran was diagnosed with moderate recurrent major depressive disorder with anxious distress. The examiner indicated that the psychiatric disorder preexisted service due to significant abuse the Veteran endured growing up and was as likely as not incurred in service based on his STRs which note that he struggled in service. The examiner noted that there was no noticeable psychosis in the evaluation and the Veteran denied psychosis and the examiner declined to diagnose a psychotic disorder. She indicated that anxiety was subsumed by his depressive disorder and the psychiatric disorder was best accounted for by depressive disorder and it was not necessary to diagnose depressive disorder and dysthymic disorder. She concluded that depressive disorder clearly and unmistakably preexisted service and was aggravated beyond its natural progression during service. She based the decision on the Veteran's STRs which document treatment for psychiatric symptoms in service and the continuation of symptoms since service. The examiner failed to discuss whether a personality disorder was present and/or provide an opinion as to whether the diagnosed recurrent major depressive disorder was superimposed on top of the Veteran's diagnosed personality disorder while in service. Moreover, the examiner opined that the diagnosed major depressive disorder preexisted service. In light of the normal psychiatric evaluation at the Veteran's entrance to service, the examiner's opinion is not adequate. When VA undertakes to provide a Veteran with an examination, that examination must be adequate for VA purposes. Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007). As such, an addendum opinion is required to address these deficiencies.  

An addendum VA opinion was obtained in May 2021 at which time the examiner opined that depression was less likely than not caused by the Veteran's service. The examiner acknowledged that the Veteran had difficulty adjusting to military life and experienced depression in service, but she indicated that he was discharged from service under an honorable discharge due to misconduct. The examiner stated that there was no medical evidence to suggest that the claimant's current depression was caused by his service and concluded that the depression was likely better accounted for by the instability of his lifestyle, his impulsive behavior, antisocial behaviors, and his lengthy incarceration. However, the examiner provided no rationale for her conclusion as there was also no evidence that depression was accounted for by instability of his lifestyle, his impulsive behavior, antisocial behaviors, and his lengthy incarceration. Moreover, she failed to discuss the Veteran's psychiatric symptoms and treatment in service and since that time. When VA undertakes to provide a Veteran with an examination, that examination must be adequate for VA purposes. Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007). As such, an addendum opinion is required to address these deficiencies.  

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Submit the Veteran's claims file to an appropriate VA examiner to determine the etiology of his claimed psychiatric disorders. The record, to include a copy of this Remand, must be made available to and be reviewed by the examiner. The need for further examination is left to the discretion of the examiner.

Thereafter, the examiner is asked to furnish an opinion with respect to the following questions:

(a) Identify the Veteran's currently diagnosed psychiatric disorder(s) or address whether he has had any such diagnosis at any time during the pendency of his claim. If the examiner determines that a diagnosis previously of record is not warranted, he or she should reconcile that with the record.

(b) For every diagnosed psychiatric disorder, is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that it had its onset in service or is etiologically related to service? The examiner should address the Veteran's treatment for variously diagnosed personality disorder, anxiety disorder, depression, and dysthymia during service.

(c) For any personality disorder, the examiner should also opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran has an additional disability due to a disease or injury superimposed upon a personality disorder as a result of service.

The examiner must reconcile any conflicting medical evidence of record.

A clear rationale for all opinions must be provided, and a discussion of the facts and medical principles involved would be of considerable assistance. If the examiner opines that any of the above questions cannot be resolved without resorting to speculation, then a detailed medical explanation as to why this is so must be provided.

A rationale should be provided for any opinion offered. If it is not possible to provide a specific opinion regarding the above questions, the examiner must state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training).

The medical opinion must support the conclusions reached with an analysis that is adequate to consider and weigh against other evidence of record; medical opinions must contain not only clear conclusions with supporting data, but also a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two. If an opinion cannot be expressed without resort to speculation, ensure that the clinician so indicates and discusses why an opinion is not possible, to include whether there is additional evidence that could enable an opinion to be provided, or whether the inability to provide the opinion is based on the limits of medical knowledge. 

 

 

D. JOHNSON

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	A. Cryan, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.