Citation Nr: A25034725
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 240705-454713
DATE: April 15, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a lumbar spine disorder is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from September 2009 to September 2014.  

This appeal to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) is from a July 18, 2023, rating decision of a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO), which is the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).  On the July 2024 VA Form 10182, the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. 

As such, the Board's review is limited to the evidence of record at the time of the issuance of the rating decision on appeal (July 18, 2023). 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. The Board cannot consider evidence submitted during the period after the issuance of the decision on appeal (on or after July 19, 2023). Id. If evidence was associated with the claims file during a period of time when additional evidence was not allowed, the Board has not considered it in its decision on the claim. 38 C.F.R. § 20.300.  However, because this case is being remanded, any evidence that is not considered by the Board at this time will be considered by the AOJ upon readjudication of this claim. 

?

The Board observes that the Veteran has claimed entitlement to service connection for a lumbar spine disorder on a direct basis, stating that he believes his lumbar spine disorder was caused by rucking with heavy packs, extensive training, and carrying and lifting large humans during service. The Veteran's DD Form 214 shows that his military occupational specialty (MOS) was infantryman, so his assertions are consistent with the circumstances of his service. See 38 U.S.C. § 1154(a).  Also, the July 2023 rating decision on appeal includes the favorable finding that the Veteran has a current diagnosis of a lumbar strain. The Board is bound by this favorable finding.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).  Accordingly, the first two elements of service connection are satisfied in this case.

By way of history, the Veteran claimed service connection for a lumbar spine disorder previously and was denied on a direct basis in a February 2023 rating decision. At the time, the AOJ determined that the evidence of record did not support ordering a VA examination to determine whether the Veteran had a lumbar spine disorder and if so, the etiology of any identified disorder. 

The Veteran filed the current claim for service connection for a lumbar spine disorder and the AOJ developed the claim by having the Veteran undergo a VA lumbar spine examination in May 2023. The examiner confirmed a diagnosis of a lumbar strain, however, the AOJ requested that the examiner provide an opinion as to whether the Veteran's lumbar spine disorder is due to his conceded toxic exposure risk activities (TERAs) based on his deployment locations. Resultantly, the examiner only provided an opinion as to a TERA, the examiner did not opine as to direct service connection. In this regard, the examiner's opinion is inadequate, as it does not clearly address the Veteran's raised contentions regarding relation to service.  Specifically, the May 2023 VA opinion does not address the Veteran's contention or lay statements. Further, at the May 2023 VA examination, the Veteran reported that he believes his lumbar spine disorder is due to the circumstances of his service, specifically, the physical aspects of his MOS, and that his pain onset during service and has continued since. The examiner's failure to address this aspect in his opinion renders the opinion inadequate.

?

Additionally, the Board observes that in rendering the negative TERA opinion, the May 2023 VA examiner stated that "[lumbar sprain and lumbar strain] can result from a sudden injury or from gradual overuse." This appears to contemplate the Veteran's assertion that his lumbar spine disorder is the result of overuse during military service as a possible etiological cause, although, again, the examiner failed to otherwise discuss this aspect of the case.

Moreover, the AOJ's failure to request an addendum or clarification prior to adjudication on this aspect of the case is a clear and obvious pre-decisional error.  See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007); Kowalski v. Nicholson, 19 Vet. App. 171, 179 (2005) (a VA examination must be based on an accurate factual premise); see also Robinson v. Peake, 21 Vet. App. 545, 552 (2008), aff'd sub nom. Robinson v. Shinseki, 557 F.3d 1355 (Fed. Cir. 2009) (recognizing VA's duty to consider all issues raised either by the claimant or by the evidence of record).  A remand is therefore necessary to correct this glaring oversight by the AOJ.

Finally, the Board acknowledges the May 2023 private positive nexus opinion concerning the Veteran's lumbar spine. However, while the private practitioner opined that the Veteran's lumbar spine disorder is directly due to his military service due to the circumstances of his service and an onset of pain during service with chronicity of symptoms, the rationale does not actually address why the physical aspects of the Veteran's service caused his lumbar spine disorder, nor does it identify any chronicity of symptomatology, other than stating that there is a chronicity of symptomatology. 

This opinion is insufficient, alone, to warrant a grant of service connection. See Guerrieri v. Brown, 4 Vet. App. 467 (1993) (the probative value of medical opinion evidence is based on the medical expert's personal examination of the patient, the physician's knowledge and skill in analyzing the data, and the medical conclusion the physician reaches.); Hernandez-Toyens v. West, 11 Vet. App. 379, 382 (1998) (the failure of the physician to provide a basis for his/her opinion affects the weight or credibility of the evidence); Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 302-04 (2008) (holding that it is the factually accurate, fully articulated, sound reasoning for the conclusion that contributes to the probative value of a medical opinion); Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 124 (2007) ("[A]medical opinion... must support its conclusion with an analysis that the Board can consider and weigh against contrary opinions").

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination from an appropriate clinician in order to determine whether any lumbar spine disorder, including lumbosacral strain, is related to military service. The examiner must review the claims file and a copy of this remand. All tests deemed necessary should be conducted and the results reported in detail.

After review of the claims file and examination of the Veteran, the examiner should state any and all lumbar spine disorders found, to include lumbosacral strain.

Thereafter, the examiner should opine whether any identified lumbar spine disorder, including (but not limited to) a lumbosacral strain, began in service, within one year of discharge therefrom, or is otherwise the result of military service, to include the physical aspects of the Veteran's service as an infantryman such as rucking with heavy packs, extensive training, and lifting and carrying large humans, and that his pain onset during service and has continued since. 

In this regard, the examiner must specifically consider and address the Veteran's lay statements regarding onset of his symptomatology and any continuity of symptomology since onset and/or since discharge from service. 

?

The examiner must provide thorough explanations and support for all opinions expressed. 

 

 

MARTIN B. PETERS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	K. Pak

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.