Citation Nr: A25034831
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 230830-375461
DATE: April 15, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an effective date earlier than March 26, 2018, for the award of service connection for bilateral dry eye syndrome is denied.  

Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 10 percent for bilateral dry eye syndrome is denied.  

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The first communication from the Veteran expressing intent to file a claim of service connection for bilateral dry eye syndrome was received by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) on March 26, 2018.  

2. Throughout the period on appeal, the Veteran's bilateral dry eye disability was manifested by corrected distance visual acuity of 20/40 or better in each eye, with average concentric contraction of visual field of no worse than 55 degrees in the right eye and 49 degrees in the left eye.  There was no evidence of impairment of muscle function or incapacitating episodes in either eye.  

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. An effective date prior to March 26, 2018, for the award of service connection for bilateral dry eye syndrome is not warranted.  38 U.S.C. §§ 5101, 5110;            38 C.F.R. §§ 3.151, 3.155, 3.400.  

2. Throughout the period on appeal, a rating in excess of 10 percent for the Veteran's bilateral dry eye syndrome is not warranted.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.7, 4.79, Diagnostic Code (Code) 6080.  

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The appellant is a Veteran who served on active duty from July 1990 to June 1994 and December 2004 to January 2006.  This matter is before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal of an August 2022 rating decision.  In an August 2023 VA Form 10182, the Veteran selected Direct Review of the evidence.  Therefore, the Board's review of the evidence is limited to the evidence considered at the time of the August 2022 rating decision.  

The Board notes that the Veteran's bilateral dry eye syndrome claim was initially in the Legacy system.  A November 2018 rating decision denied service connection for bilateral dry eye syndrome, and in December 2019, the Veteran submitted a Notice of Disagreement (NOD) for the November 2018 rating decision.  Although a Statement of the Case was not issued in response to the Veteran's NOD, the Regional Office (RO) adjudicated the issue and granted service connection under the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA) in the August 2022 rating decision on appeal.  

1. Entitlement to an effective date earlier than March 26, 2018, for the award of service connection for bilateral dry eye syndrome is denied.  

The Veteran seeks an earlier effective date for the grant of service connection for bilateral plantar fasciitis.  He has asserted that it should be January 20, 2006, the day after he was discharged from service.  

Except as otherwise provided, the effective date of an award of compensation based on an original claim will be the date of receipt of the claim or the date entitlement arose, whichever is the later (emphasis added).  38 U.S.C. § 5110;      38 C.F.R. § 3.400.  If a claim is received within one year following separation, the effective date of an award of compensation shall be the day following separation from service or the date entitlement arose, whichever is later.  38 U.S.C. § 5110(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.400(b)(2).  

A specific claim in the form prescribed by the Secretary must be filed in order for benefits to be paid or furnished to any individual under laws administered by VA. 38 U.S.C. § 5101(a); 38 C.F.R. § 3.151(a).  The term "claim" or "application" means a formal or informal communication in writing requesting a determination of entitlement or evidencing a belief in entitlement to a benefit.  38 C.F.R. § 3.1(p).  

Prior to March 24, 2015, (the effective date of the change in VA regulations regarding claims) any communication or action indicating an intent to apply for one or more benefits under the laws administered by VA, from a Veteran or his representative, could be considered an informal claim.  Such informal claim must have identified the benefit sought.  38 C.F.R. § 3.155.  

An effective date of an award of service connection is not based on the earliest medical evidence showing a causal connection, but on the date that the application upon which service connection was eventually awarded was filed with VA.  Lalonde v. West, 12 Vet. App. 377, 382 (1999).  

In other words, the critical question in this matter is when did the Veteran first file a claim seeking service connection for bilateral dry eye syndrome (as the effective date of an award of service connection cannot be earlier than the date of receipt of the claim, unless the claim was filed within one year following separation from service or if the award of compensation is due to a liberalizing change in the law or an administrative issue).  

An April 2006 eye consultation notes that the Veteran reported periorbital pain almost daily for about one year.  He related that the pain was about 8-9/10 in severity and wakes him up from sleep.  The Veteran reported mild photophobia when exposed to bright lights and occasional flashes of light in both eyes.  A head MRI was normal.  The Veteran was previously prescribed Nortriptyline with some relief, and he reported experiencing tearing in both eyes.  Blurry vision was not reported, although he did report using glasses for reading in the past year.  On evaluation, the Veteran's pupils measured 4 mm in both eyes.  He had 20/20 vision in both eyes, and refraction was 20/15 in both eyes.  The Veteran's visual field was full in both eyes, and the external examination was within normal limits in both eyes.  There was a conjunctive inclusion cyst in the right eye and a small, hazy, irregularly bordered, stromal opacity around 4:00 in the paracentral left eye.  There was a small superficial tear in the iris of the left eye.  There was lens trace nuclear sclerosis and trace cortical changes in both eyes.  The intraocular pressure was 15 in the right and 13 in the left.  The provider indicated that no findings on current examination would explain the Veteran's severe periorbital pain.  It was noted that the Veteran had very mild refractive error in his eyes and that he should follow up in 1-2 years.  

A January 2007 VA treatment record notes that the Veteran reported that his ears and eyes hurt and that he "got the symptoms" in Iraq.  

A June 2008 VA treatment record notes that the Veteran reported headaches that radiated to his whole head and that he felt strain in his eyes.  

A December 2011 VA treatment record notes that the Veteran's extraocular eye movements were intact, his pupils were normal, and his fundi were normal.  

A February 2013 VA treatment record notes that the Veteran reported chronic headaches and dry eyes that caused pain.  

A July 2013 VA treatment records notes that the Veteran reported blurry near and far vision and episodic bilateral black out of vision lasting 6-7 seconds, during which time he was not able to see a flashlight shined in his eyes.  He related that he had approximately 16 episodes a month up to twice a day, and he noted that such episodes only occur when it is dark, generally while driving at night.  Left eye mid peripheral nebular leukoma was noted, and the impression was episodic visual loss.  

Subsequent to March 24, 2015, when the Veteran would have been required to file a claim in the form prescribed by the Secretary, treatment records show treatment for various eye disorders.  However, a close review of the record shows that the first communication from the Veteran to VA expressing intent to seek service connection for bilateral dry eye syndrome was received on March 26, 2018.  

An April 2015 VA visual field examination notes that the Veteran had 20/20 vision in his right and left eyes and that his previous episodes of "black out" vision in either eye had cleared.  He reported 30-second episodes of blurring and tearing in either eye, and the impression was dry eye disease.  

A June 2015 VA treatment record notes that the Veteran denied eye pain in both eyes.  

A July 2015 VA treatment record notes that the Veteran had a prescription for drops for his dry eyes.  

An April 2016 VA treatment record notes that the Veteran reported blurred vision and a periodic loss of vision.  It was also noted that he had a prescription for drops for his dry eyes.  

A June 2017 VA treatment record notes that the Veteran denied blurry vision, dry eyes, and double vision.  

An additional June 2017 VA treatment record notes that the Veteran had a prescription for polyvinyl alcohol for dry eyes.  

A March 2018 VA treatment record notes that the Veteran reported no vision problems, no eye movement symptoms, no irritation of the eyes, no pain in or around the eyes, no watery eyes, and no red eyes.  

The Board acknowledges that the Veteran began seeking VA treatment for eye problems prior to March 24, 2015, but the record does not show that he filed a formal or informal application for service connection for bilateral dry eye syndrome prior to that date.  Under 38 C.F.R. § 3.155 and prior to March 2015, an informal claim was a communication or action expressing an intent to apply for a benefit administered by VA and had to identify the benefit sought.  There is no provision in VA law for a medical record of VA diagnosis or treatment for a disability to be considered a claim of service connection for such disability without a communication or action by the Veteran expressing intent to file a claim.  As records of the treatment for bilateral dry eye syndrome prior to March 24, 2015, do not include a communication from him expressing intent to file a claim for service connection for such disability, they may not be considered an informal claim for service connection.  Under such circumstances the effective date of an award of service connection is not based on the earliest medical evidence of treatment for the disability at issue, but on the date that the application upon which service connection was awarded was filed with VA.  See Lalonde v. West, 12 Vet. App. 377, 382-383 (1999).  

Additionally, as noted above, the evidence of record does not show that the Veteran filed a formal claim after March 24, 2015, and prior to March 26, 2018.  

Notably, the Veteran filed claims for service connection for other disabilities between his separation from service and March 24, 2015.  In January 2006, he filed claims, in part, for a psychiatric disorder, tuberculosis, and a respiratory disorder, and in November 2008 he filed claims, in part, seeking an increased rating for a psychiatric disorder, and seeking service connection for headaches, anxiety, an index finger injury, and a respiratory disorder.  In March 2007, he filed another claim seeking increased ratings for his right knee disability and chronic sinusitis, and service connection for bilateral hearing loss, tinnitus, and sleep apnea.  Thereafter, he filed multiple claims that were adjudicated prior to the rating decision on appeal.  The filing of these claims shows he was familiar with the VA claims process; nothing in the record reflects that a claim seeking service connection for bilateral dry eye syndrome was sent to, or received by, VA prior to March 26, 2018.  

The Board is bound by governing law and regulations and has no authority to award benefits not authorized by governing law.  Because the Veteran is not shown to have filed a formal or informal application for service connection for bilateral dry eye syndrome prior to March 26, 2018, VA is precluded from granting an earlier effective date for the grant of service connection for that disability, and the appeal in this matter must be denied.  

2. Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 10 percent for bilateral dry eye syndrome is denied.  

The Veteran asserts that a rating in excess of 10 percent is warranted for bilateral dry eye syndrome.  

Disability ratings are determined by applying the criteria set forth in the VA Schedule for Rating Disabilities (Schedule), found in 38 C.F.R. Part 4.  The Schedule is primarily a guide in the evaluation of disability resulting from all types of diseases and injuries encountered as a result of or incident to military service.  The ratings are intended to compensate, as far as can practicably be determined, the average impairment of earning capacity resulting from such diseases and injuries and their residual conditions in civilian occupations.  38 U.S.C. § 1155;    38 C.F.R. § 4.1.  Where there is a question as to which of two evaluations shall be applied, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria for that rating.  Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7.  When reasonable doubt arises as to the degree of disability, such doubt will be resolved in the Veteran's favor.  38 C.F.R. § 4.3.  

In considering the severity of a disability, it is essential to trace the medical history of the Veteran.  38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.41.  Consideration of the whole-recorded history is necessary so that a rating may accurately reflect the elements of any disability present.  38 C.F.R. § 4.2; Peyton v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 282 (1991).  Although the regulations do not give past medical reports precedence over current findings, the Board is to consider the Veteran's medical history in determining the applicability of a higher rating for the entire period in which the appeal has been pending.  Powell v. West, 13 Vet. App. 31, 34 (1999).  

When the appeal is from the initial rating assigned with an award of service connection, the entire period from the initial assignment of the disability rating to the present is to be considered, and "staged" ratings may be assigned based on facts found.  See Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. at 125-26 (1999).  

Evaluations of defective vision from noncompensable to 100 percent based on organic impairment of visual acuity (excluding developmental errors of refraction), visual field, and muscle function.  38 C.F.R. §§ 4.76(a), 4.79.  The examination for visual impairment must be conducted by a licensed optometrist or by a licensed ophthalmologist and the examiner must identify the disease, injury, or any other pathologic found.  38 C.F.R. § 4.76(b).  Examination of visual fields or muscle function will be conducted only when there is a medical indication of disease or injury that may be associated with visual field defect or impaired muscle function.  Id.  Unless medically contraindicated, the fundus must be examined with the Veteran's pupils dilated.  Id.  

The Veteran's bilateral dry eye syndrome is rated under 38 C.F.R. § 4.79, Code 6080.  Under Diagnostic Code 6080, visual field defects are evaluated as follows:

A 10 percent evaluation for concentric contraction of visual field with remaining field of 46 to 60 degrees bilaterally or unilaterally; with remaining field of 31 to 45 degrees unilaterally; with remaining field of 16 to 30 degrees unilaterally; loss of superior half of visual field bilaterally or unilaterally; loss of interior half of visual field unilaterally; loss of nasal half of visual field bilaterally or unilaterally; and loss of temporal half of visual field unilaterally.  

A 20 percent evaluation if assigned for concentric contraction of visual field with remaining field of 6 to 15 degrees unilaterally.  

A 30 percent evaluation is assigned for concentric contraction of visual field with remaining field of 31 to 45 degrees bilaterally; remaining field of 5 degrees unilaterally; loss of inferior half of visual field bilaterally; loss of temporal half of visual field bilaterally; and homonymous hemianopsia visual field defects.  

A 50 percent rating is assigned for concentric contraction of visual field with remaining field of 16 to 30 degrees bilaterally.  

A 70 percent rating is assigned for concentric contraction of visual field with remaining field of 6 to 15 degrees bilaterally.  

A 100 percent rating is assigned for concentric contraction of visual field with remaining field of 5 degrees bilaterally.  

With respect to field of vision impairment, 38 C.F.R. § 4.76a, Table III, reflects that the normal visual field extent at the 8 principal meridians totals 500 degrees.  The normal for the 8 principal meridians are as follows: 85 degrees temporally; 85 degrees down temporally; 65 degrees down; 50 degrees down nasally; 60 degrees nasally; 55 degrees up nasally; 45 degrees up; and 55 degrees up temporally.  The extent of visual field contraction in each eye is determined by recording the extent of the remaining visual fields in each of the eight 45-degree principal meridians.  The degrees lost are then added together to determine the total number of degrees lost, which are subtracted from 500.  The total remaining degrees of the visual field are then divided by eight to represent the average contraction for rating purposes.  38 C.F.R. § 4.76a.  

To determine the evaluation for visual impairment when both decreased visual acuity and visual field defect are present in one or both eyes and are service connected, separately evaluate the visual acuity and visual field defect (expressed as a level of visual acuity) and combine them under the provisions of § 4.25.        38 C.F.R. § 4.77 I.  

VA issued a final rule revising the portion of the VA Schedule for Rating Disabilities that addresses the organs of special sense and schedule of ratings-eye.  89 Fed. Reg. 15316 (Apr. 10, 2018).  The final rule went into effect May 13, 2018.  The Board notes that the rating criteria for Code 6080 was not affected by the amendments.  

The evaluation of visual impairment is based on impairment of visual acuity (excluding developmental errors of refraction), visual field, and muscle function.  38 C.F.R. § 4.75(a).  

Evaluation of visual acuity is based on corrected distance vision with central fixation.  38 C.F.R. § 4.76 (b)(1).  The measurements for each eye are applied to the table for Impairment of Central Visual Acuity.  Generally, the table is divided into steps corresponding to different levels of visual acuity for one eye, and each step is further divided into subsections of visual acuity for the other eye, with corresponding ratings.  The rater will first locate the step that matches the visual acuity of the poorer eye.  Within that step, the rater will then locate the subsection that matches the visual acuity of the better eye, which will produce the corresponding rating.  Where a reported visual acuity is between two sequentially listed visual acuities, the visual acuity which permits the higher evaluation will be used.  38 C.F.R. § 4.76(c).  

When the lens required to correct distance vision in the poorer eye differs by more than three diopters from the lens required to correct distance vision in the better eye (and the difference is not due to congenital or developmental refractive error), and either the poorer eye or both eyes are service connected, the visual acuity of the poorer eye will be evaluated using either its uncorrected or corrected visual acuity, whichever results in better combined visual acuity.  38 C.F.R. § 4.76(b)(1).  

Provided that the claimant customarily wears contact lenses, evaluate the visual acuity of any individual affected by a corneal disorder that results in severe irregular astigmatism that can be improved more by contact lenses than by eyeglasses, as corrected by contact lenses.  38 C.F.R. § 4.76(b)(2).  

Evaluations of visual impairment of muscle function is based on the degree of diplopia.  

Where there are documented incapacitating episodes requiring at least 1 but less than 3 treatment visits for an eye condition during the past 12 months, a 10 percent rating is warranted.  Where there are documented incapacitating episodes requiring at least 3 but less than 5 treatment visits for an eye condition during the past 12 months, a 20 percent rating is warranted.  Where there are documented incapacitating episodes requiring at least 5 but less than 7 treatment visits for an eye condition during the past 12 months, a 40 percent rating is warranted.  Where there are documented incapacitating episodes requiring 7 or more treatment visits for an eye condition during the past 12 months, a 60 percent rating is warranted.  

Note (1) indicates that, for the purposes of evaluations under 38 C.F.R. § 4.79, an incapacitating episode is an eye condition severe enough to require a clinic visit to a provider specifically for treatment purposes.  Note (2) indicates that examples of treatment may include but are not limited to: systemic immunosuppressants or biologic agents; intravitreal or periocular injections; laser treatments; or other surgical interventions.  Note (3) indicates that, for the purposes of evaluating visual impairment due to a particular condition, refer to 38 C.F.R. § 4.75-4.78 and to        § 4.79, Codes 6061-6091.  

For evaluations of restrictions in muscle functions, the examiner must use a Goldmann perimeter chart or the Tangent Screen method that identifies the four major quadrants (upward, downward, left, and right lateral) and the central field (20 degrees or less).  The examiner must document the results of muscle function testing by identifying the quadrant(s) and range(s) of degrees in which diplopia exists.  38 C.F.R. § 4.78(a).  

A June 2018 VA treatment record notes that the Veteran reported no vision problems, no eye movement symptoms, no irritation of the eyes, no pain in or around the eyes, no watery eyes, and no red eyes.  

An August 2019 VA treatment record notes that the Veteran's distance vision was 20/20 in both eyes and his best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 20/20 in his right and left eyes.  Extraocular movement was full and there were no apparent holes or tears in either eye.  The provider also noted that there was no background diabetic retinopathy in either eye.  

A December 2019 VA treatment record notes that the Veteran denied blurry vision, dry eyes, and double vision.  

On September 2020 VA eye conditions examination, bilateral dry eye syndrome and bilateral cataracts were diagnosed.  The Veteran reported that his dry eyes (watery eyes) started about 15 years ago and that his blurred vision has progressively worsened since then.  He related that he used over the counter artificial tear drops.  On evaluation, his uncorrected distance, corrected distance, uncorrected near, and corrected near vision were 20/40 in each eye.  The Veteran did not have a difference equal to two or more lines on the Snellen test type chart or its equivalent between distance and near corrected vision, with the near vision being worse.  His pupils measured 3mm in each eye and were round and reactive to light, and no afferent pupillary defect was present.  The Veteran did not have anatomical loss, light perception only, extremely poor vision or blindness of either eye.  He did not have a corneal irregularity that results in severe irregular astigmatism and did not have diplopia.  Tonometry showed right eye pressure was 18 and left eye pressure was 21.  Slit lamp examination was abnormal.  The external examination, conjunctiva, anterior chamber, and iris were normal in each eye.  The cornea showed patchy tear film associated with dry eyes, and the lens showed +2 nuclear sclerotic cataract (NSC) in each eye.  The fundus was normal in each eye, and the Veteran did not have a documented visual field defect.  He did not have a disorder of the lacrimal apparatus, to include epiphora and dacryocystitis.  The Veteran had dry eye syndrome in both eyes, and the examiner noted that he has not had elective procedures.  He had a decrease in visual acuity or other visual impairment attributable to dry eye syndrome which was described as blurred vision and tearing.  The Veteran had preoperative cataracts in both eyes, and no aphakia or dislocation of the crystalline lens was shown.  The examiner indicated that the decrease in visual acuity or other visual impairment was attributable to cataracts because blurred vision was secondary to the cataracts.  No scarring or disfigurement was found to be attributable to an eye condition, and it was noted that the Veteran had not had any incapacitating episodes attributable to an eye condition in the past 12 months.  The examiner opined that the Veteran's eye disorders had no functional impact.  

An April 2021 VA treatment record notes that the Veteran reported no vision problems, no eye movement symptoms, no irritation of the eyes, no pain in or around the eyes, no watery eyes, and no red eyes.  

On April 2022 VA eye conditions examination, bilateral cataracts and bilateral dry eye syndrome were diagnosed.  The examiner noted that the Veteran has had cataracts and dry eyes for several years and that neither condition was visually significant.  The Veteran related that he used over the counter artificial tears to treat his dry eyes.  On evaluation, his uncorrected distance vision, corrected distance vision, and corrected near vision was 20/20 or better in each eye.  The Veteran's uncorrected near vision was 20/50 in each eye.  He did not have a difference equal to two or more lines on the Snellen test type chart or its equivalent between distance and near corrected vision, with the near vision being worse.  The Veteran's pupil diameter was 3mm in each eye, they were round and reactive to light, and an afferent pupillary defect was not present.  He did not have anatomical loss, light perception only, extremely poor vision or blindness of either eye, did not have a corneal irregularity that results in severe irregular astigmatism, and did not have diplopia.  Tonometry showed right and left eye pressure of 20.  Goldmann applanation was used.  The slit lamp examination was abnormal.  The external examination showed minimal tear meniscus in each eye, the cornea showed tear break-up time (TBUT) of 8 seconds in each eye, and each lens showed trace NSC.  The conjunctiva, anterior chamber, and iris were normal in each eye, and the internal eye examination was normal in each eye.  The Veteran did not have a documented visual field defect and did not have a disorder of the lacrimal apparatus, to include epiphora and dacryocystitis.  The examiner noted that he had dry eye syndrome in each eye and that there was no decrease in visual acuity or other visual impairment due to his dry eye syndrome.  It was noted that the Veteran also had preoperative cataracts in both eyes.  There was no pseudophakia or aphakia or dislocation of the crystalline lens, and there was no decrease in visual acuity or other visual impairment.  There was also no scarring or disfigurement attributable to any eye condition.  During the past 12 months, the Veteran had not had any incapacitating episodes attributable to an eye condition.  The examiner opined that the Veteran's eye disorders had no functional impact.  

On July 2022 VA eye conditions examination, bilateral dry eye syndrome and bilateral nuclear sclerotic cataracts were diagnosed.  The Veteran reported that he experienced dry, irritated, eyes while on deployment in 2004 to Iraq.  He was treated with non-preserved artificial tears and continues to use them once a day to help with the dry eyes.  The Veteran related that he wore eyeglasses mainly to read and was told within the last few years that he had cataracts during a routine eye examination.  He described his main limitations as difficulty reading, using a computer and driving.  

On examination, the Veteran's uncorrected distance vision and corrected distance vision were 20/20 or better in each eye.  His uncorrected near vision was 20/50 in the right eye and 20/40 in the left eye, and his corrected near vision was 20/20 or better in each eye.  The Veteran did not have a difference equal to two or more lines on the Snellen test type chart or its equivalent between distance and near corrected vision, with the near vision being worse.  His pupils were 4 mm in diameter in each eye and were round and reactive to light. An afferent pupillary defect was not present.  The Veteran did not have anatomical loss, light perception only, extremely poor vision or blindness of either eye, and he did not have a corneal irregularity that resulted in severe irregular astigmatism.  He did not have diplopia, and tonometry showed right and left eye pressure of 12.  Goldmann applanation was used.  Slit lamp examination was abnormal.  External examination, cornea, anterior chamber, and iris examinations were normal in each eye.  Conjunctive examination showed low tear meniscus and reduced TBUT in each eye.  Lens examination showed nuclear sclerotic cataract, mild, in each eye. Internal eye examination was normal.  

The Veteran has a documented field defect.  Visual field testing was performed using Goldmann's equivalent III/4e target.  He was found to not have contraction of a visual field.  Up was 41 degrees in the right eye and 31 degrees in the left eye.  Up Temporally was 60 degrees in the right eye and 48 degrees in the left eye.  Temporally was 69 degrees in the right eye and 68 degrees in the left eye.  Down Temporally was 70 degrees in the right eye and 63 degrees in the left eye.  Down was 58 degrees in the right eye and 57 degrees in the left eye.  Down Nasally was 36 degrees in the right eye and 33 degrees in the left eye.  Nasally was 57 degrees in the right eye and 43 degrees in the left eye.  Up Nasally was 50 degrees in the right eye and 49 degrees in the left eye.  

Adding the remaining visual field at each principal meridian results in a total remaining visual field of 441 degrees for the right eye.  Dividing 441 by 8 and rounding to the nearest whole number, results in an average concentric contraction of 55 degrees of the visual field for the right eye.  Adding the remaining visual field at each principal meridian results in a total remaining visual field of 392 degrees for the left eye.  Dividing 392 by 8 and rounding to the nearest whole number, results in an average concentric contraction of 49 degrees of the visual field for the left eye.  

The Veteran did not have loss of a visual field.  He did not have a scotoma and did not have legal blindness based upon visual field loss.  The Veteran did not have a disorder of the lacrimal apparatus, to include epiphora and dacryocystitis.  The Veteran's decrease in visual acuity or other visual impairment was not attributable to a lacrimal system condition.  He was found to have dry eye syndrome in both eyes, and the examiner noted that the Veteran's decrease in visual acuity or other visual impairment was attributable to dry eye syndrome because the dry eye syndrome was most likely the cause of his symptoms of blurred vision while reading and using a computer.  The Veteran had preoperative cataracts in each eye.  No replacement intraocular lens was found in either eye, and there was no aphakia or dislocation of the crystalline lens in either eye.  The cataracts were mild and not to the level of currently limiting the Veteran's vision.  During the past 12 months, the Veteran had not had any incapacitating episodes attributable to an eye condition.  Regarding functional impact, the examiner opined that the Veteran's dry eye syndrome would reduce his productivity while reading and using a computer for extended periods of time.  

The Board notes that the Veteran's remaining visual field during the period on appeal was, at worst, 55 degrees in his right eye and 49 degrees in his left eye.  Under Code 6080, a 10 percent rating is warranted for bilateral visual field defect with remaining visual field between 46 and 60 degrees.  Therefore, his visual field defect only warrants the currently assigned 10 percent evaluation, and a higher, 20 percent rating, is not warranted.  

Additionally, the Veteran's 20/20 and better visual acuity bilaterally on April 2022 and July 2022 VA examinations and 20/40 bilateral visual acuity on September 2020 VA examination, warrants a noncompensable rating under the table for rating impairment of central visual acuity.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.79, Codes 6061-6066.  The Board notes that visual acuity is to be evaluated based on the corrected distance vision with central fixation.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.76(b)(1).  Therefore, a separate or higher rating based on impairment of visual acuity is not warranted.  Moreover, the Veteran's disability has not resulted in other visual impairment and has not caused any incapacitating episodes.  

Although the Veteran's eye condition involves the lacrimal apparatus and could be rated analogously under Code 6025 which notes that a 10 percent rating is warranted for unilateral involvement and a 20 percent rating is warranted for bilateral involvement of a lacrimal apparatus disorder, no VA examiner during the period on appeal determined that he had a disorder of the lacrimal apparatus, such as epiphora and dacryocystitis, which would allow for a higher rating under Code 6025.  

Therefore, the currently assigned 10 percent disability rating for bilateral dry eye syndrome under Code 6080 is appropriate, and the Veteran is not entitled to a higher rating.  

The Board notes the Veteran is competent and credible to describe the observable symptoms of his service-connected eye disability.  See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1376-77 (Fed. Cir. 2007).  However, he is not competent to state that his bilateral dry eye syndrome warrants a higher rating because such an opinion requires medical expertise and knowledge that he has not been shown to possess.  See Kahana v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 428, 435 (2011).  Moreover, the Veteran, has not provided any argument or evidence to support the assignment of a rating higher than 10 percent under Code 6080.  As such, the Board finds the competent medical evidence of record adequate for decision making purposes and assigns it significant probative value.  See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 302 (2008).  Therefore, the Board finds that a rating higher than 10 percent is not warranted under Code 6080 or the General Rating Formula for Disease of the Eye.  

As the evidence is persuasively against the claim, the reasonable doubt doctrine is not for application, and a rating higher than 10 percent for the service-connected bilateral dry eye syndrome is denied.  

The Board notes that in his August 2023 VA Form 10182, the Veteran indicated that service connection should be granted for his bilateral cataracts.  The August 2022 rating decision on appeal indicated that the Veteran's claim seeking service connection for bilateral cataracts remained pending and would be addressed at a later date.  Subsequently, a March 2023 rating decision granted service connection effective March 26, 2018, for nuclear sclerotic cataracts, combined the evaluation for cataracts with the 10 percent rating for bilateral dry eye syndrome, and continued the 10 percent rating.  In a March 2024 VA Form 10182, the Veteran appealed the March 2023 rating decision to the Board and indicated that he was seeking an earlier effective date and higher rating for the cataracts.  

Therefore, the Board finds that the Veteran's bilateral cataracts claim is being addressed in a separate appeals stream and no further discussion regarding his bilateral cataracts is necessary.  

 

John R. Doolittle, II

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Bayles, James J.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.