Citation Nr: A25034306
Decision Date: 04/14/25	Archive Date: 04/14/25

DOCKET NO. 240716-456205
DATE: April 14, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for tinnitus (claimed as ringing in ears) is granted.

Entitlement to service connection for gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for right ankle pain is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for athlete's foot is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for low back strain is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for right wrist condition is denied.

Entitlement to an initial disability rating in excess of 30 percent for asthma is denied.

Entitlement to an initial compensable rating for atopic dermatitis (claimed as skin condition) is denied.

Entitlement to a compensable rating for right pinky finger strain, status post dislocation (claimed as right hand condition), is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral flatfoot (also claimed as foot pain) is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for headaches is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for neck strain is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for left ankle pain is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a psychiatric disorder is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea is remanded.

Entitlement to an initial compensable rating for chronic rhinitis (claimed as allergies) is remanded.

Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 20 percent for right shoulder strain is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. Resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, his tinnitus began during active service.

2. The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that GERD began during active service or is otherwise related to an in-service injury, event, or disease.

3. The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that right ankle pain began during active service, or is otherwise related to an in-service event, injury, or disease.

4. The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran has had athlete's foot or any related disability at any time during or approximate to the pendency of the claim.

5. The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that low back strain began during active service or is otherwise related to an in-service injury, event, or disease.

6. The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran has had a right wrist disability or any related disability at any time during or approximate to the pendency of the claim.

7. The Veteran's service-connected asthma manifested in Pulmonary Function Test (PFT) result of FEV-1 of no less than 61 percent predicted, and FEV-1/FVC of 58 percent predicted.

8. The Veteran's atopic dermatitis is manifested by skin condition covering less than 5 percent of the total body area, and none of the exposed area.

9. During the appeal period, the Veteran's right pinky finger strain has been manifested by painful motion, but ankylosis is not shown.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for service connection for tinnitus have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1112, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.307, 3.309.

2. The criteria for service connection for GERD have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1117, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.317.

3. The criteria for service connection for right ankle have not been met.  38?U.S.C. §§?1110, 5107; 38?C.F.R. §§?3.102, 3.303.

4. The criteria for service connection for athlete's foot have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

5. The criteria for service connection for low back strain have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

6. The criteria for service connection for right wrist condition have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

7. The criteria for an initial disability rating in excess of 30 percent for service-connected asthma have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.96, 4.97, Diagnostic Code 6602.

8. The criteria for an initial compensable disability rating for atopic dermatitis have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.118, Diagnostic Code 7806.

9. The criteria for a compensable rating for right pinky finger strain have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5230.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from January 2010 to January 2011.  He also served a period of active duty for training from March 2007 to July 2007.  

This matter is on appeal to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from November 2023 rating decisions issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).  In the July 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran timely appealed the portion of the rating decisions pertaining to the issues above and requested direct review of the evidence considered by the RO.  38 C.F.R. § 20.202.  

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the November 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decisions on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  

Evidence was added to the claims file during a period of time when new evidence was not allowed.  As the Board is deciding the claims of service connection for tinnitus, GERD, right ankle, athlete's foot, low back strain, right wrist, and increased rating for asthma, atopic dermatitis, and right pinky finger strain, it may not consider this evidence in its decision.  38 C.F.R. § 20.300.  The Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.  

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of service connection for bilateral flatfoot, headaches, neck strain, left ankle, depression, and sleep apnea, and increased rating for chronic rhinitis and right shoulder strain, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).  

In the July 2024 Notice of Disagreement, the Veteran also requested to appeal the issue of increased rating for left shoulder strain and listed the August 2011 as the decision on appeal.  However, the left shoulder strain appeal is untimely as the August 2011 rating decision was issued more than a year before the July 2024 Notice of Disagreement.  As such, the issue of increased rating for left shoulder strain is not on appeal.  38 C.F.R. §§ 3.156, 20.202, 20.302, 20.1103.  

Service Connection

Generally, to establish service connection, a claimant must show: (1) a present disability; (2) an in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service, the so-called "nexus" requirement.  See 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303; see also Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004).  A disability that is proximately due to, the result of, or aggravated by a service-connected disease or injury shall be service connected.  38 C.F.R. § 3.310.  

VA has established certain rules and presumptions for chronic diseases, such as organic disease of the nervous system like tinnitus.  See 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303(b), 3.307, 3.309(a); Walker v. Shinseki, 708 F.3d 1331, 1338 (Fed. Cir. 2013).  With chronic diseases shown as such in service so as to permit a finding of service connection, subsequent manifestations of the same chronic disease at any later date, however remote, are service connected, unless attributable to intercurrent causes.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(b).  If chronicity in service is not established, a showing of continuity of symptoms after discharge may support the claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(b).  In addition, for veterans who have served 90 days or more of active service during a war period or after December 31, 1946, chronic diseases are presumed to have been incurred in service if they manifested to a compensable degree within one year of separation from service.  38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307(a)(3), 3.309(a).    

1. Tinnitus

The Veteran contends that he has ringing in ears that was related to service, to include as due to exposure to loud noise.  See May 2023 Fully Developed Claim.  

Tinnitus is a noise in the ears, such as ringing, buzzing, roaring, or clicking.  YT v. Brown, 9 Vet. App. 195, 196 (1996).  Tinnitus is the type of disability that is capable of lay observation.  Charles v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 370, 374 (2002).  

The Veteran has a current tinnitus disability.  For example, during the June 2023 VA examination he was diagnosed with recurrent tinnitus.  Thus, the remaining question is whether the Veteran's tinnitus is related to service.  

In this case, the Veteran reported that he was exposed to loud noise from mortars, rocket fires, and weapons systems while deployed.  See May 2023 Fully Developed Claim.  He reported that his ringing in his ears have been present since service and have also worsened.  Id.  The Board has no reason to doubt the Veteran's reports of experiencing tinnitus during service and presently and finds these statements credible.  

In the June 2023 VA examination, the examiner opined that the claimed tinnitus condition was less likely than not caused by or a result of military noise exposure.  The examiner noted that the Veteran reported routine noise exposure to helicopters, aircraft, mortars, and firearms that lasted up to a full day and several days per week.  The Veteran reported that he was a right-handed shooter and did have hearing protection while in service.  The examiner noted that the Veteran's MOS of Transportation Management Coordinator had a low probability for hazardous noise exposure.  The examiner further noted that his hearing was within normal limits during the examination which does not corroborate acoustic trauma.  In the absence of objectively verifiable noise injury, the examiner concluded that the association between claimed tinnitus and noise exposure cannot be assumed to exist.  Tinnitus may occur following a single exposure to high-intensity impulse noise, long-term exposure to repetitive impulses, long-term exposure to continuous noise, or exposure to a combination of impulses and continuous noise.  However, you would have to accept the scientifically unsubstantiated theory that tinnitus occurred as a result of some latent, undiagnosed noise injury.  

Upon review of the evidence of record, the Board finds that service connection for tinnitus is warranted.  The June 2023 VA medical opinion is acknowledged.  However, as tinnitus, a chronic disease, was present during service based on the competent lay statement of the Veteran and is present currently, and is not clearly attributable to an intercurrent cause, service connection is granted.  See 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303(b), 3.309(a); see also Fountain v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 258, 271 (2015); Walker v. Shinseki, 708 F.3d 1331 (Fed. Cir. 2013).  

2. GERD

The Veteran contends that he has GERD that was caused by his active-duty service.  See May 2023 Fully Developed Claim.  He stated that he started having really bad acid reflux and stomach pain issues.  Id.  

The question for the Board is whether the Veteran has a current disability that began during service or is at least as likely as not related to an in-service injury, event, or disease.

The Board concludes that, while the Veteran has a current diagnosis of GERD, the evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran's GERD began during service or is otherwise related to an in-service injury, event, or disease.  

The Veteran is a Persian Gulf Veteran and is presumed to have been exposed to toxic exposure.  See December 2022, January 2023, May 2023, September 2023 VA Memo.  

Service connection may be warranted for a Persian Gulf veteran who exhibits objective indications of a qualifying chronic disability that became manifest to any degree at any time.  38 U.S.C. § 1117.  For purposes of section 3.317, there are two types of qualifying chronic disabilities: (1) an undiagnosed illness, and (2) a medically unexplained chronic multi symptom illness (MUCMI).  38 C.F.R. § 3.317(a)(2).  

Signs or symptoms which may be a manifestation of an undiagnosed illness or MUCMI include fatigue, signs or symptoms involving the skin, muscle pain, joint pain, sleep disturbances, and neurological signs or symptoms.  38 C.F.R. § 3.317(b).  

An undiagnosed illness is defined as a condition that by history, physical examination, and laboratory tests cannot be attributed to a known clinical diagnosis.  There must also be objective indications of chronic disability, which include both "signs," in the medical sense of objective evidence perceptible to an examining physician, and other, non-medical indicators that are capable of independent verification.  38 C.F.R. § 3.317(a)(3).  

A MUCMI is defined by a cluster of signs or symptoms, such as: (1) chronic fatigue syndrome, (2) fibromyalgia, and (3) functional gastrointestinal disorders (excluding structural gastrointestinal disease).  The term MUCMI means a diagnosed illness without conclusive pathophysiology or etiology that is characterized by overlapping symptoms and signs and has features such as fatigue, pain, disability out of proportion to physical findings, and inconsistent demonstration of laboratory abnormalities.  Chronic multi symptom illnesses of partially understood etiology and pathophysiology, such as diabetes and multiple sclerosis, will not be considered medically unexplained.  38 C.F.R. § 3.317(a)(2).  

In this case, the Veteran has a current GERD disability.  For example, during the October 2023 VA examination he was diagnosed with GERD.  The examiner noted that the Veteran's GERD was a disease with a clear and specific etiology and diagnosis.  The examiner supported this conclusion by explaining that GERD is a disease caused by excessive acid in the lower part of the esophagus refluxing and less likely than not related to toxic exposure risk activities.  

As the Veteran's GERD is a diagnosed condition, it cannot be considered an undiagnosed illness.  38 C.F.R. § 3.317(a)(1)(ii).  Further, GERD is a structural gastrointestinal disorder and cannot be considered a MUCMI.  38 C.F.R. § 3.317(a)(2)(i)(B)(3); see also Atencio v. O'Rourke, 30 Vet. App. 74, 83 (2018).  The examiner noted that the Veteran's GERD was a disease with a clear and specific etiology and diagnosis.  Thus, presumptive service connection for GERD under 38 C.F.R. § 3.317 is not warranted.  

While presumptive service connection for GERD under 38 C.F.R. § 3.317 is not warranted, consideration must also be made on a direct service connection basis.  See Combee v. Brown, 34. F.3d 1039 (Fed. Circ. 1994).  Thus, the question becomes whether the Veteran's GERD began during service.  

Service treatment records show no complaints, diagnosis, or treatment related to a GERD disability.  

Post-service, the Veteran presented for a July 2011 general medical examination.  On examination, it was noted that the Veteran did not have a history of nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, constipation, indigestion, heartburn, hemorrhoids, hernia, abdominal mass, abdominal swelling, regurgitation, jaundice, and abdominal pain.  The examiner observed the Veteran's abdomen and gastrointestinal and noted that inspection showed normal findings.  Bowel sounds were normal, and there was no other abnormality of auscultation.    

In a November 2023 VA medical opinion, the examiner opined that after reviewing the medical records and preforming physical exam the claimed condition is less likely than not caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activity, after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran.  In support of this conclusion, the examiner explained that there is no known association between the Veteran's claimed toxic exposures and GERD.  GERD is a disease caused by a weakness in the lower esophageal sphincter which allows backflow of stomach acid into the esophagus. The examiner noted that there is no known mechanism by which the toxic exposures can cause weakness in the lower esophageal sphincter and produce GERD.  The Veteran's risk factors of genetics, diet, and obesity will outweigh the toxic exposure risk activities, since his genetics will determine the tone of the esophageal sphincter, the diet determines the acidity of the stomach acid, and the obesity puts pressure on the stomach and forces the acid out of it.  

The Board finds this opinion highly probative as it was made by a medical professional with consideration of the specific facts in this case and after examination of the Veteran.  The opinion is also supported by other evidence of record.  There is no medical opinion or competent and credible evidence in significant conflict with the VA medical opinion.  

Upon review of the record, the Board finds that the most persuasive evidence is against the claim of service connection for GERD.  While the Veteran has a current GERD disability, there was no evidence of GERD or related symptoms during service.  During the July 2011 general examination, the examiner noted normal findings for the abdominal and gastrointestinal area.  The November 2023 probative medical opinion determined the claimed condition was not related to service, to include as due to toxic exposure.  The examiner noted that the Veteran's GERD was likely related to other risk factors such as genetics, diet, and obesity.  

While the Veteran is competent to report having experienced symptoms of GERD since service, the Veteran is not competent to provide a diagnosis in this case or determine that these symptoms were manifestations of GERD.  The issue is medically complex, as it requires knowledge of the interaction between multiple organ systems in the body/interpretation of complicated diagnostic medical testing.  Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377, 1377 n.4 (Fed. Cir. 2007).  The Board finds that the VA examiner's opinion is probative, because it is based on an accurate medical history and provides an explanation that contains clear conclusions and supporting data.  Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008).  Consequently, the Board gives more probative weight to the medical evidence of record.  

Accordingly, the Board finds that the most persuasive evidence of record is against the claim of service connection for GERD, and the claim is denied.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.  

3. Right Ankle Pain

The Veteran contends that he has a right ankle disability that was caused by his active service.  

The question for the Board is whether the Veteran has a current disability that began during service or is at least as likely as not related to an in-service injury, event, or disease.

The Board concludes that, while the Veteran has a history of being treated for his right ankle, the evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that it began during active service, or is otherwise related to an in-service injury, event, or disease.  

Service treatment records show no complaints, diagnosis, or treatment related to a right ankle condition.  As the Veteran reported other ailments during service such as left ankle pain, and right ankle problems are the type that a reasonable person would report while in the military with access to healthcare, if the Veteran was experiencing problems with right ankle pain during service the Board would expect that he would have reported these problems to medical professionals.  

During an August 2011 VA treatment, the Veteran sought treatment for his right ankle.  He reported seeking VA medical treatment for a fall resulting in right ankle sprain in November 2011.  In a November 2012 VA treatment, the Veteran reported having right ankle pain as he twisted his ankle in 2011 and continued to have intermittent pain.  During a January 2014 VA treatment, he reported having intermittent right ankle pain.  

During the relevant period on appeal, the Veteran has not provided lay evidence explaining how he believes his right ankle pain was related to service.  For instance, during the May 2023 application for benefits, he reported that he "get[s] really bad ankle pain and pain in my Achilles as well."  He also reported that he "randomly get pain in the back of his ankle in my Achilles area to where I can't walk and have to sit to let the pain go away."  The Board does not dispute that the Veteran did have right ankle pain after service.  However, he has not provided any statement regarding how his right ankle pain had its onset during service.  The medical evidence indicate that he had right ankle pain in 2011, after service, when he sprained his right ankle.  

The Veteran was not afforded a VA examination in connection with his claim for service connection for right ankle prior to the rating decision on appeal.  Generally, a VA medical examination or opinion is necessary when there is (1) competent evidence of a current disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability, (2) evidence establishing that an event, injury, or disease occurred in service, or establishing certain diseases manifesting during an applicable presumptive period for which the veteran qualifies, and (3) an indication that the disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability may be associated with the Veteran's service or with another service-connected disability, but (4) there is insufficient competent medical evidence on file for VA to make a decision on the claim.? 38?U.S.C. §?5103A(d)(2); 38?C.F.R. §?3.159(c)(4)(i); see also McLendon v. Nicholson, 20?Vet. App.?79, 83 (2006).  The threshold for determining whether the evidence "indicates" that there "may" be a nexus between a current disability and an in-service event, injury, or disease is a low one.  Id.  

Here, a VA medical examination is not necessary.  While the Veteran believes the claimed right ankle condition was related to service, the evidence during the appeal period did not indicate any in-service injury, event, or illness related to the right ankle to trigger the requirement for a VA examination.  Thus, there was no pre-decisional duty to assist error in not scheduling an examination for the right ankle claim.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802.  

Upon review of the evidence, the Board finds that most persuasive evidence weighs heavily against the claim of service connection for right ankle.  While the Veteran believes the claimed condition was related to service, the Board notes that the evidence during the appeal period does not show any indication of an in-service injury, event, or illness for the right ankle.  Service treatment records were silent for any complaints, treatment, or diagnoses for the right ankle.  The lay statement of record discusses the Veteran's current right ankle pain, which is shown during the treatment records.  However, the lay statement proffered by the Veteran does not show any specific instances regarding how the right ankle onset during service.  Consequently, the Board finds that the evidence of record persuasively weighs against the claim.  

Accordingly, the most persuasive evidence of record is against finding that service connection for right ankle is warranted, and the claim is denied.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (2021) (en banc).  

4. Athletes Foot

The Veteran contends that he has athlete's foot disorder that was related to service.  

The question for the Board is whether the Veteran has a current disability that began during service or is at least as likely as not related to an in-service injury, event, or disease.

The Board concludes that the Veteran does not have a current diagnosis of athlete's foot and has not had one at any time during the pendency of the claim or recent to the filing of the claim.  Romanowsky v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 289, 294 (2013); McClain v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 319, 321 (2007).  

Service treatment records show no complaints, diagnosis, or treatment related to athlete's foot.  

Post-service treatment records show no complaints, diagnosis, or treatment pertaining to athlete's foot.  

The Veteran presented for an October 2023 VA skin disease examination, at which time he was interviewed by the examiner who also reviewed the pertinent medical history and performed an examination.  The examiner opined that there were no objective findings of athlete's foot on examination to warrant a diagnosis.  The Board finds this examination highly probative as it was made by a medical professional with consideration of the specific facts in this case and after examination of the Veteran.  The findings are also supported by other evidence of record, such as the treatment records absent of any indication of athlete's foot.  There is no medical opinion or competent and credible evidence in significant conflict with the VA medical opinion.  

Upon review of the record, the Board finds that the most persuasive evidence of record is against the claim of service connection for athlete's foot.  In Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356 (Fed. Cir. 2018), the Federal Circuit held that "pain alone, without an accompanying diagnosis of a present disease, can qualify as a disability" if it "reaches the level of a functional impairment of earning capacity."  Id. at 1367-69.  The Board has considered the Veteran's lay statements.  In his May 2023 application for benefits, the Veteran asserted that he had rashes on his feet that make his feet burn.  He reported that the rash occurs when he wears boots for long periods of time and has been an issue for a long time.  It happens often where he has to use a cream to relieve the itching.  

As the Veteran is not shown to have medical education or experience, he is a lay person and is competent to report (1) symptoms that are observable to a layperson, e.g., rash on his feet; (2) symptoms at the time supporting a later diagnosis by a medical professional; or (3) a contemporaneous medical diagnosis.  See Davidson v. Shinseki, 581 F.3d 1313 (2009).  The Veteran is not competent to independently render a medical diagnosis or opine as to the specific etiology of a condition as these are medically complex issues.  The October 2023 VA examiner determined that, while the Veteran experienced subjective symptoms of athlete's foot, the Veteran did not have a diagnosis of athlete's foot as there was no objective findings of athlete's foot during the examination.  Further, despite lay statements describing a foot rash, the VA treatment and medical evidence during service and after service continued to show no evidence of athlete's feet.  Instead, the statement appears to be based on the Veteran's self-reported medical history, which is inconsistent with medical record.  The Board ultimately assigns greater probative weight to the medical evidence of record, to include the opinion rendered by a trained medical professional based on appropriate diagnostic testing and reasonably drawn conclusions with supportive rationale.  

Accordingly, the most persuasive evidence of record is against finding that service connection for athlete's foot is warranted, and the claim is denied.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (2021) (en banc).  

5. Low Back Strain

The Veteran asserts that he has a back condition that was related to his active service.  

The question for the Board is whether the Veteran has a current disability that began during service or is at least as likely as not related to an in-service injury, event, or disease.

The Board concludes that, while the Veteran has reported back pain, the evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that it began during active service, or is otherwise related to an in-service injury, event, or disease.  

Service treatment records show no complaints, diagnosis, or treatment related to a back disability.  

Post-service, the Veteran presented for a July 2011 VA general examination.  It was noted that the Veteran did not have other spine and disc disease symptoms.  There were no flare-ups of any spinal disease.    

In a November 2011 VA treatment, the Veteran reported having intermittent back pain.  In a January 2014 VA treatment, the Veteran reported having low back pain and occasionally having sharp stabbing pain.  

During the appeal period, the Veteran has not provided lay evidence explaining how he believes his low back strain was related to service.  In the May 2023 application for benefits, the Veteran reported that his lower back has been hurting for quite some time now, especially in the mornings or if he sits too long.  

The Veteran was not scheduled for a VA examination for his claim of service connection for low back strain.  The Board finds that a VA examination was not necessary in this case.  While the Veteran believes his low back strain was related to service, the evidence during the appeal period does not indicate any in-service injury, event, or illness related to low back strain to trigger the requirement for a VA examination.  McLendon, 20 Vet. App. at 83.  As such, there was not pre-decisional duty to assist error by the AOJ in failing to schedule the Veteran for back examination.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802.  

Given the foregoing, the Board finds that the most persuasive evidence of record is against the claim of service connection for low back strain.  The probative evidence shows no indication of a low back condition during the Veteran's service.  Service treatment records were silent for any report, complaints, or treatment for a back disability.  The lay statements of record do not show any specific instances reported by the Veteran regarding the incurrence of low back strain during service.  Further, during the July 2011 VA examination, there was no indication of a back condition.  Rather, the Veteran reported in November 2011, after his discharge from service, of having intermittent back pain.  There was no report of back pain until January 2014.  The evidence shows that other than November 2011 and January 2014 report of back pain, the remaining evidence is absent of report of treatment for back pain.  Consequently, the Board finds that the evidence weighs heavily against any low back strain as related to service.  

Accordingly, the most persuasive evidence of record is against finding that service connection for low back strain is warranted, and the claim is denied.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (2021) (en banc).  

6. Right Wrist

The Veteran contends that he has a right wrist disorder that was related to service.  He reported that he has random pain that runs through his wrist and hand, especially when his shoulders begin to hurt.  See May 2023 Fully Developed Claim.  

The question for the Board is whether the Veteran has a current disability that began during service or is at least as likely as not related to an in-service injury, event, or disease.  

The Board concludes that the Veteran does not have a current diagnosis of a right wrist disability and has not had one at any time during the pendency of the claim or recent to the filing of the claim.  Romanowsky v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 289, 294 (2013); McClain v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 319, 321 (2007).  

Service treatment records show no complaints, diagnosis, or treatment related to a right wrist disability.  

Post-service, there is no report of a right wrist condition until an October 2022 private treatment where there was complaint concerning the right wrist.  The record is absent of any other private and VA treatment for the right wrist.  

The Veteran presented for an October 2023 VA examination for the wrist, at which time he was interviewed by the examiner who also reviewed the pertinent medical history and performed an examination.  The examiner noted that the Veteran does not have a current diagnosis associated with the claimed right wrist condition.  During the examination, the Veteran reported having moderate flare-ups that lasted a couple of hours every other week.  He described the flare-ups as manifesting in tightness and sore as a result of overuse.  The Veteran did not report having any functional loss or functional impairment of the right wrist.  Active and passive range of motion testing of the right wrist was normal and he did not have pain during range of motion testing.  While the examination was not conducted during a flare-up, the examiner noted that the evidence does not suggest pain, fatigability, weakness, lack of endurance, or incoordination would significantly limit functional ability with flare-ups.  The examiner noted that the Veteran's claimed right wrist condition would not impact his ability to perform any type of occupational task.  After the examination and reviewing the evidence, the examiner concluded that there was no objective findings found on examination today to warrant a diagnosis of a wrist condition.  

The Board finds this examination highly probative as it was made by a medical professional with consideration of the specific facts in this case and after examination of the Veteran.  The opinion is also supported by other evidence of record.  There is no medical opinion or competent and credible evidence in significant conflict with the VA medical opinion.  

Upon review of the record, the Board finds that the most persuasive evidence of record is against the claim of service connection for the right wrist.  The probative evidence does not show any in-service incurrence of a right wrist condition.  Furthermore, the probative evidence indicate that the Veteran does not have a current right wrist condition.  The Board has considered Saunders and acknowledges the Veteran's report that during flare-ups, his right wrist would functionally impact his typing, writing, and fine motor skills.  During the same examination, the Veteran also did not report having functional loss or functional impairment.  The right wrist range of motion testing was normal.  Even during flare-ups, the examiner noted that the evidence does not suggest that pain, fatigability, weakness, lack of endurance, or incoordination would significantly limit functional ability.  Furthermore, the examiner noted that the Veteran's claimed right wrist condition did not impact his ability to perform any type of occupational task.  Lastly, after reviewing the evidence and conducting an examination of the right wrist, the examiner concluded that there was no objective findings found on examination to warrant a diagnosis of a wrist condition.  While the Veteran reported right wrist pain, the persuasive medical evidence weighs against a finding that such pain reaches the level of a functional impairment of earning capacity to qualify as a disability pursuant to Saunders.  

While the Veteran believes there is a current diagnosis of the right wrist, the Veteran is not competent to provide a diagnosis in this case.  The issue is medically complex, as it requires specialized medical education/knowledge of the interaction between multiple organ systems in the body/the ability to interpret complicated diagnostic medical testing.  Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377, 1377 n.4 (Fed. Cir. 2007).  Consequently, the Board gives more probative weight to the competent medical evidence.  

Accordingly, the most persuasive evidence of record is against finding that service connection for right wrist is warranted, and the claim is denied.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (2021) (en banc).  

Increased Rating

Disability ratings are determined by evaluating the extent to which a Veteran's service-connected disability adversely affects his or her ability to function under the ordinary conditions of daily life, including employment, by comparing his or her symptomatology with the criteria set forth in the Schedule for Rating Disabilities (Rating Schedule).  See 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1.  Different ratings may be assigned for different periods of time for the same disorder if the facts show distinct time periods with different levels of disability.  Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119 (1999); Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007).  If two ratings are potentially applicable, the higher rating will be assigned if the disability more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating; otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.7.  Any reasonable doubt regarding the degree of disability will be resolved in favor of the Veteran.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.3.  

When evaluating musculoskeletal disabilities based on limitation of motion, 38 C.F.R. § 4.40 requires consideration of functional loss caused by pain or other factors listed in that section that could occur during flare-ups or after repeated use and, therefore, not be reflected on range-of-motion testing.  38 C.F.R. § 4.45 requires consideration also be given to less movement than normal, more movement than normal, weakened movement, excess fatigability, incoordination, and pain on movement.  See DeLuca v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 202 (1995); see also Mitchell v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 32, 44 (2011).  Nonetheless, even when the background factors listed in § 4.40 or 4.45 are relevant when evaluating a disability, the rating is assigned based on the extent to which motion is limited, pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a (musculoskeletal system) or § 4.73 (muscle injury); a separate or higher rating under § 4.40 or 4.45 itself is not appropriate.  See Thompson v. McDonald, 815 F.3d 781, 785 (Fed. Cir. 2016) ("[I]t is clear that the guidance of § 4.40 is intended to be used in understanding the nature of the veteran's disability, after which a rating is determined based on the § 4.71a [or 4.73] criteria.").  

1. Asthma

By way of background, the Veteran submitted a May 6, 2023, claim for service connection for asthma.  A November 2023 rating decision granted service connection for asthma and assigned a 30 percent rating effective August 10, 2022, the date of the passage of the Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxics Act of 2022 (PACT Act).  

The Veteran continues to seek a higher rating for his service-connected asthma.  

Under Diagnostic Code 6602, which is a rating for bronchial asthma, a 10 percent rating is warranted for FEV-1 of 71 to 80 percent predicted, or; FEV-1/FVC of 71 to 80 percent, or; intermittent inhalational or oral bronchodilator therapy.  A 30 percent rating is warranted for FEV-1 of 56 to 70 percent predicted, or; FEV-1/FVC of 56 to 70 percent, or; daily inhalational or oral bronchodilator therapy, or; inhalational anti-inflammatory medication.  A 60 percent rating is warranted for FEV-1 of 40 to 55 percent predicted, or; FEV-1/FVC of 40 to 55 percent, or; at least monthly visits to a physician for required care of exacerbations, or; intermittent (at least three per year) courses of systemic (oral or parenteral) corticosteroids.  A 100 percent rating is warranted for FEV-1 less than 40 percent predicted, or; FEV-1/FVC less than 40 percent, or; more than one attack per week with episodes of respiratory failure, or; required daily use of systemic (oral or parenteral) high dose corticosteroids or immunosuppressive medications.  Id.  

Pulmonary function test results are generally reported before and after the administration of bronchodilator therapy.  VA regulations instruct that post-bronchodilator results be used when considering PFT criteria for ratings under Diagnostic Codes 6600, 6603, 6604, 6825-6833, and 6840-6845.  38 C.F.R. § 4.96(d)(4).  There are no regulations identifying whether pre- or post-bronchodilator results should be used when determining disability ratings under Diagnostic Code 6602.  As 38 C.F.R. § 4.96(d)(4) does not explicitly apply to Diagnostic Code 6602, the Board will use the pulmonary function test results that allow the most favorable disability rating to the Veteran.  

The Veteran presented for an October 2023 VA examination.  He was diagnosed with asthma.  The Veteran reported current symptoms of hard time breathing with or without physical activity.  He reported that when he climbs stairs, he will get super winded.  The Veteran used an Advair inhaler, Albuterol inhaler as needed, and Montelukast.  The Veteran's respiratory condition did not require the use of oral or parenteral corticosteroid medications.  He required the use of inhaled medications, such as inhalational bronchodilator therapy used intermittently, and inhalational anti-inflammatory medication used daily.  

He did not require the use of oral bronchodilators, or the use of antibiotics.  He did not require outpatient oxygen therapy for his respiratory condition.  The Veteran had not had any asthma attacks with episodes of respiratory failure in the past 12 months.  He had not had any physician visits for required case of exacerbations.  Pulmonary function testing (PFT) was performed with the results reflecting the Veteran's current pulmonary function.  PFT results record the Veteran's pre-bronchodilator FEV-1 as 68 percent predicted and FEV-1/FVC as 67 percent predicted.  Post-bronchodilator results were FEV-1 as 61 percent predicted and FEV-1/FVC as 58 percent predicted.  The examiner noted that the test result most accurately reflecting the Veteran's level of disability was FEV-1 percent predicted.  

The Veteran does not have multiple respiratory conditions.  Exercise capacity testing was not performed.  There was no other significant diagnostic findings and/or results.  Regarding the functional impact of his asthma, the Veteran reported that he has limitation in tasks involving prolonged walking, heavy lifting, and climbing stairs.  

Based on the foregoing, the Board finds that the most persuasive evidence of record is against a disability rating in excess of 30 percent for asthma during the appeal period.  The PFT results during the examination does not reveal findings, such as FEV-1 of at least 55 percent predicted and FEV-1/FVC of at least 55 percent predicted, to warrant the assignment of a disability rating in excess of the current 30 percent rating.  Further, there was no evidence of at least monthly visits to a physician for required care of exacerbations, intermittent courses of corticosteroids, or more than one attack per week with episodes of respiratory failure.  

The Board has considered the Veteran's lay statement that he has used an inhaler since 2020.  See May 2023 Fully Developed Claim.  The Board notes that the examination took into consideration the Veteran's reported use of inhalers to treat his asthma condition.  As the rating criteria for?asthma?specifically considers the?ameliorative?effects of?medication, those effects have been considered in evaluating the Veteran's disability.  See Jones v. Shinseki,?26 Vet. App. 56, 63?(2013) (holding the?ameliorative?effects of?medication?cannot be taken into effect unless specifically contemplated by the applicable diagnostic code).  

A 60 percent rating under Diagnostic Code 6602 requires evidence of intermittent (at least three per year) courses of systemic (oral or parenteral) corticosteroids.  A 100 percent rating under Diagnostic Code 6602 is warranted if the evidence shows the Veteran requires daily use of systemic (oral or parenteral) high dose corticosteroids or immuno-suppressive medications.  The evidence during the appeal period does not show that these criteria are met to warrant a higher rating.  The evidence during the appeal period continues to support a 30 percent rating for the service-connected asthma.  

Accordingly, the Board finds that the most persuasive evidence of record weighs against an initial disability rating in excess of 30 percent for asthma under Diagnostic Code 6602, and the claim is denied.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 4.3.  

2. Atopic Dermatitis

By way of background, the Veteran submitted a May 2023, claim for service connection for skin condition.  A November 2023 rating decision granted service connection for atopic dermatitis (claimed as skin condition) and assigned a noncompensable (zero) percent rating effective August 10, 2022, the date of the passage of the PACT Act.  

The Veteran continues to seek a higher rating for the service-connected atopic dermatitis.

The Veteran's atopic dermatitis is rated under Diagnostic Code 7806, for dermatitis or eczema.  

VA regulations explicitly state that systemic therapy is treatment that is administered through any route other than the skin, and topical therapy is treatment that is administered through the skin.  38 C.F.R. § 4.118(a).

The General Rating Formula for the Skin applies to Diagnostic Codes 7806, 7809, 7813 to 7816, 7820 to 7822, and 7824.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.118.  Under this formula, a noncompensable rating is assigned for no more than topical therapy required over the past 12-month period and at least one of the following: characteristic lesions involving less than 5 percent of the entire body affected; or characteristic lesions involving less than 5 percent of exposed areas affected.  A 10 percent rating is assigned for at least one of the following: characteristic lesions involving at least 5 percent, but less than 20 percent, of the entire body affected; or at least 5 percent, but less than 20 percent, of exposed areas affected; or intermittent systemic therapy including, but not limited to, corticosteroids, phototherapy, retinoids, biologics, photochemotherapy, PUVA, or other immunosuppressive drugs required for a total duration of less than 6 weeks over the past 12- month period.  A 30 percent rating is assigned at least one of the following: characteristic lesions involving more than 20 to 40 percent of the entire body or 20 to 40 percent of exposed areas affected; or systemic therapy including, but not limited to, corticosteroids, phototherapy, retinoids, biologics, photochemotherapy, PUVA, or other immunosuppressive drugs required for a total duration of 6 weeks or more, but not constantly, over the past 12-month period.  A 60 percent rating is assigned for at least one of the following: characteristic lesions involving more than 40 percent of the entire body or more than 40 percent of exposed areas affected; or constant or near-constant systemic therapy including, but not limited to, corticosteroids, phototherapy, retinoids, biologics, photochemotherapy, psoralen with long-wave ultraviolet-A light (PUVA), or other immunosuppressive drugs required over the past 12-month period.  Or rate as disfigurement of the head, face, or neck (DC 7800) or scars (DC's 7801, 7802, 7803, 7804, or 7805), depending on the predominant disability.  38 C.F.R. § 4.118, General Rating for the Skin for DCs 7806, 7809, 7813-7816, 7820-7822, and 7824.  

The Veteran presented for an October 2023 VA skin examination.  He was diagnosed with atopic dermatitis.  He reported current symptoms of random rash on the left lower calf to the ankle area.  The right leg symptoms had resolved.  The Veteran had been treated with medication in the past 12 months for his skin condition.  He constantly/near constantly treated his atopic dermatitis with topical treatment of Triamcinolone cream.  It was also noted that for 6 weeks or more, he treated his atopic dermatitis with topical treatment of Mupirocin ointment.  The Veteran had not had any treatment or procedures other than systemic or topical medications in the past 12 months for any skin condition.  

On physical examination, the Veteran's atopic dermatitis covered less than 5 percent of the total body area, and none of the exposed area.  He did not currently have a skin condition without any visible characteristics' lesions at the time of the examination.  The examiner observed the Veteran's atopic dermatitis as raised discolored rash, scabs, and open scab in the left outer calf to ankle.  The Veteran did not have a benign or malignant neoplasm or metastases related to his skin condition.  The Veteran's skin condition did not cause scarring (regardless of location), or disfigurement of the head, face, or neck.  The Veteran did not have any other pertinent physical findings, complications, conditions, signs and/or symptoms related to his skin condition.  The Veteran's skin condition did functionally impact his ability to work.  

Treatment records are consistent with the VA examination findings.  During an October 2022 private treatment, the Veteran reported having eczema rash in the lower extremity and upper back.  He reported using a triamcinolone cream for treatment.  At a November 2022 private treatment, the Veteran's atopic dermatitis was symptomatic, and the Veteran used triamcinolone cream for treatment.  In a January 2023 private treatment, the Veteran reported having rash and follicles crust in both lower extremity and upper back.  

Upon review of the record, the Board finds that the evidence of record persuasively weighs against the assignment of an initial compensable evaluation because the Veteran's atopic dermatitis does not more nearly approximate characteristic lesions involving at least 5 percent, but less than 20 percent, of the entire body affected; or  at least 5 percent, but less than 20 percent, of exposed areas affected; or intermittent systemic therapy required for a total duration of less than 6 weeks over the past 12- month period.  The Board acknowledge the Veteran's report of rash on his bilateral lower extremity and upper back.  The examiner reviewed the private treatment records, and even made note that the symptoms of the right leg had resolved.  Of note, upon physical examination of the Veteran's skin condition, it was noted that the atopic dermatitis covered less than 5 percent of the total body area, and none of the exposed area.  The private treatment record did not provide medical evidence indicating the percentage of the total body or exposed area covered by atopic dermatitis to warrant a higher rating.  Further, the Board notes that as the rating criteria for?atopic dermatitis?specifically considers the?ameliorative?effects of?medication, those effects have been considered in evaluating the Veteran's disability.  See Jones,?26 Vet. App. at 63.  

The Board acknowledges that the Veteran believes that the disability on appeal has been more severe than the assigned disability rating reflects.  Moreover, the Veteran is competent to report observable symptoms, to include rash on his body, and these reports are credible.  Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 (Fed. Cir. 2007).  However, medical evidence of records does not show that the atopic dermatitis more nearly approximates the criteria in the next higher rating.  

The Board has considered whether any other Diagnostic Codes related to disabilities of the skin would provide for a higher disability evaluation.  However, the evidence does not reflect that the atopic dermatitis would warrant a higher rating under a different diagnostic code.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.118.

In conclusion, the Board finds that the evidence of record persuasively weighs against the Veteran's claim for an initial compensable rating for atopic dermatitis.  As the evidence of record persuasively weighs against a compensable rating, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).  

3. Right Pinky Finger Strain

By way of background, an August 2011 rating decision granted service connection for status post dislocation of the right pinky finger strain and assigned a zero percent rating under Diagnostic Code 5299-5230 effective January 10, 2011, the day after his discharge from service.  The Veteran did not submit a timely appeal of rating decision.  

In May 2023, the Veteran submitted a standalone increased rating claim for his right pinky finger strain (claimed as right-hand condition).  A November 2023 rating decision denied a higher rating for right pinky finger strain under Diagnostic Code 5230.  

The Veteran continues to seek a higher rating for his service-connected right pinky finger strain.  

Effective February 7, 2021, VA amended the rating criteria for musculoskeletal disabilities; however, Diagnostic Code 5230 was unchanged.  

The Veteran's right pinky finger strain is rated under 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5230, limitation of motion of the ring or little finger.  Under Diagnostic Code 5230, a maximum noncompensable rating is warranted for any limitation of motion of the ring or little finger, whether on the major (dominant) and minor (non-dominant) hand.  38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5230.  

The Veteran presented for an October 2023 VA hand and fingers examination.  It was noted that the Veteran was right hand dominant.  He was diagnosed with right pinky strain, status post dislocation.  He reported that his current symptoms were that his finger will lock up from time to time.  The Veteran did not report flare-ups of the finger.  He did not report having any functional loss or functional impairment of the joint.  

On examination, the range of motion testing of the right little finger revealed flexion of MCP to 70 degrees, PIP to 90 degrees, and DIP to 70 degrees, and revealed extension of MCP, PIP, and DIP to zero degrees.  There was no objective evidence of localized tenderness or pain on palpation of the joint or associated soft tissue.  Passive range of motion testing results were the same as active range of motion.  The Veteran was able to perform repetitive-use testing with at least three repetitions and with no additional loss of function.  While the Veteran was not examined immediately after repeated use over time or during a flare-up, the examiner noted that pain, fatigability, weakness, lack of endurance, or incoordination did not significantly limit functional ability with repeated use over time or with flare-ups.  Thus, the Board finds that the range of motion findings on examination depict the estimated range of motion during a flare-up or after repetitive use over time.  

There were no additional factors contributing to the right pinky finger disability.  Muscle strength testing showed normal strength for the right hand.  There was no muscle atrophy.  There was no ankylosis of the little finger of the MCP joint and PIP joint.  The Veteran did not have any other pertinent physical findings, complications, conditions, signs or symptoms related to the right pinky finger strain.  The Veteran did not use any assistive devices.  The examiner further noted that with regard to the right pinky finger strain, there was no functional impairment of an extremity such that no effective function remains other than that which would be equally well served by an amputation with prosthesis (functions of the upper extremity include grasping, manipulation, etc.).  Regarding functional impact of the right pinky finger strain on the Veteran's ability to perform any type of occupational task, it was noted that the Veteran had limitation in tasks involving prolonged writing and typing.  

Upon review of the record, the Board finds that the evidence of record persuasively weighs against a compensable rating for right pinky finger strain.  The Veteran is already in receipt of a noncompensable rating, the maximum rating available under Diagnostic Code 5230 for any limitation of motion of the ring or little finger.  38 C.F.R. § 4.71a.  

Although a noncompensable rating is the maximum rating available for disability of the little finger under Diagnostic Code 5230, the Board must consider the assignment of an increased rating under other potentially applicable diagnostic codes.  See Schafrath v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 589, 595 (1991).  

Under Diagnostic Code 5227, a maximum noncompensable rating is warranted for unfavorable or favorable ankylosis of the ring or little finger, whether on the major (dominant) or minor (non-dominant) hand.  A note to Diagnostic Code 5227 provides that consideration should be made as to whether evaluation as amputation is warranted and whether an additional evaluation is warranted for any resulting limitation of motion of other digits or interference with the overall function of the hand.  38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5227.  

A review of the evidence showed that the Veteran's right pinky finger strain did not manifest in ankylosis.  Thus, a higher rating under Diagnostic Code 5227 for favorable or unfavorable ankylosis of the ring or little finger is inapplicable.  Even with evidence of ankylosis, Diagnostic Code 5227 would not provide a compensable rating.  Further, there is no evidence here of amputation of the little finger, and thus no compensable rating is possible.  

The Board acknowledges the Veteran's lay reports of symptoms such as his report that his right-hand condition resulted in random pain that runs through his wrist and hand.  See May 2023 Fully Developed Claim.  Unfortunately, the Veteran cannot be compensated for painful motion under Diagnostic Code 5230.  For a painful joint, a Veteran can be awarded at least the minimum compensable rating.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.59; Burton v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 1 (2011).  But a higher rating for pain is not available under Diagnostic Code 5230 because there is no minimal compensable rating.  See Sowers v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 472, 481 (2016) Diagnostic Code 5230's specific finding that there is no impairment in earning capacity from any limitation of the pinky finger overrides the general intent in 38 C.F.R. § 4.59 to compensate painful motion with at least the minimum compensable rating.  Id., at 480.  

The Board may not deny a higher rating on the basis of relief provided by medication when the ameliorative effects are not specifically contemplated by the rating criteria.  Jones, 26. Vet. App. at 63.  Here, the rating criteria under 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5230 applicable to the right pinky finger does not contemplate the ameliorative effects of medication.  However, the Veteran reported during the examination that he has not had any treatment or medications for the right pinky finger strain.  Thus, the denial of a compensable rating for the right pinky strain is not based on relief provided by medication as the Veteran credibly reported that he did not use any medication for his little finger.  

In conclusion, the Board finds that the evidence of record persuasively weighs against the Veteran's claim for a compensable rating for right pinky finger strain.  As the evidence of record persuasively weighs against a compensable rating, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (2021) (en banc).  

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Service Connection for Bilateral Flatfoot is Remanded.

The issue of entitlement to service connection for bilateral flatfoot is remanded to correct a duty to assist error that occurred prior to the November 2023 rating decision on appeal.  

The Veteran contends that he has a bilateral flatfoot condition that was caused by his active service.  

In the May 2023 claim, the Veteran reported that he has bilateral flatfoot that was painful when he is on his feet for a long time and that he does not know the cause of his pain.  The service treatment records show a December 2010 treatment where it was noted that the Veteran was treated for pes planus and used orthotics.  

Given the indication of bilateral feet pain and the in-service treatment for pes planus, the AOJ should have afforded the Veteran an examination for his bilateral flatfoot claim.  To correct this pre-decisional duty to assist error, a remand is warranted to schedule the Veteran for an examination to determine the nature and etiology of the claimed bilateral flatfoot.  McLendon, 20 Vet. App. at 83.  

The Board emphasizes that it is not determining whether or not the Veteran's statements that his bilateral flat foot symptoms are due to service are credible at this time, as the additional development set forth in the directives below could impact that determination.  

2. Service Connection for Headaches is Remanded.

The issue of entitlement to service connection for headaches is remanded to correct a duty to assist error that occurred prior to the November 2023 rating decision on appeal.  

The Veteran contends that his headaches were caused by his active service.  Alternatively, he asserted that his ringing in his ears makes his headaches worse at times.  See May 2023 Fully Developed Claim.  

The AOJ obtained an October 2023 examination prior to the November 2023 rating decision on appeal.  In the examination, he was diagnosed with tension headaches.  The examiner opined that the Veteran's tension headaches were caused by muscular pain or strain.  Given that the Veteran was service connection for bilateral shoulder strain, the examiner should have obtained an opinion addressing secondary service connection.  A pre-decisional duty to assist error is identified, and a remand is warranted to obtain an addendum medical opinion as to whether the Veteran's headache was secondary to service-connected bilateral shoulder strain.  

The Board emphasizes that it is not determining whether or not the Veteran's statements that his headache symptoms are due to service are credible at this time, as the additional development set forth in the directives below could impact that determination.  

3. Service Connection for Neck Strain is Remanded.

The issue of entitlement to service connection for neck strain is remanded to correct a duty to assist error that occurred prior to the November 2023 rating decision on appeal.  

The AOJ obtained a November 2023 VA examination prior to the November 2023 rating decision on appeal.  In the examination, the Veteran was diagnosed with cervical strain.  The examiner opined that the claimed cervical condition was not caused by his service-connected bilateral shoulder strain.  However, this medical opinion does not provide an opinion addressing whether the claimed cervical strain was aggravated by the bilateral shoulder strain.  To be adequate, a VA opinion must provide separate rationales for both causation and aggravation.  See Atencio v. O'Rourke, 30 Vet. App. 74 (2018).  To correct this pre-decisional duty to assist error, a remand is warranted to obtain an addendum medical opinion.  

The Board emphasizes that it is not determining whether or not the Veteran's statements that his neck strain symptoms are due to service are credible at this time, as the additional development set forth in the directives below could impact that determination.  

4. Service Connection for Left Ankle Pain is Remanded.

The issue of entitlement to service connection for left ankle pain is remanded to correct a duty to assist error that occurred prior to the November 2023 rating decision on appeal.  

The Veteran contends that his left ankle was caused by his active service.  

A review of the service treatment records shows a September 2010 record where the Veteran was diagnosed with left ankle sprain.  During the treatment, he reported that his left ankle was injured during physical training while performing sprints.  He was issued a line of duty determination where it was noted that the Veteran twisted his ankle while running during physical therapy in September 2010.  The determination noted that the ankle injury was incurred in the line of duty.  

The AOJ obtained a November 2023 medical opinion prior to the November 2023 rating decision on appeal.  He was diagnosed with left ankle strain.  The examiner opined that the Veteran's left ankle strain was not caused by service as there is no evidence that the condition became chronic since there were no subsequent complaints nor a continuity of care of the left ankle condition after service.  However, a review of VA treatment records shows a November 2012 treatment where he reported having pain in his ankle when he stands too long.  He also reported in a January 2014 VA treatment where he stated that his ankle bothered him when he stands for a long period of time.  

As there was report of left ankle complaints after service, inconsistent with the VA medical opinion, the Board finds that an addendum medical opinion is necessary to again address whether the current left ankle strain was caused by his active service.  See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007).  

The Board emphasizes that it is not determining whether or not the Veteran's statements that his left ankle symptoms are due to service are credible at this time, as the additional development set forth in the directives below could impact that determination.  

5. Service Connection for a psychiatric disorder is Remanded.

The issue of entitlement to service connection for depression is remanded to correct a duty to assist error that occurred prior to the November 2023 rating decision on appeal.  

The AOJ obtained an October 2023 VA examination prior to the November 2023 rating decision on appeal.  In the examination, the Veteran was diagnosed with chronic adjustment disorder with anxiety and depressed mood.  The examiner opined that the claimed condition was not caused by the bilateral shoulder strain, and right pinky finger strain.  However, this medical opinion did not address whether the claimed condition was aggravated by the bilateral shoulder strain and right pinky finger strain.  Thus, a duty to assist error is identified.  Atencio, 30 Vet. App. at 74.  To correct this pre-decisional duty to assist error, a remand is warranted to obtain an addendum medical opinion.  

The Board emphasizes that it is not determining whether or not the Veteran's statements that his depression symptoms are due to service are credible at this time, as the additional development set forth in the directives below could impact that determination.  

6. Service Connection for Sleep Apnea is Remanded.

The issue of entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea is remanded to correct a duty to assist error that occurred prior to the November 2023 rating decision on appeal.  

The Veteran contends that he has a sleep apnea condition that was caused by his active service.  See May 2023 Fully Developed Claim.  

A review of service treatment records shows that in December 2010, the Veteran reported that he experienced sleep problems or difficulty falling sleep.  

Post-service, in a July 2011 general examination, it was noted that the Veteran had a positive history of sleep apnea with related symptoms of daytime hypersomnolence, snoring, and sleep disruption.  

In an October 2022 private treatment, the Veteran reported that he felt tired all the time and fell asleep easily during the day.  There was indication of hypersomnia, and the Veteran was referred for a sleep study.  In a November 2022 private treatment, the Veteran reported having sleep disturbance.  In a January 2023 private treatment, it was noted that the Veteran may have hypersomnia and was referred for a sleep study.  

As there was indication of sleep difficulties during and after service, the Veteran should have been afforded an examination for his sleep apnea claim.  McLendon, 20 Vet. App. at 83.  To correct this pre-decisional duty to assist error, a remand is warranted to schedule the Veteran for a VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of his sleep apnea claim.  

The Board emphasizes that it is not determining whether or not the Veteran's statements that his sleep apnea symptoms are due to service are credible at this time, as the additional development set forth in the directives below could impact that determination.  

7. Disability Rating for Chronic Rhinitis is Remanded.

The issue of entitlement to an increased rating for chronic rhinitis is remanded to correct a duty to assist error that occurred prior to the November 2023 rating decision on appeal.  

The Veteran's chronic rhinitis is rated zero percent under 38 C.F.R. § 4.97, Diagnostic Code 6522, for allergic or vasomotor rhinitis.  Under the General Rating Formula for Diseases of the Nose and Throat, a 10 percent rating is warranted for allergic rhinitis without polyps, but with greater than 50-percent obstruction of nasal passage on both sides or complete obstruction on one side.  A 30 percent rating is warranted for allergic rhinitis with polyps.  38 C.F.R. § 4.97.  

The Board may not deny a higher rating on the basis of relief provided by medication when the ameliorative effects are not specifically contemplated by the rating criteria.  Jones, 26. Vet. App. at 63.  Here, the rating criteria under 38 C.F.R. § 4.97, Diagnostic Code 6522 applicable to chronic rhinitis does not contemplate the ameliorative effects of medication.  

The AOJ obtained an October 2023 VA examination report prior to the November 2023 rating decision on appeal.  The Veteran reported that he used Montelukast and Fluticasone nasal spray for treatment of his chronic rhinitis.  During an October 2022 private treatment, it was noted that the Veteran's asthma symptoms were on and off and he used an albuterol MDI for treatment as needed.  

However, the examination failed to address whether if the ameliorative effects of the medication for chronic rhinitis was discounted, the Veteran's nasal blockage would manifest in greater than 50-percent obstruction of nasal passage on both sides or complete obstruction on one side or polyps without, or with polyps.  As the examination failed to address the ameliorative effects of the medication, a pre-decisional duty to assist error is identified.  Ingram v. Collins, 2025 U.S. App. Vet. Claims LEXIS 327, at *19 (Mar. 12, 2025); __ Vet. App. __.  A remand is warranted to obtain an addendum medical opinion.  

8. Disability Rating for Right Shoulder Strain is Remanded.

The issue of entitlement to an increased rating for right shoulder strain is remanded to correct a duty to assist error that occurred prior to the November 2023 rating decision on appeal.  

The Veteran's right shoulder strain was rated under 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5201, for limitation of motion of the arm.  Under Diagnostic Code 5201, limitation of motion of the arm at shoulder level warrants a 20 percent rating for both the major and minor extremity.  Limitation of motion of the arm midway between side and shoulder warrants a 20 percent rating for the minor extremity and a 30 percent rating for the major extremity.  Limitation of motion of the arm to 25 degrees from side warrants a maximum 30 percent rating for the minor joint and a maximum 40 percent rating for the major joint.  38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5201.  

The AOJ obtained a June 2023 examination report prior to the November 2023 rating decision on appeal.  In the examination, the Veteran reported that he treated his right shoulder strain with medication.  

Diagnostic Code 5201 does not contemplate the ameliorative effects of medications in the rating criteria.  Jones, 26. Vet. App. at 63.  As such, the Board finds that a remand is necessary to obtain an opinion regarding the ameliorative effects of medication with regards to the Veteran's service-connected right shoulder strain.  Ingram v. Collins, 2025 U.S. App. Vet. Claims LEXIS 327, at *19 (Mar. 12, 2025); __ Vet. App. __.   

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination to determine whether any current disability of the bilateral flat foot onset during service or is otherwise related to an in-service injury, event, or disease.  

Although an independent review of the claims file is required, the examiner is asked to consider the December 2010 service treatment record where it was noted that the Veteran was treated for pes planus and used orthotics.  

The examiner should elicit a full history from the Veteran and consider the lay statements of record.  The Veteran is competent to attest to factual matters of which he has first-hand knowledge, and if there is a medical basis to support or doubt the history provided by the Veteran the examiner should provide a fully reasoned explanation. 

A rationale for all opinions expressed is requested as adjudicators are precluded from making any medical findings.  

2. The claims file should be sent to an appropriate examiner to review and to offer an opinion on the issue of service connection for headaches.  The examiner is asked to address the following:

(a.) Whether the current headache disability was caused by the service-connected bilateral shoulder strain.

(b.) Whether the current headache disability was aggravated by the service-connected bilateral shoulder strain.   

(c.) If the Veteran is diagnosed with migraine headaches, determine whether they manifested within one year of separation from service. 

Although an independent review of the claims file is required, the examiner is asked to consider the October 2023 VA medical opinion where the examiner opined that tension headaches were caused by muscular pain or strain.

The need for an examination is left to the discretion of the examiner.  A rationale for all opinions offered is requested as adjudicators are precluded from making any medical findings.   

3. The claims file should be sent to an appropriate examiner to review and to offer an opinion on the issue of service connection for neck strain.  The examiner is asked to address the following:

(a.) Whether the current neck disability was caused by the service-connected bilateral shoulder.

(b.) Whether the current neck disability was aggravated by the service-connected bilateral shoulder.   

The need for an examination is left to the discretion of the examiner.  A rationale for all opinions offered is requested as adjudicators are precluded from making any medical findings.  

4. The claims file should be sent to an appropriate examiner to review and to offer an opinion as to whether the current left ankle disability onset during service or is otherwise related to an in-service injury, event, or disease.  

Although an independent review of the claims file is required, the examiner is asked to consider the September 2010 diagnosis of left ankle sprain, the line of duty determination of the left ankle as incurred in the line of duty, and the report of left ankle pain in November 2012 and January 2014 VA treatment records.

The need for an examination is left to the discretion of the examiner.  A rationale for all opinions offered is requested as adjudicators are precluded from making any medical findings.  

5.  The claims file should be sent to an appropriate examiner to review and to offer an opinion on the issue of service connection for a psychiatric disorder.  The examiner is asked to address the following:

(a.) Whether the current psychiatric disorder was caused by the service-connected bilateral shoulder strain.

(b.) Whether the current psychiatric disorder was aggravated by the service-connected bilateral shoulder strain.   

The need for an examination is left to the discretion of the examiner.  A rationale for all opinions offered is requested as adjudicators are precluded from making any medical findings.   

6. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination to determine whether any current sleep apnea disability onset during service or is otherwise related to an in-service injury, event, or disease.  

Although an independent review of the claims file is required, the examiner is asked to consider the December 2010 service treatment where the Veteran reported that he experienced sleep problems or difficulty falling sleep; the July 2011 general examination where it was noted that the Veteran had a positive history of sleep apnea with related symptoms of daytime hypersomnolence, snoring, and sleep disruption; and the November 2022 private treatment where the Veteran reported having sleep disturbance. 

The examiner should elicit a full history from the Veteran and consider the lay statements of record.  The Veteran is competent to attest to factual matters of which he has first-hand knowledge, and if there is a medical basis to support or doubt the history provided by the Veteran the examiner should provide a fully reasoned explanation. 

A rationale for all opinions expressed is requested as adjudicators are precluded from making any medical findings.  

7. The claims file should be sent to an appropriate examiner to review and to offer an opinion on the issue of increased rating for chronic rhinitis.  The examiner is asked to address the following:

(a.) When the ameliorative effect of medication is disregarded, whether the Veteran's chronic rhinitis manifest without polyps, but with greater than 50-percent obstruction of nasal passage on both sides or complete obstruction on one side.

(b.) When the ameliorative effect of medication is disregarded, whether the Veteran's chronic rhinitis manifest with polyps.  

The need for an examination is left to the discretion of the examiner.  A rationale for all opinions offered is requested as adjudicators are precluded from making any medical findings.  

8. The claims file should be sent to an appropriate examiner to review and to offer an opinion regarding the severity of the right shoulder strain.  

(a.) Discounting the ameliorative effects of medications, the examiner should provide a full description of the disability and report all signs and symptoms necessary for evaluating the Veteran's disability under the rating criteria.  

(b.) Discounting the ameliorative effects of medication, the examiner is asked to address both active and passive motion, in weight-bearing and non-weight-bearing and, if possible, with range of the opposite undamaged joint.  

(c.) Discounting the ameliorative effects of medication, the clinician is asked to comment regarding the severity, frequency, and duration of any flare-ups, and the degree of functional loss during flare-ups or after repeated use over time.  The clinician should provide an estimate, if at all possible, of the additional impairment due to flare-ups or after repeated use over time based on the other evidence of record and the Veteran's statements. If it is not possible to provide a specific measurement without speculation, the examiner must state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training).

The need for an examination is left to the discretion of the examiner.  A rationale for all opinions offered is requested as adjudicators are precluded from making any medical findings.  

 

 

D. Martz Ames

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Mathew, M.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.