Citation Nr: A25034050
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 240418-434927
DATE: April 11, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 30 percent for migraine headaches is denied.

FINDING OF FACT

During the appeal period, the Veteran experienced migraines with characteristic prostrating attacks occurring on average once a month over the last several months.  The migraines did not manifest in very frequent completely prostrating and prolonged attacks productive of severe economic inadaptability.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for a disability rating in excess of 30 percent for migraines have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8100.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from February 2010 to January 2016.  This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an April 2024 rating decision by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In December 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR), and requested review of a November 2023 decision.  In April 2024, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the HLR decision on appeal, which considered the evidence of record at the time of the prior November 2023 decision.  

In the April 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the November 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 30 percent for migraine headaches is denied.

The Veteran contends he is entitled to an increased rating for his migraines.  After careful consideration, the Board must respectfully disagree.

Disability ratings are determined by applying the criteria set forth in the VA Schedule for Rating Disabilities, found in 38 C.F.R., Part 4.  The rating schedule is primarily a guide in the evaluation of disability resulting from all types of diseases and injuries encountered as a result of or incident to military service.  The ratings are intended to compensate, as far as can practicably be determined, the average impairment of earning capacity resulting from such diseases and injuries and their residual conditions in civilian occupations.  38 U.S.C. § 1155 ; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1.  Where there is a question as to which of two evaluations shall be applied, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria for that rating.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7.

In considering the severity of a disability, it is essential to trace the medical history of the veteran.  38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.41.  Consideration of the whole-recorded history is necessary so that a rating may accurately reflect the elements of disability present.  38 C.F.R. § 4.2; Peyton v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 282 (1991).  While the regulations require review of the recorded history of a disability by the adjudicator to ensure a more accurate evaluation, the regulations do not give past medical reports precedence over the current medical findings.

Where entitlement to compensation has already been established and an increase in the disability rating is at issue, it is the present level of disability that is of primary concern.  Francisco v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 55, 58 (1994).  However, where the question for consideration is the propriety of the initial rating assigned, evaluation of the evidence since the effective date of the grant of service connection is required.  Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119, 125-26 (1999).  Where VA's adjudication of the claim for increase is lengthy and factual findings show distinct time periods where the service-connected disability exhibits symptoms which would warrant different ratings, different or "staged" ratings may be assigned for such different periods of time.  Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505, 509-10 (2007); Fenderson, 12 Vet. App. at 126-27.

Additionally, the evaluation of the same disability under several Diagnostic Codes, known as pyramiding, must be avoided.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.14.  Separate ratings may be assigned for distinct disabilities resulting from the same injury only where the symptomatology for one condition is not duplicative or overlapping with the symptomatology of the other condition.  See Esteban v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 259, 261-62 (1994).

Under Diagnostic Code 8100, a 10 percent rating is warranted for migraine headaches that occur with characteristic prostrating attacks averaging one in two months over the previous several months. 

A 30 percent rating is warranted where migraine headaches occur with characteristic prostrating attacks on an average of once a month over the previous several months. 

Migraine headaches with very frequent, completely prostrating, and prolonged attacks that are productive of severe economic inadaptability warrant a maximum schedular 50 percent disability rating.  38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8100.

The rating criteria do not define "prostrating" as used in Diagnostic Code 8100.  In Johnson v. Wilkie, 30 Vet. App. 245, 247 (2018), the Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (CAVC) found that the phrase "characteristic prostrating attacks" describes migraine attacks that typically produce powerlessness or a lack of vitality.  Id. at 252.

Similarly, the regulations provide no clarification as to the meaning of the phrase "productive of severe economic inadaptability."  In Pierce v. Principi, 18 Vet. App. 440 (2004), the Court interpreted the phrase as follows: "nothing in Diagnostic Code 8100 requires that the claimant be completely unable to work in order to qualify for a 50% rating" because "[i]f 'economic inadaptability' were read to import unemployability," then a claimant who "met the economic-inadaptability criterion, would then be eligible for a rating of total disability based on individual unemployability...rather than just a 50% rating."  Id.

Because DC 8100 does not address the effects of medication, the Board may not deny entitlement to a higher rating on the basis of relief provided by medication.  See Jones v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 56, 63 (2012).  

By way of background, in a July 2022, rating decision, the Veteran was initially granted service connection for migraine headaches and assigned a 0 percent rating, effective February 5, 2021, under Diagnostic Code 8100, for headaches/migraines.  

In September 2023, the Veteran filed for an increased rating.  In November 2023, the RO granted an increase to 30 percent, effective September 13, 2023.  The Veteran filed a request for a higher-level review in December 2023.  The RO denied an increase to 50 percent in an April 2024 rating decision.  The Veteran appealed to the Board in April 2024.

The Veteran filed his current claim for an increased rating in September 2023.  The relevant rating period begins on September 13, 2023, which is based on the date of submission of the claim for an increased rating.

Accordingly, the Board has reviewed all relevant evidence, to include evidence dated within the one year look back period commencing September 13, 2022.  38 U.S.C. § 5110 (b)(3).

In February 2021, the Veteran authored a detailed lay statement in support of his claim.  He wrote that he has

headaches which now occur 1-2 times per week and happen at various times during the day  ...  They can last for varying amounts of time, depending on the severity.  At least 3-4 times per month, they knock me out of commission to the point that I am totally incapacitated and bedridden for 4-5 hours.  During my headaches, I have light sensitivity, noise sensitivity, dizziness, lightheadedness, throbbing pain, pulsating pain, flashing or shimmering lights, and nausea  ...  I use prescription medication to help treat these symptoms.  I have missed events and activities due to my headaches because they render me unable to function at all during the time of my headaches.  In the last 12 months I have missed at least a week of work due to my episodes.

VA first examined the Veteran for his migraine headaches in July 2022.  The Veteran reported migraines with pain on both sides, with nausea and light sensitivity.  He reported less than one attack every two months, which lasted for less than a day.  The Veteran also reported "[d]ifficulty staying on task at work due to frequent headaches".  He treated with a prescription for Sumatriptan.  The examiner marked that the Veteran did not have very prostrating and prolonged attacks of migraines/non-migraine pain productive of severe economic inadaptability.

VA most recently examined the Veteran for his migraine headaches in October 2023.  The examiner noted that there were no complaints or records of treatment since the prior July 2022 examination.  The examiner wrote, "[a]ccording to the Veteran, his migraine symptoms have been stable.  He is currently prescribed Sumatriptan as needed at onset of migraine by private PCP.  He states that this keeps his migraines manageable.  Migraines occur twice a month and last 48 hours."  During a migraine, the Veteran reported pain on the right side of his head, light sensitivity, and changes in vision.  The examiner marked that the Veteran did not have very prostrating and prolonged attacks of migraines/non-migraine pain productive of severe economic inadaptability.

The examiner recorded that the Veteran works in HVAC.  The Veteran reported he lost one to two weeks over the past 12 months due to his migraines.  The examiner wrote, "[h]eadaches have resulted in missed time at work during prostrating attacks secondary to decreased work productivity and concentration."

It is more likely than not that, but for the effects of his medication, the Veteran would have two to four migraines each month, with characteristic prostrating attacks.  However, it is less likely than not that he would have very frequent, completely prostrating, and prolonged attacks that are productive of severe economic inadaptability.  There is no evidence that, with or without medication, the Veteran has had very frequent, completely prostrating, and prolonged attacks that are productive of severe economic inadaptability at any point within the one-year lookback.  See, e.g., July 2022 VA examination, October 2023 VA examination.  

Both the February 2021 statement and July 2022 examination are outside of the one-year lookback beginning September 13, 2022.  However, because the Board may not deny an increased rating based solely on the ameliorative effects of the Veteran's Sumatriptan, the earlier evidence helps show what the Veteran's symptoms could be like without the medication.  See Jones, supra.  Thus, while the Veteran cannot be rated on the basis of these symptoms, the evidence is still relevant to the Veteran's symptoms during the relevant period on appeal from September 13, 2022.  Further, the July 2022 examination is only two months prior, and is a relevant snapshot of the Veteran's migraine symptoms.

The Veteran has not reported very frequent migraine attacks.  His reports have ranged from less than one per month in October 2023, to three to four per month in February 2021.  The Veteran takes the Sumatriptan at the start of a migraine, and it mitigates his symptoms, but there is no evidence that it stops him from having migraines in the first place.  See Colvin v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 171, 175 (1991) (VA may only consider independent medical evidence to support its findings but is not permitted to base decisions on its own unsubstantiated medical conclusions).

Within the one-year lookback, the Veteran has an average of one migraine per month.  The more current estimates are approximately less than one per month to two per month.  The Veteran has never reported more than four migraines a month at any point.  Regardless of whether three to four migraines a month qualifies as "very frequent", however, this estimate was over a year prior to the one-year lookback.  The criteria for a 30 percent rating requires a characteristic prostrating attack once per month on average, and therefore the frequency of the Veteran's prostrating attacks more closely approximates the 30 percent criteria.  

The evidence is arguably in balance as to whether the Veteran has completely prostrating and prolonged attacks.  The Veteran still experiences migraines with symptoms such as pain, nausea, and light sensitivity.  See July 2022 and October 2023 examinations.  The Veteran reported being completely unable to do anything during a migraine for 4-5 hours in the February 2021 statement.  These attacks would likely be completely prostrating.  However, there is no indication that any such attacks have happened within the one-year lookback.  

Although the Veteran did not specify the medication in his February 2021 statement, he did note he was treating with a prescription medication.  Regardless of whether the medication was Sumatriptan or some other medication, the evidence supports the Veteran's statement that medication has only ever made his symptoms more manageable.  Thus, there is some evidence that, but for the Sumatriptan, the Veteran would have completely prostrating attacks. 

Arguably, the Veteran does have prolonged attacks within the relevant timeframe.  The Veteran has reported migraines lasting 48 to 72 hours in October 2023.  This evidence is in approximate balance, and the Veteran's claim is not denied on the basis of the severity and duration of his migraine attacks.

As to severe economic inadaptability, the most relevant evidence comes from the Veteran's statements that he missed roughly a week or two of work over 12 months due to migraines.  See February 2021 lay statement, October 2023 examination.  It is unknown whether the Veteran has the benefit sick time, or whether he is paid by the hour.  He has also reported difficulty concentrating at work and trouble staying on task.  

Without more information, however, missing one to two weeks of work over the course of a year, by itself, does not rise to the level of severe economic inadaptability.  There is no evidence of how this impacted the Veteran's working situation or his financial stability.  With the available evidence, the Board cannot determine whether this was an extreme financial hardship or simply required use of sick leave.  Moreover, there is no evidence that this caused the Veteran any difficulty with his employer, or caused him to make career decisions he would not have made but for his migraines.  

With or without medication, it is less likely than not that the Veteran's symptoms more closely approximated the 50 percent criteria.  Specifically, there is no evidence that the Sumatriptan would alleviate the frequency of the Veteran's migraines or lessen the economic inadaptability caused by the migraines.  Thus, although the severity of the Veteran's migraines is alleviated by his medication, that is only one of the elements required for a 50 percent rating under DC 8100.  As to the frequency and economic adaptability components of DC 8100, the evidence weighs strongly against finding in favor of the Veteran, and the Board cannot afford him the benefit of the doubt.

Finally, the Board has considered whether it may remand the claim for the Veteran's private treatment records.  This indication of possible treatment records for migraines by the Veteran's private medical provider does not sufficiently identify these records such that the RO had a duty to retrieve them.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c).  The name of the provider and dates of treatment are not in the available evidence.  

Accordingly, the Veteran's symptoms do not most closely approximate the criteria for a 50 percent rating, even after affording him the benefit of the doubt.  Unfortunately, his claim for an increased rating must be denied.

 

 

Jenna Brant

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	T.E. Yahner, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.