Citation Nr: A25034997
Decision Date: 04/16/25	Archive Date: 04/16/25

DOCKET NO. 240910-473081
DATE: April 16, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disability, to include posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

Resolving reasonable doubt in favor of the Veteran, he has an acquired psychiatric disability, to include PTSD, due to a traumatic experience during military service.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

Resolving any reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the criteria for service connection for an acquired psychiatric disability, to include PTSD, have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the Air Force from June 1975 to November 1976. 

These matters come before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an August 2024 Supplemental Claim rating decision of a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office that reconsidered the Veteran's claim for service connection of PTSD.  

Procedurally, the Board notes that the Veteran's service connection claim for PTSD was initially denied in a May 2019 rating decision.  He submitted a supplemental claim in May 2020 and a February 2022 rating decision confirmed and continued to deny service connection for PTSD.  Pursuant to a May 2022 supplemental claim, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) again continued to deny the claim in an August 2022 rating decision.  The Veteran requested a Higher Level Review, and in a December 2022 rating decision, the AOJ found a duty to assist error and transferred the matter for Supplemental Claim review and additional development, which resulted in the August 2024 rating decision on appeal.  

In September 2024, the Veteran timely appealed the August 2024 rating decision with submission of VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), and elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the AOJ decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Of note, the Board is bound by favorable findings made by the AOJ, absent clear and unmistakable error.  38 C.F.R. § 3.104 (c).  

The evidentiary record show diagnoses and treatment for PTSD and persistent depressive disorder, in addition to a March 2019 VA PTSD examination that included a diagnosis of alcohol use disorder and an October 2023 VA mental disorders (other than PTSD) Examination that diagnosed unspecified depression disorders.  A claim for a disability includes any disability that may reasonably be encompassed by the claimant's description of the claim, reported symptoms, and the other information of record.  See Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1, 5-6 (2009).  Therefore, the Board has recharacterized the claim to encompass an acquired psychiatric disorder.

As a final preliminary matter, the August 2024 rating decision on appeal found new and relevant evidence was received to warrant readjudicating the Veteran's claim for service connection for PTSD.  As the Board is bound by this favorable finding, it need not adjudicate the matter and may proceed to the merits of the claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.104 (c).

Service Connection

A veteran is entitled to VA disability compensation if there is disability resulting from personal injury suffered or disease contracted in line of duty in active service, or for aggravation of a preexisting injury suffered or disease contracted in line of duty in active service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1131.

To establish an entitlement to service connection for a disability, a veteran must show: (1) a present disability; (2) an in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service, the so-called "nexus" requirement.  Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

Service connection for PTSD requires: (1) medical evidence diagnosing the condition in accordance with 38 C.F.R. § 4.125 (a); (2) credible supporting evidence that the claimed in-service stressor actually occurred; and (3) medical evidence of a link between current symptomatology and the claimed in-service stressor.  38 C.F.R. § 3.304 (f).  See also Cohen v. Brown, 10 Vet. App. 128 (1997).

Generally, where a determination is made that a veteran did not "engage in combat with the enemy," or the claimed stressor is not related to combat, a veteran's lay testimony alone will not be enough to establish the occurrence of the alleged stressor.  See Moreau v. Brown, 9 Vet. App. 389, 395 (1996); Dizoglio v. Brown, 9 Vet. App. 163, 166 (1996).  In such cases, the record must contain service records or other corroborative evidence that substantiates or verifies the veteran's testimony or statements as to the occurrence of the claimed stressor.  See West (Carlton) v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 70, 76.

When a veteran's claim was certified for appeal before the Board after August 4, 2014, any diagnoses for psychiatric disabilities rendered for purposes of obtaining VA benefits must use the DSM-V criteria.  38 C.F.R. § 4.125 (a).

Within the legal framework for evaluating claims of service connection for PTSD, the sufficiency of a stressor is a medical determination, while the occurrence of the stressor is a legal determination.  Sizemore v. Principi, 18 Vet. App. 264 (2004).

In Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49, 53 (1990), the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims stated that "a veteran need only demonstrate that there is an 'approximate balance of positive and negative evidence' in order to prevail."  When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, VA shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant.  38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b); see also Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F. 4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc).

Facts and Analysis

The Veteran seeks service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include PTSD, as related to active-duty service.  He does not allege that he engaged in combat or that his stressor to support a diagnosis of PTSD is combat-related; rather he asserts that while in service, he was exposed to the human remains of his friend, a fellow servicemember, following his death by suicide from a self-inflicted gunshot.

In the August 2024 rating decision, the AOJ favorably found that the Veteran has a current diagnosis of PTSD, which is binding on the Board.  38 C.F.R. § 3.104 (c). Thus, the first Shedden element of service connection is met.  

Regarding the second Shedden element of service connection, an in-service event, the AOJ conceded that evidence was submitted to corroborate that the death of a fellow servicemember by suicide in October 1976 but determined that the evidence failed to show that the Veteran actually witnessed the event and failed to make a favorable finding in this regard.  However, the Board points out that the Veteran has not asserted that he witnessed the actual shooting, but instead specifically asserts that he was notified of the death, ran to the scene, and saw his friend slumped over in the vehicle after sustaining a self-inflicted gunshot wound.  Given the corpsman's death by suicide has been conceded, and the Veteran's reports of witnessing the aftermath thereof are internally consistent and consistent with the evidentiary record, the Board resolves any reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor and finds the Veteran experienced an in-service event occurred.  38 C.F.R. § 3.159; Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, at 469-71 (1994).  Therefore, the Board finds the second element of service connection is satisfied.

Thus, the remaining question before the Board is whether there exists a medical nexus between the Veteran's current acquired psychiatric disability, to include PTSD, and the in-service stressful event.   

In May 2022, the Veteran's submitted a private medical opinion by a psychologist that is also a licensed VA contracted examiner which shows the Veteran has current diagnoses of PTSD and persistent depressive disorder with overlapping symptoms that cannot be differentiated from one another.  See Medical Assessment of C.M. PhD, HSPP, received May 11, 2022.  The psychologist identified the PTSD stressor as exposure to death after arriving on the scene of his friend/fellow corpsman's death by suicide.  Notably, the Veteran experienced intrusive thoughts related to the event, which included traumatic nightmares and recurrent thoughts, as well as feelings of guilt, struggling with feeling that he could have helped prevent the tragedy.  The private psychologist opined that the Veteran's PTSD and persistent depressive disorder were related to the traumatic stress he experienced when a fellow corpsman died by suicide during active duty.  Id., at 7.  The Board affords this opinion great probative weight as it takes into consideration the Veteran's lay statements, applies the evidence to medical principles, and provides an explanation of symptoms and their correlation to etiology.

The Veteran was afforded VA PTSD examinations in February 2022 and March 2023 to determine the nature and etiology of his PTSD.  Although neither the February 2022 nor March 2023 examiners provided favorable nexus opinions, both noted that the Veteran's report of witnessing the aftermath of his friend's death by a self-inflicted gunshot wound was the only identified stressor sufficient to support his PTSD diagnosis.  

Of note, an October 2023 VA mental disorders (other than PTSD) examination reflects the Veteran's diagnosis of unspecified depressive disorder.  The examiner provided an unfavorable nexus opinion for service connection as secondary to the Veteran's service-connected concussion, reporting that the evidentiary record showed a history of PTSD with a stressor related to the death of his friend by suicide; the examiner did not provide an opinion on direct service connection.

Based on above and review of the evidentiary record, the Board finds there is at least an approximate balance of evidence that the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder, to include PTSD, is due to a traumatic experience during his military service.  With the resolution of any reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the claim for entitlement to service connection for acquired psychiatric disorder, to include PTSD, is warranted.

 

 

MICHAEL LANE

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Gipson, Natalie E.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.