Citation Nr: A25034381
Decision Date: 04/14/25	Archive Date: 04/14/25

DOCKET NO. 240919-475328
DATE: April 14, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for other specified trauma and stressor related disorder is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran's other specified trauma and stressor related disorder is the result of an in-service event, evidenced by lay statements and court documents.  

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for service connection for other specified trauma and stressor related disorder are met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from August 1995 to September 1999. 

The rating decision on appeal was issued in February 2024 and constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.  

In the September 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the February 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Entitlement to service connection for other specified trauma and stressor related disorder is granted. 

The Veteran asserts that she is entitled to service connection for a stressor related mental disability on a direct basis. As outlined below, the Board finds that service connection is warranted for the Veteran's other specified trauma and stressor related disorder. 

On the July 1999 service treatment record (STR) report of medical history, the Veteran indicated she does not experience depression or excessive worry or nervous trouble of any sort. In a July 1999 STR separation report of medical examination, no finding was made regarding the Veteran's psychiatric evaluation. 

In a June 2019 VA treatment record, the Veteran reported that she reported her sexual trauma to a psychologist around September 2018. 

In an August 2019 VA treatment record, the medical provider stated that the Veteran has a history of bipolar II, social anxiety, and posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD). The Veteran stated that family causes her life to be extremely stressful. 

In a July 2021 lay statement, the Veteran reported an in-service personal trauma that occurred when she was stationed in Aberdeen in 1995. She stated that the drill sergeant, who was known to be a "creep" and an alcoholic, came and stood behind her causing her to be startled. She stated that the next week while watching television, the drill sergeant did the same thing. She stated that she then left to ready for bed. She stated she was in the shower, and when she got out, somebody was trying to open the door. She stated that she was pushing the door closed and this kept on going and then the person left. She stated when she checked the hallway, no one was there. She stated she did not report the incident. She stated that she thought it was the drill sergeant that tried to open the bathroom door. She stated that when she was at her next duty station, an investigator spoke to her about issues at Aberdeen with the drill sergeant. She stated that she did not report anything to the investigator. She stated that she did not think her experience was anything since she did not experience sexual assault or battery. 

She also stated that that during service she experienced a lot of sexual harassment. She stated she was a mechanic and was the only woman. She stated that she had to learn how to deal with the sexual harassment. 

As a result of her experiences in service, she does not want to socialize. She stated she is not involved in romantic relationships. She stated she does not trust men. She stated she has difficulty expressing her feelings. She stated she feels lonely. She stated she can be hypervigilant. She stated she had thoughts of hurting herself in the past. She stated she has depression and anxiety, and the depression began after separation from the military. She stated that because of what happened during service, she has lost her sense of worth. Attached to her July 2021 statement was a news article about sexual misconduct of the drill sergeant from Aberdeen during the time the Veteran was assigned to that location. 

On the August 2021 personal trauma incident/marker worksheet, VA indicated the Veteran had markers that suggest the Veteran's reported personal trauma occurred. The markers were noted to be diagnoses of PTSD, bipolar II, anxiety, depression, obesity, and weight loss/gain in the STRs. The worksheet noted a lay statement from S.M. indicating the Veteran told her that her commander would sneak into her room while she was sleeping. S.M. stated she would find the Veteran wandering around and unable to sleep.

On the August 2021 VA PTSD examination, the examiner indicated the Veteran has a diagnosis of other specified trauma and stressor related disorder. The examiner stated the Veteran does not meet the criteria for PTSD. However, the examiner stated that the stressor was subjectively intense enough to result in the development of trauma symptoms over time. The Veteran reported the incident of someone attempting to push into the bathroom while she was showering. 

The August 2021 VA examiner opined that it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's other specified trauma and stressor related disorder is the result of service. The examiner reasoned that several of the records include similar stressor statements, and this stressor is causal for her trauma disorder. The examiner stated the Veteran is not diagnosed with any other mental health condition. The examiner stated the Veteran's stressor does not meet military sexual trauma (MST) criteria. The examiner stated the Veteran did not suffer a sexual assault; however, the stressor was impactful enough that she developed trauma symptoms over time. 

On the April 2023 VA examination, the examiner indicated the Veteran has a diagnosis of other specified trauma and stressor related disorder. The examiner specifically noted the Veteran does not have a diagnosis of PTSD. At the examination, the Veteran reported that while service in Aberdeen in 1995, someone attempted to open the bathroom door as she was stepping out of the shower in the barracks. She stated that because she was new, she was not allowed off-post and was alone on the floor. She stated that there was a struggle with her pushing the door to stay closed while the person on the other side continued to try to open the door. The Veteran stated the person eventually walked away. The Veteran stated that once she looked in the hall, no one was present. She added that about one week prior to this incident, a sergeant came up from behind her while she was watching a movie in the common area of the barracks. She stated that this scared her, not because he did anything specific or intentional, but rather because she did not hear him approach. 

The April 2023 VA examiner opined that it is less likely than not that the Veteran's other specified trauma and stressor related disorder was the result of service. The examiner reasoned that after review of the Veteran's claims folder, there was no in-service evidence supporting the Veteran's statement regarding the stressor was found. Therefore, the examiner stated no opinion regarding the currently diagnosed other specified trauma and stress related disorder is offered. 

The VA examiner explained that all potential evidence regarding the identified stressor found in her post-military records comes from the Veteran. The examiner stated that while the Veteran has told the same story consistently since first talking about it to a mental health professional in 2019, no other evidence is present from when she was still in the military or since her discharge in 1999. The examiner found that this lack of in-service evidence is consistent with the Veteran's statements indicating the claimed incident was never reported while she was still in service. The examiner noted that this is true even when investigators reportedly later questioned her about her experiences at Aberdeen in the course of their investigation of a specific Sergeant. The examiner stated there is no mention of this claimed stressor incident until 2019 when the Veteran first reported it to a mental health provider, despite her receipt of mental health treatment across the previous 11 years. 

The examiner further stated that the information regarding the Sergeant was considered as potentially corroborating the Veteran's claimed stressor. The examiner stated that this evidence shows that the Sergeant was found guilty of sexual assault of six female trainees while at Aberdeen. The examiner stated that the time frame that these acts took place encompassed the Veteran's time in training there, including the time of her claimed stressor in 1995. The examiner stated that the allegations against and subsequent conviction of the Sergeant are in no way disputed, nor is the Veteran's account of what occurred to her. The examiner stated that although the Sergeant was present at Aberdeen around the time of the Veteran's incident, the Veteran has admitted that there is no evidence that the person attempting to open her bathroom door was the Sergeant. In fact, the Veteran does not know the gender of the person, nor said the person's intent for attempting to enter the bathroom at that time. The Veteran stated in the past and at this examination that she never saw anyone outside of the bathroom after the incident. Therefore, the examiner concluded that the Sergeant's court case and subsequent convictions cannot corroborate this Veteran's lay statements of her experienced event. 

Regarding any conflicting evidence, the VA examiner stated the evidence of record fails to corroborate the occurrence of MST event. Thus, the examiner stated it is opined that the evidence of record is less likely than not consistent with the occurrence of MST stressor event. The examiner stated that the rationale is two-fold. First, the examiner stated that after extensive review of the available records, no in-service evidence supporting the Veteran's statement regarding the stressor was found. Second, the examiner stated the incident presented by the Veteran is not an MST event. The examiner stated that MST is a subset of personal trauma and refers to sexual harassment, sexual assault, or rape that occurs in a military setting. The examiner stated that while the Veteran has spoken of the identified incident since at least 2019, at no time has sexual assault or rape been claimed. The examiner stated that by her own admission, she never saw anyone once she opened the door to see who might have been trying to enter the bathroom, and she has no way of knowing the intent of said person. The examiner stated that her fears of "What if?" or what might have happened if the unknown person had been able to open the bathroom door do no in any way constitute sexual harassment. The examiner stated that the Veteran made statements about a sergeant, some one she referred to as a "creep" in her July 2021 statement, coming up behind her and scaring her while watching a movie in barracks. The examiner stated that as with the bathroom door incident, this is not MST stressor event as it is not related to sexual harassment, sexual assault, or rape. 

The Board notes that the record contains different VA examination reports that arrive at opposite conclusions from one another.  In that regard, the Board finds that the April 2023 VA opinion, although extensive, is less persuasive as there is evidence to support that the Veteran's in-service event occurred, as supported by the Court findings of the drill sergeant consistent with the Veteran's assigment, the consistency of the Veteran's reported event, and the Veteran's symptoms that resulted. Further, the April 2023 VA examiner did not address the positive August 2021 VA opinion. As a result, the Board finds the April 2023 VA opinion to be less persuasive than the 2021 examination report. 

Based on the Veteran's credible assertions, supporting evidence of a traumatizing experience, news article and court documentation of the drill sergeant, lay statements, and the August 2021 VA examination and positive nexus opinion, the Board finds that the evidence supports finding that the Veteran's other specified trauma and stressor related disorder was the result of an in-service event.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a). Therefore, service connection for other specified trauma and stressor related disorder is warranted. The appeal is granted to that extent. 

 

B. D. WATSON

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	M. Thompson, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.