Citation Nr: A25034218
Decision Date: 04/14/25	Archive Date: 04/14/25

DOCKET NO. 211105-204920
DATE: April 14, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an annual clothing allowance for 2021 for left ankle brace is granted.

Entitlement to an annual clothing allowance for 2021 for right leg brace is denied.

Entitlement to an annual clothing allowance for 2021 for skin medication is denied. 

FINDINGS OF FACT

1.  The Veteran's left ankle brace is reasonably shown to have caused wear and tear to his clothing.

2.  The Veteran is not service connected for any right lower extremity disability.  

3. The only skin disability for which the Veteran is service connected is a scar of the scalp; any skin medication prescribed for this disability is not shown to cause wear and tear to the Veteran's clothing.   

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1.  Resolving any reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the criteria for entitlement to an annual clothing allowance for 2021 for left ankle brace have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1162, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.810.

2.  The criteria for entitlement to an annual clothing allowance for 2021 for right leg brace have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1162, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.810.

3. The criteria for entitlement to an annual clothing allowance for 2021 for skin medication have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1162, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.810.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from August 1963 to October 1970.

This matter is on appeal before the Board of Veterans Appeals (Board) from an August 2021 decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center (VAMC) in Orange, Texas.  

In a November 2021, a notice of disagreement selecting Hearing Lane review by a Veterans Law Judge was received.  A Board videoconference hearing was then scheduled to take place on December 11, 2024.  However, in a December 11, 2024, letter, the Veteran's representative withdrew the Veteran's hearing request.  Accordingly, in deciding this appeal, the Board can consider the evidence of record prior to the August 2021 VAMC decision, and any evidence received within 90 days of December 11, 2024.  However, no additional evidence was associated with the claims file in connection with this appeal within the 90 day period.

Clothing Allowance

A clothing allowance may be paid annually to a veteran who, because of a service-connected disability, wears or uses a prosthetic or orthopedic appliance (including a wheelchair) which VA determines tends to wear out or tear the veteran's clothing, or who uses medication which a physician has prescribed for a skin condition which is due to a service-connected disability and VA determines causes irreparable damage to the veteran's outer garments.  38 U.S.C. § 1162.  The implementing regulation, 38 C.F.R. § 3.810, provides, in pertinent part, that an annual clothing allowance may be granted when the following criteria are met:

(a)(1)(ii)(A) The Under Secretary for Health or a designee certifies that a veteran, because of a service-connected disability or disabilities, wears or uses one qualifying prosthetic or orthopedic appliance (including, but not limited to, a wheelchair) which tends to wear or tear clothing.

(a)(1)(ii)(B) The Under Secretary for Health or a designee certifies that a veteran, because of a service-connected disability or disabilities, uses medication prescribed by a physician for one skin condition that causes irreparable damage to the veteran's outer garments.  38 C.F.R. § 3.810(a)(1).

It is the policy of VA to administer the law under a broad interpretation, consistent with the facts in each case with all reasonable doubt to be resolved in favor of the claimant; however, the reasonable doubt rule is not a means for reconciling actual conflict or a contradiction in the evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.102.  The claimant is entitled to the benefit of the doubt when the evidence is in "approximate" balance (i.e., "nearly equal)" but does not require that the evidence be in exact equipoise.  Lynch v. McDonough, 999 F.3d 1391, 1394 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

1. Entitlement to an annual clothing allowance for 2021 for left ankle brace.  

The Veteran seeks a clothing allowance for left ankle brace for his service-connected left ankle disability.  He has generally alleged that the brace caused wear and tear to his clothing during 2021.  See e.g., Application for Clothing Allowance dated July 2021 where the Veteran signed a certification that because of his service-connected residuals of left ankle sprain, he wore the ankle brace, which tended to wear and tear his clothing.   

A May 2014 VA progress note indicates that a large ankle/foot brace was delivered to the Veteran.  It was noted that the brace was vinyl/nylon foam and had a lace up closure.  The specific type of brace was noted to be an ankle foot orthosis (AFO), prefabricated ankle gauntlet, that was off the shelf, which was indicated for osteoarthritis of the lower left leg.  The Healthcare Common Procedure Coding System (HCPCS) Code for the appliance was listed as L1902.  This Code generally pertains to "ankle gauntlet or similar, prefabricated, off-the-shelf."  See e.g., https://www.cms.gov/medicare/regulations-guidance/physician-self-referral/list-cpt-hcpcs-codes.          

In the August 2021 decision, the VAMC denied a clothing allowance for the left foot/ankle brace based on a finding that it did not cause wear and tear to an outer garment.  The VAMC did not make a finding that the brace was not worn for the Veteran's service-connected left ankle residuals during 2021 and did not explain the basis for finding that the brace did not cause wear and tear to an outer garment.

Given the lack of a negative finding by the AOJ and given the Veteran's affirmative certification, the evidence reasonably indicates that the Veteran did wear a left foot/ankle AFO for his service-connected residuals of left ankle sprain during 2021.  Concerning whether this appliance caused clothing wear and tear during 2021, as AFOs do cover the ankle, they at least come into contact with an outer garment, pants.  Also, as indicated above, the Veteran generally certified that wear and tear did occur on his July 2021 application without specially describing the nature of the wear and tear.  On the other hand, in the August 2021 decision, the VAMC prosthetics department made a general determination that the Veteran's left ankle brace did not result in clothing wear and tear without explaining the basis for this finding.  

The Veteran is competent to report that his left ankle AFO caused clothing wear and tear as this is an observable phenomenon.  In the absence of an indication that the Veteran's account is not credible, this report supports a finding that the brace does cause such wear and tear.  Additionally, although VAMC prosthetics representatives are deemed to have expertise in determining what type of prosthetic would generally cause clothing wear and tear, there is no indication that they or any other VA prosthetics staff examined the Veteran's specific brace AFO or his clothing to determine whether wear and tear resulting from the brace was actually occurring.  

Rather, in the August 2021 decision, the VAMC prosthetics department made a generalized finding that the type of brace worn by the Veteran would not cause wear and tear without explaining the basis for this finding.  Given that the Veteran provided a direct observation of the effect of the AFO on his clothing and the VA prosthetics staff did not, the evidence at least approximates equipoise as to whether such wear and tear took place.  Consequently, affording the Veteran the benefit of the doubt, clothing wear and tear in 2021 due to the AFO has been established.  Accordingly, as all necessary criteria are met, a clothing allowance for this brace for 2021 is warranted.  38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.810(a)(1)(ii)(A); Lynch, 1 Vet. App. 49 (1990).      

2. Entitlement to an annual clothing allowance for 2021 for right leg brace.  

Review of the record shows that the Veteran is not service connected for any right lower extremity disability, to include any disability of the right leg.  Consequently, there is no basis in the record for awarding a clothing allowance for any brace the Veteran wore for a right lower extremity/right leg disability during 2021.  38 C.F.R. § 3.810(a)(1).  Accordingly, the appeal seeking clothing allowance for right leg brace for 2021 must be denied as a matter of law.  Id.; Sabonis v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 426 (1994).

3. Entitlement to an annual clothing allowance for 2022 for skin medication.

As indicated above, a clothing allowance can only be awarded for a skin medication when because of a service-connected disability, the Veteran uses medication prescribed for a skin condition that causes irreparable damage to the Veteran's outer garments.  38 C.F.R. § 3.810(a)(1).  In this case, the evidence indicates that the only skin disability for which service connection is in effect is "scar, residual of scalp laceration."  VA treatment records show the Veteran was prescribed three topical medications during 2021; Capsaicin, Diclofenac, and hydrophilic ointment.  Notably, topical Capsaicin and Diclofenac are both prescribed to treat pain, not to treat any skin condition.  There is also no indication that either medication was prescribed to treat a skin condition, let alone for the service-connected residual scar of the scalp.  Also, although hydrophilic ointment is used to treat skin conditions, including dry skin, there is no indication in the record that this medicine was prescribed to treat the Veteran's residual scar of the scalp, and the Veteran has not alleged that this was the case.   

The Veteran did generally certify on the July 2021 clothing allowance application that a medication prescribed to treat a service-connected skin condition did cause irreparable damage to an outer garment, a certification he is competent to make.  However, he did not affirmatively report using of a prescribed skin medication to treat the scar of the scalp, nor did he specify how any topical skin medication he may have used to treat scarring of the scalp caused irreparable damage to any outer garment.  In this regard, the scalp is normally not covered by clothing unless and individual is wearing a hat or apparel similar to a hat, and the Veteran did not allege that any skin medication had caused any irreparable damage to any hats.  The Board notes that VHA has determined that clothing allowance may not be awarded for "accessories" such as hats but here, the Board need not decide whether this determination is correct under the underlying statute and regulation as irreparable damage to hats due to a skin medication to treat the Veteran's lone service-connected skin disability, scarring of the scalp, is not shown or alleged.  

On the other hand, as noted above, the contemporaneous VA treatment records show no indication that during 2021, any of the skin medication prescribed to the Veteran was used to treat the scar of the scalp.  The Board presumes that had the Veteran been treated with a skin medication for scarring of the scalp, that this would have been reflected in the VA treatment records, just as treatment of conditions affecting other parts of the body is reflected in these records.  Consequently, the Board is not able to find credible the Veteran's general June 2021 certification that a skin medication prescribed for his service-connected scar of the scalp caused irreparable damage to any outer garment during 2021.  

Rather the Board must credit the information contained in the contemporaneous VA treatment records, which do not show treatment of the scarring of the scalp by any skin medication.  Thus, the evidence weighs against any such medication causing irreparable damage to any outer garment.  Accordingly, as the evidence weighs persuasively against this claim, the appeal seeking a clothing allowance for skin medication must be denied.  38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.810(a)(1)(ii)(A); Lynch, 1 Vet. App. 49 (1990).      

 

 

S. HENEKS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Brook, Daniel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.