Citation Nr: A25034678
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 240912-474436
DATE: April 15, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for cervical spine disorder, to include degenerative disc disease, and to include as secondary to service-connected disability, is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for lumbar spine disorder, to include levoscoliosis, degenerative disc disease, and intervertebral disc disease, and to include as secondary to service-connected disability, is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for right knee disorder, to include history of partial menisctomy right knee, and to include as secondary to service-connected disability, is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from April 1978 to August 1978 and from April 1979 to March 1986. 

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a rating decision issued in January 2024 by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office. In the September 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the August 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. However, because the Board is remanding the claims, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

1. Entitlement to service connection for cervical spine disorder.

2. Entitlement to service connection for lumbar spine disorder.

3. Entitlement to service connection for right knee disorder.

The Veteran contends entitlement to service connection for cervical spine disorder, lumbar spine disorder, and right knee disorder as onset during service and continuing since, and as secondary to his service-connected right foot disability. As it relates to direct service connection, the Veteran avers that his joints were subject to extreme wear and tear caused by his in-service duties related to lifting, carrying, standing, and walking. As it relates to secondary service connection, the Veteran avers that biomechanical abnormalities caused by his service-connected right foot disability caused or aggravated his cervical spine disorder, lumbar spine disorder, and right knee disorder. 

As favorably found by the AOJ, the Veteran has a current cervical spine disorder, lumbar spine disorder, and right knee disorder, all confirmed by VA examination. Service treatment records show the Veteran sought treatment for back and neck pain. At VA examinations in June 2018, the Veteran reported his back, neck, and knee pain all onset about 20 years prior, or in approximately 1998. At VA examinations in July 2023, the Veteran reported that his back, neck and knee pain all onset during service and had continued since that time. The Veteran avers he did not seek treatment for his back, neck, and right knee pain during service due to military culture. 

The June 2018 VA examiner provided negative opinions regarding direct service connection for the Veteran's cervical spine disorder, lumbar spine disorder, and right knee disorder, stating that medical records were silent for chronic, continuous conditions. The Board finds the June 2018 VA examiner's opinions are inadequate as they are conclusory and do not address the service treatment records noted above or the Veteran's later lay statements regarding onset in service and chronicity and continuity since.

The July 2023 VA examiner provided negative opinions regarding direct service connection for the Veteran's cervical spine disorder, lumbar spine disorder, and right knee disorder, relying on a lack of chronicity during service. The Board finds the July 2023 VA examiner's opinions regarding direct service connection are inadequate as they are conclusory and do not address the service treatment records noted above or the Veteran's lay statements regarding onset in service and chronicity and continuity since. 

The July 2023 VA examiner provided negative opinions regarding secondary service connection for the Veteran's cervical spine disorder, lumbar spine disorder, and right knee disorder, stating that the Veteran's right foot disability was not medically related to the cervical spine disorder, lumbar spine disorder, and right knee disorder, and that they were separate, unrelated entities. The VA examiner did not offer any opinion as to whether the Veteran's service-connected right foot disability aggravated his cervical spine disorder, lumbar spine disorder, or right knee disorder. The Board finds the July 2023 VA examiner's opinions regarding secondary service connection to be inadequate because the VA examiner did not address the Veteran's assertion that altered biomechanics caused by his right foot disability affect his cervical spine disorder, lumbar spine disorder, and right knee disorder, nor did the VA examiner offer an opinion regarding secondary aggravation.

Failure to obtain adequate medical opinions regarding direct service connection and secondary service connection in the instant claims is a pre-decisional duty to assist error. Remand is warranted to correct it. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a). 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Forward the record to include a copy of this Remand to an appropriate medical professional for opinions as to the nature and etiology of the Veteran's cervical spine disorder, lumbar spine disorder, and right knee disorder. Following a review of the relevant record, the medical professional is asked to address the following?

(a.) Is it as approximately likely as not that the Veteran's cervical spine disorder, to include degenerative disc disease, onset during or is otherwise the result of his service?

(b.) Is it as approximately likely as not that the Veteran's cervical spine disorder, to include degenerative disc disease, is 1) due to or the result of his service-connected right foot disability or 2) aggravated by his service-connected right foot disability. 

(c.) Is it as approximately likely as not that the Veteran's lumbar spine disorder, to include levoscoliosis, degenerative disc disease, and intervertebral disc syndrome, onset during or is otherwise the result of his service?

(d.) Is it as approximately likely as not that the Veteran's lumbar spine disorder, to include levoscoliosis, degenerative disc disease, and intervertebral disc syndrome, is 1) due to or the result of his service-connected right foot disability or 2) aggravated by his service-connected right foot disability. 

(e.) Is it as approximately likely as not that the Veteran's right knee disorder, to include history of partial menisctomy right knee, onset during or is otherwise the result of his service?

(f.) Is it as approximately likely as not that the Veteran's right knee disorder, to include history of partial menisctomy right knee, is 1) due to or the result of his service-connected right foot disability or 2) aggravated by his service-connected right foot disability.

The medical professional should address the service treatment records showing treatment for neck and back problems, the Veteran's lay statements regarding the onset and chronicity and continuity of his neck, back, and knee problems, and the Veteran's assertion that altered biomechanics caused by his service-connected right foot disability affect his neck, back, and knee. 

A rationale for any opinion offered should be provided. 

 

 

Nathaniel Doan

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Sasha Larie Boersma

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.