Citation Nr: A25034370
Decision Date: 04/14/25	Archive Date: 04/14/25

DOCKET NO. 240308-422369
DATE: April 14, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to a compensable (in excess of zero percent) disability rating prior to October 25, 2021, and in excess of 40 percent thereafter for hypertensive retinopathy with branch retinal vein occlusion with macular edema is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The evidence of record is persuasively against the finding that the Veteran had documented incapacitating episodes requiring at least 1 but less than 3 treatment visits for the service-connected hypertensive retinopathy with branch retinal vein occlusion with macular edema for a period of 12 months prior to October 25, 2021, or had documented incapacitating episodes requiring 7 or more treatment visits for the service-connected hypertensive retinopathy with branch retinal vein occlusion with macular edema for a period of 12 months from October 25, 2021, and onwards.

2. The evidence of record is persuasively against the finding that throughout the rating period on appeal, the Veteran had corrected vision for any of his eyes worse than visual acuity of 20/40. Also, the Veteran's service-connected hypertensive retinopathy with branch retinal vein occlusion with macular edema has not been manifested by visual field defect, or diplopia or any other impairment of eye muscle function. Furthermore, the Veteran has not experienced anatomical loss of either eye, or had no more than light perception in either eye.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to a compensable (in excess of zero percent) disability rating prior to October 25, 2021, and in excess of 40 percent thereafter for hypertensive retinopathy with branch retinal vein occlusion with macular edema have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107, 5110; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.400, 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.25, 4.27, 4.31, 4.75-4.79, Diagnostic Code 6006, 6061-64, 6066, 6080, 6090-91.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Air Force from December 1969 to August 1970.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an April 2023 rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In a September 2022 rating decision, the RO continued the zero percent disability rating for the service-connected hypertensive retinopathy with branch retinal vein occlusion with macular edema. In January 2023, the Veteran filed a higher-level review request for entitlement to an increased rating for the service-connected hypertensive retinopathy with branch retinal vein occlusion with macular edema. After completing the higher-level review, in the April 2023 rating decision, the RO increased the disability rating from zero to 40 percent from October 25, 2021, for the service-connected hypertensive retinopathy with branch retinal vein occlusion with macular edema. The Veteran timely appealed the matter to the Board.

In the March 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the September 2022 RO decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the RO issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a supplemental claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a supplemental claim are included with this decision.

Entitlement to a compensable disability rating prior to October 25, 2021, and in excess of 40 percent thereafter for hypertensive retinopathy with branch retinal vein occlusion with macular edema is denied.

The Veteran has been receiving a noncompensable (zero percent) disability rating from November 1, 2018, and 40 percent disability rating from October 25, 2021, for the service-connected hypertensive retinopathy with branch retinal vein occlusion with macular edema. In the March 2024 correspondence, the Veteran's representative asserted that a 10 percent disability rating is warranted from February 2019, and a 40 percent disability percent rating is warranted from an earlier effective date of March 2021.

Initially, the Board finds that the rating period on appeal begins from November 1, 2018, the date of grant of service connection for hypertensive retinopathy, because on this date the Veteran submitted the intent to file a claim, and has been continuously pursuing the claim since then. The Veteran's intent to file a claim was received on November 1, 2018. Within one year, on December 4, 2018, the Veteran filed the claim for entitlement to service connection for hypertensive retinopathy as secondary to the service-connected hypertension. In an April 2019 rating decision, the RO granted entitlement to service connection for hypertensive retinopathy, and assigned a zero percent disability rating with an effective date of November 1, 2018. Within one year of the April 2019 rating decision, in April 2020, the Veteran filed a supplemental claim for increased rating for the service-connected hypertensive retinopathy. In a July 2021 rating decision, the RO continued a zero percent disability rating for the service-connected hypertensive retinopathy. Within one year, in May 2022, the Veteran filed another supplemental claim for increased rating for the service-connected hypertensive retinopathy.

The RO adjudicated the Veteran's supplemental claim, and in the September 2022 rating decision, the RO continued the zero percent disability rating for the service-connected hypertensive retinopathy with branch retinal vein occlusion with macular edema. In January 2023, the Veteran filed a higher-level review request for entitlement to an increased rating for the service-connected hypertensive retinopathy with branch retinal vein occlusion with macular edema. After completing the higher-level review, in the April 2023 rating decision on appeal, the RO increased the disability rating from noncompensable (zero percent) to 40 percent from October 25, 2021, for the service-connected hypertensive retinopathy with branch retinal vein occlusion with macular edema. The Veteran timely appealed the matter to the Board.

Thus, the Board finds that the Veteran has been continuously pursuing his claim since he submitted the intent to file a claim on November 1, 2018, therefore, the rating period on appeal begins from November 1, 2018.

Accordingly, the question for the Board is whether the Veteran is entitled to a compensable disability rating prior to October 25, 2021, and in excess of 40 percent thereafter for the service-connected hypertensive retinopathy with branch retinal vein occlusion with macular edema. Based on the following reasons, the Board finds that entitlement to a compensable disability rating prior to October 25, 2021, and in excess of 40 percent thereafter for the service-connected hypertensive retinopathy with branch retinal vein occlusion with macular edema is not warranted.

Disability ratings are determined by applying the criteria set forth in the VA Schedule for Rating Disabilities, found in 38 C.F.R., Part 4. The percentage ratings are based on the average impairment of earning capacity as a result of a service-connected disability, and separate diagnostic codes identify the various disabilities and the criteria for specific ratings. See 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1. 

If two disability evaluations are potentially applicable, the higher evaluation is assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria for that rating; otherwise, the lower rating is assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7. Any reasonable doubt regarding the degree of a disability is resolved in favor of the Veteran. See 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.3. 

The Veteran's entire history is to be considered when assigning disability rating. Schafrath v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 589, 594 (1991); 38 C.F.R. § 4.1. The Board will consider entitlement to staged ratings to compensate for times since filing the claim when the disability may have been more severe than at other times during the period of claim on appeal. Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505, 509-510 (2007); Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119, 126 (1999).

The law and regulations governing effective dates establish that, unless specifically provided otherwise, the effective date of an award based on an original claim, a claim reopened after final adjudication, or a claim for increase, of compensation, dependency and indemnity compensation, or pension, shall be fixed in accordance with the facts found, but shall not be earlier than the date of receipt of application, therefore. 38 U.S.C. § 5110(a); 38 C.F.R. § 3.400(o)(1). Thus, the general rule for an increased rating award is that the effective date of such an award shall not be earlier than the date of receipt of application. Id.

An exception to that rule applies under circumstances where evidence demonstrates a factually ascertainable increase in disability during the one-year period preceding the date of receipt of a claim for increased compensation. In that situation, the law provides that the effective date of the award "shall be the earliest date as of which it is ascertainable that an increase in disability had occurred, if application is received within one year from such date." 38 U.S.C. § 5110(b)(2); Harper v. Brown, 10 Vet. App. 125, 126 (1997); 38 C.F.R. § 3.400(o)(2).

Therefore, three possible dates for an increased rating may be assigned depending on the facts of a case: (1) if an increase in disability occurs after the claim is filed, the date that the increase is shown to have occurred (date entitlement arose) (38 C.F.R. § 3.400(o)(1)); (2) if an increase in disability precedes the claim by a year or less, the date that the increase is shown to have occurred (factually ascertainable), otherwise; (3) date of receipt of claim. See Harper, 10 Vet. App. at 126; 38 C.F.R. § 3.400(o)(2).

Evaluation of defective vision from noncompensable to 100 percent is based on organic impairment of visual acuity (excluding developmental errors of refraction), visual field, and muscle function. 38 C.F.R. § 4.75(a). The examination for visual impairment must be conducted by a licensed optometrist or by a licensed ophthalmologist and the examiner must identify the disease, injury, or any other pathologic process responsible for any visual impairment found. 38 C.F.R. § 4.75(b). Examination of visual fields or muscle function will be conducted only when there is a medical indication of disease or injury that may be associated with visual field defect or impaired muscle function. Id. Unless medically contraindicated, the fundus must be examined with the Veteran's pupils dilated. Id.

Unless otherwise directed, diseases of the eye are evaluated under the General Rating Formula for Diseases of the Eye. 38 C.F.R. § 4.79, Diagnostic Codes 6000 through 6009. Impairment of visual acuity is rated under diagnostic codes 6061 through 6066. Impairment of visual fields is rated under diagnostic codes 6080 through 6081. Impairment of muscle function is rated under diagnostic codes 6090 through 6091.

The Veteran's service-connected hypertensive retinopathy with branch retinal vein occlusion with macular edema has been rated as zero percent (noncompensable) disabling from November 1, 2018, under 38 C.F.R. § 4.79, Diagnostic Code 6006-6066, and 40 percent disabling from October 25, 2021, under 38 C.F.R. § 4.79, Diagnostic Code 6006. Hyphenated diagnostic codes are used when a rating under one diagnostic code requires the use of an additional diagnostic code to identify the basis for the rating assigned; additional code is shown after the hyphen. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.27. The hyphenated diagnostic code here indicates that the Veteran's retinopathy under diagnostic code 6006 is the service-connected disorder, and the impairment of central visual acuity under diagnostic code 6066, is the residual condition. 38 C.F.R. § 4.79, Diagnostic Codes 6006, 6066.

The Board notes that the Rating Schedule which addresses eye disabilities was amended effective May 13, 2018. This amended regulation applies to all applications for benefits received by VA or that are pending before the RO on or after May 13, 2018. Claims pending prior to the effective date will be considered under both the pre- and post-amendment rating criteria, and whichever is more favorable to the Veteran will be applied. However, in this case, only new rating criteria is applicable because the rating period on appeal begins from November 1, 2018, which is after the effective date of the amended regulation.

Retinopathy is evaluated pursuant to the General Rating Formula for Diseases of the Eye. Under this framework, the eye disability is rated based on visual impairment or incapacitating episodes, whichever results in a higher evaluation. 38 C.F.R. § 4.79, Diagnostic Codes 6006, 6066.

Based on incapacitating episodes, under the General Rating Formula for Diseases of the Eye, a 10 percent rating is warranted for documented incapacitating episodes requiring at least 1 but less than 3 treatment visits for an eye condition during the past 12 months. 38 C.F.R. § 4.79, Diagnostic Codes 6006, General Rating Formula for Diseases of the Eye. A 20 percent rating is warranted for documented incapacitating episodes requiring at least 3 but less than 5 treatment visits for an eye condition during the past 12 months. Id. A 40 percent rating is warranted for documented incapacitating episodes requiring at least 5 but less than 7 treatment visits for an eye condition during the past 12 months. Id. A maximum of 60 percent rating is warranted for documented incapacitating episodes requiring 7 or more treatment visits for an eye condition during the past 12 months. Id.

Under Note (1) for General Rating Formula for Diseases of the Eye, for the purposes of evaluations under 38 C.F.R. § 4.79, an incapacitating episode is an eye condition severe enough to require a clinic visit to a provider specifically for treatment purposes. Id. Under Note (2), the examples of treatment may include but are not limited to: systemic immunosuppressants or biologic agents; intravitreal or periocular injections; laser treatments; or other surgical interventions. Id.

In every instance where the schedule does not provide a zero percent evaluation for a diagnostic code, a zero percent evaluation is assigned when the requirements for a compensable evaluation are not met. 38 C.F.R. § 4.31.

Evaluation of visual impairment is based on impairment of visual acuity, visual field, and muscle function. 38 C.F.R. § 4.75(a).

Examinations of visual acuity must include the central uncorrected and corrected visual acuity for distance and near vision using Snellen's test type or its equivalent. 38 C.F.R. § 4.76(a). Evaluation of central visual acuity is completed on the basis of corrected distance vision with central fixation, even if a central scotoma is present. 38 C.F.R. § 4.76(b). However, when the lens required to correct distance vision in the poorer eye differs by more than three diopters from the lens required to correct distance vision in the better eye (and the difference is not due to congenital or developmental refractive error), and either the poorer eye or both eyes are service connected, evaluate the visual acuity of the poorer eye using either its uncorrected or corrected visual acuity, whichever results in better combined visual acuity. Id. Where a reported visual acuity is between two sequentially listed visual acuities, the visual acuity which permits the higher evaluation will be used. Id.

Evaluation of visual field is based on the remaining field of vision in each eye. The examiner must record the remaining visual field of at least 16 meridians 2212 degrees apart for each eye, even though only the visual field at eight principal meridians 45 degrees apart will be used for rating purposes. 38 C.F.R. § 4.77(a). The examiner must use either Goldmann kinetic perimetry or automated perimetry using Humphrey Model 750, Octopus Model 101, or later versions of these perimetric devices with simulated kinetic Goldmann testing capability. 38 C.F.R. § 4.77(a). Determination of the average concentric contraction of the visual field of each eye is done by measuring the remaining visual field (in degrees) at each of the eight principal meridians 45 degrees apart, adding them, and dividing the sum by eight. 38 C.F.R. § 4.77(b). To determine the evaluation for visual impairment when both decreased visual acuity and visual field defect are present in one or both eyes and are service connected, separately evaluate the visual acuity and visual field defect (expressed as a level of visual acuity), and combine them under the provisions of 38 C.F.R. § 4.25.

The table of Ratings for Impairment of Visual Fields provides ratings for visual field loss. The first half of the table provides ratings based on loss of an entire half of field of vision in an eye. The second half of the table provides ratings based on the average concentric contraction of the visual field of each eye. 38 C.F.R. § 4.76a, 4.77.

Evaluation of impairment of muscle function is based on the degree of diplopia. The examiner must record test results for the four major quadrants (upward, downward, and right and left lateral) and the central field (20 degrees or less). 38 C.F.R. § 4.78(a).

The Board has reviewed the evidence of record from beginning of the rating period on appeal. The Veteran underwent a VA examination for his bilateral eye condition in February 2019, during which the examiner noted the diagnosis of hypertensive retinopathy. The Veteran's corrected distance visual acuity was 20/40 in the right eye and 20/40 in the left eye. The Veteran's corrected near visual acuity was 20/20 or better in the right eye and 20/20 or better in the left eye. There was no difference equal to two or more lines on the Snellen test type chart or its equivalent between distance and near corrected vision, with the near vision being worse. Physical examination showed pupils equal, round, and reactive to light, with no afferent pupillary defect. Also, no anatomical loss, light perception only, extremely poor vision or blindness of either eye was noted. No corneal irregularity that results in severe irregular astigmatism was noted. No diplopia was noted. Slit lamp examination and external eye examination, including conjunctiva/sclera, cornea, anterior chamber, iris, were normal. Bilateral lens was noted as +2 NSC. Internal examination revealed A/V crossing changes to the vessels in both of the Veteran's eyes. There was no documented visual field defect. 

Regarding eye conditions, the examiner noted the Veteran has lens conditions, and retinal, macula, or vitreous conditions. Regarding lens conditions, the examiner noted the Veteran had preoperative cataract in both of his eyes. No aphakia or dislocation of the crystalline lens was noted. Regarding visual acuity, the examiner noted the Veteran had decreased visual acuity of OD 20/30 and OS 20/25 due to cataracts. Regarding retinal, macula, or vitreous conditions, the examiner noted the Veteran has bilateral retinopathy. However, no visual acuity or other visual impairment attributable to a retina, macula, or vitreous condition was noted. No scar and disfigurement of either eye was noted. Also, no incapacitating episodes attributed to an eye condition were noted. The examiner did not note any functional impact of the Veteran's eye condition.

The examiner noted that the Veteran's hypertensive retinopathy is most likely caused by or a result of hypertension. The examiner explained that hypertensive retinopathy is known to be caused by microvascular damage incurred over time due to high blood pressure. The examiner also noted that hypertensive retinopathy is seen as A/V crossing changes in both eyes, not affecting visual acuity. Finally, the examiner noted the Veteran has age related cataracts in both eyes, which are unrelated to service-connected condition. Best corrected visual acuity was OD 20/30, OS 20/25. Cataracts appearance was mild and correlated well to best corrected visual acuity.

A February 2020 private treatment record noted that the Veteran was seen for swollen lids, decreased vision, diabetes mellitus type II, and high blood pressure. It was noted that the Veteran had not had an eye examination in four years, when he was told that he had hypertensive retinopathy. It was also noted that the Veteran had run very high blood pressure for years, and he had stopped a lot of his medication himself. The clinician noted the Veteran had all four lids swollen especially first thing in the morning for years, with tenderness sometimes. However, no discharge or tearing were noted. It was noted the Veteran only wears readers. The Veteran near vison had decreased with trouble reading.

The clinician noted the problems of hypertensive retinopathy, hypertension, diabetes mellitus type II, heart condition, hypercholesterolemia, arthritis, tinnitus, neuropathy, hearing loss, and sinus problems. The clinician dilated the Veteran's eyes for examination. As assessment, the clinician noted the Veteran has type II diabetes mellitus with mild nonproliferative diabetic retinopathy without macular edema in right eye, for which the Veteran was not receiving any treatment, however, the clinician recommended a six-month follow-up to evaluate eye for diabetic retinopathy. The clinician noted dot blot hemorrhage in peripheral retina of the Veteran's eyes. Regarding hypertensive retinopathy, the clinician noted the Veteran had mild hypertensive vessel changes. The clinician stressed the Veteran of controlling blood pressure. 

In an April 2020 correspondence, the Veteran's representative referred to the above noted February 2020 private treatment record, and argued that in February 2020, the Veteran received treatment for incapacitating episodes due to retinopathy with future appointment in August 2020, and the Veteran had swollen eye lids.

The Veteran underwent another VA examination for his bilateral eye condition in June 2021. In the June 2021 VA disability benefits questionnaire (DBQ) for eye conditions, the examiner noted the diagnoses of hypertensive retinopathy in both of the Veteran's eyes, cataracts in both eyes, and dermatochalasis of both eyes upper lids. The examiner noted the Veteran's reports that his vision in the distance and at near while wearing his eyeglasses was blurred. No treatment, medication, or surgery was noted for the Veteran's eye condition. The Veteran's corrected distance visual acuity was 20/40 in the right eye and 20/40 in the left eye. The Veteran's corrected near visual acuity was 20/40 in the right eye and 20/40 in the left eye. There was no difference equal to two or more lines on the Snellen test type chart or its equivalent between distance and near corrected vision, with the near vision being worse. Physical examination showed pupils equal, round, and reactive to light, with no afferent pupillary defect. Also, no anatomical loss, light perception only, extremely poor vision, or blindness of either eye was noted. No corneal irregularity that results in severe irregular astigmatism was noted. No diplopia was noted. Slit lamp examination and external eye examination were abnormal, and the examiner noted dermatochalasis of both eyes upper lids. Conjunctiva/sclera, cornea, anterior chamber, iris, were normal. Cataract was noted in both of the Veteran's eyes. Internal examination revealed arterial attenuation and venous nicking to the vessels in both of the Veteran's eyes. 

The examiner noted the Veteran had superior visual field loss in each eye due to the upper lid dermatochalasis noted in each eye. However, no contraction of a visual field was noted. Also, no scotoma was noted. Regarding eye conditions, the examiner noted the Veteran has lens conditions, and retinal, macula, or vitreous conditions. No lacrimal system conditions, including dry eye syndrome was noted. Also, no cornea/conjunctiva conditions were noted. No glaucoma, and uveal tract conditions were noted. Regarding lens conditions, the examiner noted the Veteran had preoperative cataract in both of his eyes. No aphakia or dislocation of the crystalline lens was noted. Regarding visual acuity, the examiner noted the Veteran's reduced visual acuity is due to the cataracts. Regarding retinal, macula, or vitreous conditions, the examiner noted the Veteran has bilateral retinopathy. However, no visual acuity or other visual impairment attributable to a retina, macula, or vitreous condition was noted. The examiner noted the Veteran's hypertensive retinopathy was mild in both eyes, and there was no macular edema or other macular pathologies. No neuro-ophthalmic conditions were noted. No ocular neoplasms were noted. Also, no trauma/hemorrhage was noted. No scar and disfigurement of either eye was noted. Also, no incapacitating episodes attributed to an eye condition were noted. The examiner did not note any functional impact of the Veteran's eye condition.

Finally, the examiner noted the Veteran's cataracts are secondary mainly to his age and less due to hypertension. However, the examiner noted that the studies have noted that people with severe hypertension has a higher risk of cataract that those with mild hypertension. Regarding the dermatochalasis, the examiner noted that a literature search did not yield a positive correlation of dermatochalasis being secondary to hypertension.

An October 25, 2021, private treatment record reflects that the Veteran was seen for consultation regarding branch retinal vein occlusion with macular edema of right eye due to retinopathy. The clinician noted the Veteran presented with worsening blurry vision in both eyes for one year. The clinician treated the Veteran with intravitreal injection, and recommended the Veteran to follow-up in 4 to 6 weeks.

The Veteran received a second intravitreal injection in November 2021, third in December 2021, and fourth in February 2022.

In the February 2022 private opinion, the examiner stated that he first saw the Veteran on October 25, 2021. The examiner noted the Veteran received four injections in the past 12 months period, and would require ongoing injections about every 2 months to maintain his vision in the right eye.

Subsequent private treatment records reflect that the Veteran received injections in March and May 2022.

The Veteran underwent another VA examination for his bilateral eye condition in June 2022. In the June 2022 VA DBQ for eye conditions, the examiner noted the diagnoses of hypertensive retinopathy and branch retinal vein occlusion with macular edema. The examiner noted that the Veteran had sudden onset of decreased vision in 2021, and he was getting injections in the eye every 6-8 weeks. The examiner also noted the cataracts in both of the Veteran's eyes.

The Veteran's corrected distance visual acuity was 20/40 in the right eye and 20/40 in the left eye. The Veteran's corrected near visual acuity was 20/40 in the right eye and 20/40 in the left eye. There was no difference equal to two or more lines on the Snellen test type chart or its equivalent between distance and near corrected vision, with the near vision being worse. Physical examination showed pupils equal, round, and reactive to light, with no afferent pupillary defect. Also, no anatomical loss, light perception only, extremely poor vision or blindness of either eye was noted. No corneal irregularity that results in severe irregular astigmatism was noted. No diplopia was noted. Slit lamp examination and external eye examination were abnormal, and the examiner noted cataract in the Veteran's right eye, and pseudophakia in the left eye. However, lids/lashes, conjunctiva/sclera, cornea, anterior chamber, and iris were normal. Internal examination revealed macular edema in the Veteran's right eye. Vessels were not normal in the Veteran's right eye, and the examiner noted brach vein occlusion. Vitreous and periphery were normal. No visual field defect was noted. Also, no scotoma was noted.

Regarding eye conditions, the examiner noted the Veteran has lens retinal, macula, or vitreous conditions. No lacrimal system conditions, including dry eye syndrome was noted. Also, no cornea/conjunctiva conditions were noted. No glaucoma, and uveal tract conditions were noted. The examiner noted the macular edema is the result of the vein occlusion and is the reason for the injections, and the cause of the decrease in vision. No neuro-ophthalmic conditions were noted. No ocular neoplasms were noted. Also, no trauma/hemorrhage was noted. The examiner noted that the branch retinal vein occlusion is the causative process for the macular edema. No scar and disfigurement of any eye was noted. Also, no incapacitating episodes attributed to an eye condition were noted. The examiner did not note any functional impact of the Veteran's eye condition. Finally, the examiner noted that the diagnosis changed from the previously service-connected diagnosis, and the new diagnosis is branch retinal vein occlusion with macular edema of right eye. The examiner noted that the new diagnosis is directly due to or related to the service-connected diagnosis. The examiner noted that branch retinal vein occlusion is due to the hypertension/hypertensive retinopathy.

In the March 2024 correspondence, the Veteran's representative asserted that as the rating period begins from the initial filing of the service connection claim in November 2018, VA should assign the Veteran staged ratings for the service-connected hypertensive retinopathy. The representative stated that the Veteran is in receipt of zero percent rating from November 2018, the beginning of rating period on appeal, however, a 10 percent rating for the Veteran's retinopathy should be granted from February 2019 because the evidence shows at least one incapacitating episode during a 12-month period from February 2019 to February 2020, warranting a 10 percent rating. Furthermore, the representative argued that evidence of record shows that during the time period from March 2021 to March 2022 the Veteran had at least 5 treatments, and he continued to receive treatment approximately 6 times per year moving forward, therefore, a 40 percent rating is warranted effective March 2021, instead of the current effective date of October 25, 2021.

Based on the above noted evidence of record, the Board finds that a disability rating in excess of zero percent prior to October 25, 2021, and in excess of 40 percent thereafter is not warranted for the Veteran's service-connected hypertensive retinopathy with branch retinal vein occlusion with macular edema. The Veteran was granted a 40 percent disability rating from October 25, 2021, for hypertensive retinopathy with branch retinal vein occlusion with macular edema based on incapacitating episodes because the evidence of record reflects that the Veteran received first documented injection in eye on this date, and the subsequent treatment records reflect that the Veteran needs at least 5 but less than 7 treatment visits to receive ocular injection to maintain vision in his right eye. 38 C.F.R. § 4.79, Diagnostic Codes 6006, General Rating Formula for Diseases of the Eye.

As noted above, the Veteran's representative argued that the Veteran had an incapacitating episode in February 2020, warranting at least a 10 percent disability rating from February 2019 because between February 2019 and February 2020, the Veteran had one treatment visit for his eye condition, which is an incapacitating episode. In this regard, the Board finds that the February 2020 private treatment record indicates that it was a routine eye examination, and was not a clinic visit to a provider specifically for treatment purposes of the service-connected hypertensive retinopathy.

As noted above, under Note (1) for General Rating Formula for Diseases of the Eye, for the purposes of evaluations under 38 C.F.R. § 4.79, an incapacitating episode is an eye condition severe enough to require a clinic visit to a provider specifically for treatment purposes. Id. Under Note (2), the examples of treatment may include but are not limited to: systemic immunosuppressants or biologic agents; intravitreal or periocular injections; laser treatments; or other surgical interventions. Id.

As described above in detail, the February 2020 private treatment record noted that the Veteran was seen for swollen lids, decreased vision, diabetes mellitus type II, and high blood pressure. It was noted that the Veteran had not had an eye examination in four years, when he was told that he had hypertensive retinopathy. This record does not reflect that the Veteran was treated specifically for the service-connected hypertensive retinopathy during this visit. The clinician noted the problems of hypertensive retinopathy, hypertension, diabetes mellitus type II, heart condition, hypercholesterolemia, arthritis, tinnitus, neuropathy, hearing loss, and sinus problems. The clinician dilated the Veteran's eyes for examination. As assessment, the clinician noted the Veteran has type II diabetes mellitus with mild nonproliferative diabetic retinopathy without macular edema in right eye, for which the Veteran was not receiving any treatment, however, the clinician recommended a six-month follow-up to evaluate eye for diabetic retinopathy. The clinician noted dot blot hemorrhage in peripheral retina of the Veteran's eyes. Regarding hypertensive retinopathy, the clinician noted the Veteran had mild hypertensive vessel changes. The clinician stressed the Veteran of controlling blood pressure. 

Thus, the February 2020 private treatment record does not reflect that the visit was specifically for treating the Veteran's service-connected hypertensive retinopathy. The clinician stressed the Veteran of controlling blood pressure, but no treatment was provided or noted. Even no treatment was noted for mild nonproliferative diabetic retinopathy without macular edema in right eye. The clinician merely recommended a six-month follow-up to evaluate eye for diabetic retinopathy. Thus, the Board finds that the February 2020 private treatment record does not reflect that it was an incapacitating episode under 38 C.F.R. § 4.79, General Rating Formula for Diseases of the Eye, for the purposes of evaluations. Therefore, the Board finds that a compensable disability rating is not warranted for the Veteran's hypertensive retinopathy based on the February 2020 private routine eye examination, under 38 C.F.R. § 4.79, Diagnostic Codes 6006, General Rating Formula for Diseases of the Eye.

Regarding, the Veteran's representative's argument that the 40 percent disability rating for the Veteran's service-connected hypertensive retinopathy with branch retinal vein occlusion with macular edema should be granted from an earlier effective date of March 2021 because the Veteran received at least 5 ocular injections during the time period from March 2021 to March 2022. On the contrary, the Board notes that the Veteran received his first ocular injection on October 25, 2021, thus, the date entitlement to the increased rating based on incapacitating episodes arose is the date of the first injection in October 2021.

As noted above, this increased rating claim is an initial rating claim, and the rating period begins from the date of entitlement to service connection, which is November 1, 2018, and the representative argues, that the Veteran is entitled to a compensable disability rating of 10 percent from February 2019, and 40 percent from March 2021, which are the dates after the beginning of rating period on appeal. Thus, the Board needs to determine when did the entitlement to increase rating arose, the factually ascertainable increase. In a case where the increase becomes ascertainable after the filing of the claim, the effective date would be the date of increase. 38 U.S.C. § 5110(b)(2); Harper, 10 Vet. App. at 126; 38 C.F.R. § 3.400(o)(2). In Swain v. McDonald, the Court noted that "the effective date for an increased rating, as well as for an initial rating or for staged ratings, is predicated on when the increase [in a disability] can be ascertained." Swain v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 219, 224 (2015)

The Veteran received first eye (ocular) injection on October 25, 2021. He received a second intravitreal (eye) injection in November 2021, third in December 2021, fourth in February 2022, and fifth in March 2022. Since a 40 percent rating is warranted for the documented incapacitating episodes requiring at least 5 but less than 7 treatment visits for an eye condition during the past 12 months, and the Veteran received his fifth injection in March 2022, the Veteran's representative's argues that the Veteran should get automatically 40 percent disability rating from March 2021, one year prior to the fifth injection. 38 C.F.R. § 4.79, Diagnostic Codes 6006, General Rating Formula for Diseases of the Eye.

The Board finds that there is nothing in the General Rating Formula for Diseases of the Eye that suggests that the Veteran automatically gets an increased rating twelve months prior to the date of the 5th injection (or 5th incapacitating episode). Thus, rules of effective date come into play, and the Board needs to determine when did the factually ascertainable increase occurred in the Veteran's service-connected disability.

The evidence of record clearly shows that the Veteran was seen for consultation on October 25, 2021, when he also received an injection in his right eye. There is nothing in the record that suggests the Veteran was prescribed injections prior to October 25, 2021. In the February 2022 private opinion, the examiner clearly stated that he first saw the Veteran on October 25, 2021. The examiner noted the Veteran received four injections in the past 12 months, and would require ongoing injections about every 2 months to maintain his vision in the right eye. However, the examiner did not state that the Veteran received first in injection in February 2021. Nonetheless, as noted above, the evidence of record clearly shows that the Veteran received his first intravitreal injection on October 25, 2021, he received the second intravitreal injection in November 2021, third in December 2021, fourth in February 2022, and fifth in March 2022. He received sixth injection in May 2022. Thus, the RO properly granted a 40 percent rating from October 25, 2021, and continued the 40 percent rating thereafter because in the February 2021 private opinion, the examiner stated that the Veteran would require ongoing injections about every 2 months to maintain his vision in the right eye.

Accordingly, the evidence of record reflects that the Veteran needs at least six injections every year to maintain his vision in the right eye. Therefore, the Board finds that the Veteran has been properly receiving a 40 percent disability rating for the service-connected hypertensive retinopathy with branch retinal vein occlusion with macular edema from October 25, 2021, and onwards based on incapacitating episodes under 38 C.F.R. § 4.79, Diagnostic Codes 6006, General Rating Formula for Diseases of the Eye.

Furthermore, a disability rating in excess of 40 percent, which is 60 percent is not warranted because the Veteran does not have documented incapacitating episodes requiring 7 or more treatment visits for the service-connected eye condition during a period of 12 months throughout the rating period on appeal. Id.

Besides evaluating the Veteran's service-connected hypertensive retinopathy with branch retinal vein occlusion with macular edema for rating based on incapacitating episodes under General Rating Formula for Diseases of the Eye, the Board has evaluated the disability based on visual impairment. As noted above, evaluation of visual impairment is based on impairment of visual acuity, visual field, and muscle function. 38 C.F.R. § 4.75(a).

Based on the above noted evidence of record, the Board notes that based on impairment of visual acuity, a rating in excess of zero percent (compensable) prior to October 25, 2021, and in excess of 40 percent thereafter, or separate compensable rating is not warranted for the Veteran' service-connected hypertensive retinopathy with branch retinal vein occlusion with macular edema under diagnostic code 6066. 38 C.F.R. § 4.79, Diagnostic Code 6006. The Veteran's worst corrected vision for eyes was noted in the June 2021 and June 2022 VA examination reports, when the examiners noted the Veteran's corrected distance visual acuity was 20/40 in the right eye and 20/40 in the left eye. The Veteran's corrected near visual acuity was 20/40 in the right eye and 20/40 in the left eye.

For granting a disability rating of 10 percent under diagnostic code 6066, vision in one eye should be 20/50, and in the other eye either 20/50 or 20/40. 38 C.F.R. § 4.79, Diagnostic Code 6006. Thus, a disability rating in excess of zero percent is not warranted for the service-connected hypertensive retinopathy with branch retinal vein occlusion with macular edema under diagnostic code 6066 throughout the rating period on appeal. Id.

No treatment records or VA examination reports, except the June 2021 VA DBQ for eye conditions, noted visual field defects. In the June 2021 VA DBQ for eye conditions, the examiner noted the Veteran had superior visual field loss in each eye due to the upper lid dermatochalasis noted in each eye. 38 C.F.R. § 4.77(a). However, no contraction of a visual field was noted. Id. Furthermore, the examiner noted that the Veteran's dermatochalasis is not service connected or secondary to the service-connected hypertension. Furthermore, there is no private or VA treatment record, or examination report, which noted visual field impairment due to the Veteran's service-connected hypertensive retinopathy with branch retinal vein occlusion with macular edema. Accordingly, the Board finds that a rating in excess of zero percent prior to October 25, 2021, and in excess of 40 percent thereafter for the Veteran's service-connected hypertensive retinopathy with branch retinal vein occlusion with macular edema is not warranted based on visual field defect.

The evidence of record does not show, and the Veteran does not asserts that he experiences anatomical loss of either eye, or no more than light perception in either eye. Therefore, a rating in excess of zero percent prior to October 25, 2021, and in excess of 40 percent thereafter for the Veteran's service-connected hypertensive retinopathy with branch retinal vein occlusion with macular edema is not warranted based on anatomical loss of an eye or no more than light perception in any of the eyes. 38 C.F.R. § 4.79, Diagnostic Code 6061-64.

Furthermore, the Veteran does not have diplopia or any other impairment of eyes muscle function as a result of his service-connected hypertensive retinopathy with branch retinal vein occlusion with macular edema throughout the rating period on appeal. Therefore, a rating in excess of zero percent prior to October 25, 2021, and in excess of 40 percent thereafter for the Veteran's service-connected hypertensive retinopathy with branch retinal vein occlusion with macular edema is not warranted under diagnostic code 6090 for diplopia or under diagnostic code 6091 for symblepharon. 38 C.F.R. § 4.79, Diagnostic Code 6090, 6091.

Accordingly, the Board concludes that the evidence of record is persuasively against the finding that the Veteran had documented incapacitating episodes requiring at least 1 but less than 3 treatment visits for the service-connected hypertensive retinopathy with branch retinal vein occlusion with macular edema for a period of 12 months prior to October 25, 2021, or had documented incapacitating episodes requiring 7 or more treatment visits for the service-connected hypertensive retinopathy with branch retinal vein occlusion with macular edema for a period of 12 months from October 25, 2021, and onwards. Furthermore, the evidence of record is persuasively against the finding that throughout the rating period on appeal, the Veteran had corrected vision for any of his eyes worse than visual acuity of 20/40. Also, the Veteran's service-connected hypertensive retinopathy with branch retinal vein occlusion with macular edema has not been manifested by visual field defect, or diplopia or any other impairment of eye muscle function. Moreover, the Veteran has not experienced anatomical loss of either eye, or had no more than light perception in either eye.

As the probative evidence of record persuasively weighs against the claim, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.3.

Accordingly, entitlement to a compensable (in excess of zero percent) disability rating prior to October 25, 2021, and in excess of 40 percent thereafter for hypertensive retinopathy with branch retinal vein occlusion with macular edema is denied.

 

 

MICHAEL MARTIN

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Tariq, Nadeem

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.