Citation Nr: A25034391
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 200415-82350
DATE: April 15, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for chronic fatigue syndrome is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for irritable bowel syndrome is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for headaches is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from October 1988 to December 1991.  His decorations include the Southwest Asia Service Medal.

This matter originates from an August 2013 rating decision issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office in Decatur, Georgia.  The Veteran filed a legacy notice of disagreement (NOD) in August 2014, and a Statement of the Case (SOC) was issued in March 2020.  See 38 C.F.R. §§ 19.26, 19.29, 20.200, 20.201 (2018).

The Appeals Modernization Act (AMA) allows VA claimants to opt into the modernized review system by requesting review of an SOC or supplemental SOC (SSOC) issued on or after February 19, 2019, if the opt-in is received within one year of the date of the notification of the underlying rating decision, or 60 days from the issuance of the SOC/SSOC, whichever is later.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2400(c)(2).  Here, the Veteran elected to appeal to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) via the modernized review system in April 2020, after receiving the March 2020 SOC.  See April 2020 VA Form 10182 (Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement)).

In the April 2020 VA Form 10182, the Veteran selected the hearing review option. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.201, 20.202(b)(2).  In February 2024, he testified at a Board hearing before the undersigned Veterans Law Judge.  A transcript of that hearing has been associated with the record.

Under the hearing review option, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal (here, the March 2020 SOC), as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or his representative at the hearing or within 90 days following the hearing.  38 C.F.R. §?20.302(a).  The Board cannot consider (1) evidence submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the March 2020 SOC and before the hearing was held, or (2) evidence submitted more than 90 days after the hearing was held.  38 C.F.R. § 20.302.

That said, for the reasons set forth below, the Board is remanding the Veteran's claims to the AOJ for correction of pre-decisional duty to assist errors.  The AOJ will consider any additional evidence that has been submitted when the claims are readjudicated.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

As a final introductory matter, the Board notes that the Veteran also initiated a legacy appeal as to the August 2013 rating decision's denial of service connection for erectile dysfunction.  However, service connection for that disability was subsequently granted in a March 2020 rating decision.  As the award of service connection represents a full grant of benefits regarding that issue, it is no longer in appellate status.  See Grantham v. Brown, 114 F. 3d. 1156 (Fed. Cir. 1997).

1. Entitlement to service connection for chronic fatigue syndrome is remanded.

2. Entitlement to service connection for irritable bowel syndrome is remanded.

3. Entitlement to service connection for headaches is remanded.

Service connection is warranted where the evidence of record establishes that a particular injury or disease resulting in disability was incurred in the line of duty in the active military service or, if pre-existing such service, was aggravated thereby.  38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a).

Generally, in order to prove service connection, there must be competent, credible evidence of (1) a current disability, (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of an injury or disease, and (3) a nexus, or link, between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury.  See, e.g., Davidson v. Shinseki, 581 F.3d 1313 (Fed. Cir. 2009); Pond v. West, 12 Vet. App. 341 (1999).

Under applicable law, service connection may also be established for a chronic disability manifested by certain signs or symptoms that became manifest either during active service in the Southwest Asia theater of operations during the Persian Gulf War or to a degree of 10 percent or more thereafter, and which, by history, physical examination, and laboratory tests, cannot be attributed to any known clinical diagnosis.  38 U.S.C. § 1117; 38 C.F.R. § 3.317(a)(1).

A qualifying chronic disability means a chronic disability resulting from any of the following (or any combination of the following): an undiagnosed illness; a medically unexplained, chronic multi-symptom illness that is defined by a cluster of signs or symptoms; or any diagnosed illness that the Secretary determines in regulations prescribed under 38 U.S.C. § 1117(d) warrants a presumption of service-connection.  38 C.F.R. § 3.317(a).

An undiagnosed illness is defined as a condition that by history, physical examination, and laboratory tests cannot be attributed to a known clinical diagnosis.  A medically unexplained, chronic multi-symptom illness is one defined by a cluster of signs or symptoms, and specifically includes chronic fatigue syndrome, fibromyalgia, and functional gastrointestinal disorders (excluding structural gastrointestinal diseases).  The term medically unexplained, chronic multi-symptom illness means a diagnosed illness without conclusive pathophysiology or etiology, that is characterized by overlapping symptoms and signs, and has features such as fatigue, pain, disability out of proportion to physical findings, and inconsistent demonstration of laboratory abnormalities.  Chronic multi-symptom illnesses of partially understood etiology and pathophysiology will not be considered medically unexplained.  38 C.F.R. § 3.317(a).

Objective indications of chronic disability include both "signs" in the medical sense of objective evidence perceptible to an examining physician, and other non-medical indicators that are capable of independent verification.  38 C.F.R. § 3.317(a).  Signs or symptoms that may be manifestations of an undiagnosed illness or a medically unexplained, chronic multi-symptom illness include, but are not limited to: (1) fatigue; (2) signs or symptoms involving skin; (3) headache; (4) muscle pain; (5) joint pain; (6) neurologic signs and symptoms; (7) neuropsychological signs or symptoms; (8) signs or symptoms involving the respiratory system (upper or lower); (9) sleep disturbances; (10) gastrointestinal signs or symptoms; (11) cardiovascular signs or symptoms; (12) abnormal weight loss; and (13) menstrual disorders.  38 C.F.R. § 3.317(b).

For purposes of section 3.317, disabilities that have existed for six months or more and disabilities that exhibit intermittent episodes of improvement and worsening over a six-month period will be considered chronic.  The six-month period of chronicity will be measured from the earliest date on which the pertinent evidence establishes that the signs or symptoms of the disability first became manifest.  38 C.F.R. § 3.317(a)(4).

Compensation shall not be paid under section 3.317 if there is affirmative evidence that an undiagnosed illness was not incurred during active military service in the Southwest Asia theater of operations during the Persian Gulf War; if there is affirmative evidence that an undiagnosed illness was caused by a supervening condition or event that occurred between the veteran's most recent departure from active duty in the Southwest Asia theater of operations during the Persian Gulf War and the onset of the illness; or if there is affirmative evidence that the illness is the result of the veteran's own willful misconduct or the abuse of alcohol or drugs.  38 C.F.R. § 3.317(a)(7).

In this case, service connection was denied for the claimed disabilities, in part, because fatigue, gastrointestinal problems, and headaches were recognized as symptoms of the Veteran's service-connected fibromyalgia.  See February 2008 and January 2013 VA examinations; May 2009 rating decision; August 2013 rating decision.  In addition, the medical evidence, including February 2008 and January 2013 VA examinations, reflected that the Veteran did not have a diagnosis of chronic fatigue syndrome.  Further, the January 2013 VA examiner provided an opinion to the effect that the Veteran's headaches were due to a post-service injury, and not related to active service.

As an initial matter, the Board notes that Diagnostic Code 5025, pertaining to the evaluation of fibromyalgia, provides ratings for "widespread musculoskeletal pain and tender points, with or without associated fatigue, sleep disturbance, stiffness, paresthesias, headache, irritable bowel symptoms, depression, anxiety, or Raynaud's-like symptoms."  38 C.F.R. § 4.71a (emphases added).

The "rule against pyramiding," set out at 38 C.F.R. § 4.14, provides that the evaluation of the "same disability" or the "same manifestation" under various diagnoses is to be avoided.  It is possible for a veteran to have separate and distinct manifestations from the same injury that are rated under multiple diagnostic codes; however, the critical element in permitting the assignment of multiple ratings under various diagnostic codes is that none of the symptomatology for any one of the conditions is duplicative or overlapping with the symptomatology of another condition.  See Esteban v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 259, 261-62 (1994).

In light of the manner in which the rating criteria for fibromyalgia are constructed, allowing for ratings for fibromyalgia "with or without" associated fatigue, headaches, and irritable bowel symptoms, the Board finds that the rule against pyramiding would not be violated by providing service connection/separate ratings for chronic fatigue syndrome, irritable bowel syndrome, and/or headaches in addition to the rating currently assigned for fibromyalgia.  That said, the Board must still address whether the evidence supports a finding that the Veteran has the claimed disabilities, and, if so, whether service connection is warranted for such, to include on the basis of the applicable presumptive provisions set out at 38 U.S.C. § 1117 and 38 C.F.R. § 3.317.  In addressing the irritable bowel syndrome, the Board must also determine whether it is separate and distinct from the Veteran's now service-connected gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD).

As noted, VA examinations in February 2008 and January 2013 included findings to the effect the Veteran did not satisfy the criteria for a diagnosis of chronic fatigue syndrome.  However, the Veteran submitted Disability Benefits Questionnaires (DBQs) dated and received in 2014 which, in pertinent part, indicate that he does satisfy the criteria for such a diagnosis.  The United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) held in McClain v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 319 (2007), that the requirement that a claimant have a current disability before service connection may be awarded for that disability is satisfied when a claimant has the disability at the time a claim for VA disability compensation is filed or during the pendency of that claim, even if no disability is present at the time of the claim's adjudication.

The DBQs provided by the Veteran in 2014 also included findings of irritable bowel syndrome and headaches, as well as opinions that related those disabilities to active service, including biological, chemical, and environmental hazards to which he was exposed while in the Southwest Asia theater of operations.

The Board also notes that the Veteran has challenged the adequacy of his January 2013 VA examination, to include in his August 2014 legacy NOD.  In addition, the pertinent 2014 DBQ for headaches includes findings that call into question the opinion of the January 2013 VA examiner, to the effect that the headaches are attributable to a specific post-service injury.

The Board acknowledges that the March 2020 SOC found the 2014 DBQs to be deficient.  Nevertheless, given the competent findings contained therein, as well as the criticisms of the January 2013 VA examination, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) should have arranged for new examinations and opinions to address the nature and etiology of the claimed disabilities prior to promulgating the SOC in this case. The failure to do so constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error that must be corrected.

In arriving at this conclusion, the Board is cognizant of the fact that the Veteran submitted an updated DBQ in May 2024, during a permissible evidentiary window, and that the DBQ diagnosed chronic fatigue syndrome and related the diagnosis to service.  The Board finds, however, that the nature of the claimed disability is still not clear from the evidence available for review.  As such, further development is still required.

The Board also notes that the Veteran submitted a copy of a November 2023 medical statement which, in pertinent part, opined that his headaches were secondary to his service-connected posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD).  However, it does not appear that that contention was advanced at the time of the AOJ's prior decisions in this case.  On remand, the AOJ will have an opportunity to address that contention in the first instance.

These matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Schedule the Veteran for medical examination(s) by appropriately qualified clinician(s) to address the nature and etiology of his claimed chronic fatigue syndrome, irritable bowel syndrome, and headaches.  The examiner(s) should review the record. All indicated tests should be conducted and the results reported.

After examining the Veteran and reviewing the record, together with the results of any testing deemed necessary, the examiner should offer an opinion as to whether the signs and symptoms of the claimed disabilities are most consistent with: (1) a diagnosable but medically unexplained chronic multi-symptom illness of unknown etiology and pathophysiology, (2) a diagnosable chronic multi-symptom illness with a partially explained etiology and pathophysiology, or (3) a disease with a clear and specific etiology and diagnosis.

The pertinent examiner should also specifically address whether the Veteran had a diagnosis of chronic fatigue syndrome at any time during the pendency of this appeal, taking into account the findings of the February 2008 VA examinations, as well as the relevant 2014 DBQ.

In addition, the pertinent examiner should address whether the symptoms of the Veteran's claimed irritable bowel syndrome are separate and distinct from the now service-connected GERD.

If after examining the Veteran and reviewing the claims file, the examiner(s) determine(s) that the Veteran's disability pattern with respect to the signs and symptoms at issue is most consistent with a diagnosable chronic multi-symptom illness with a partially explained etiology, or a disease with a clear and specific etiology and diagnosis, the examiner should offer a further opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (i.e., whether the likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that any such illness or disability is related to active service, to include as due to exposure to environmental hazards during service in the Southwest Asia theater of operations.  The opinion should also reflect consideration of the Veteran's account of biological and chemical exposures while on active duty, to include from vaccinations he received therein.

A complete rationale for all opinions expressed should be provided.

 

 

DAVID A. BRENNINGMEYER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	John Kitlas, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.