Citation Nr: A25034099
Decision Date: 04/14/25	Archive Date: 04/14/25

DOCKET NO. 231006-382853
DATE:  April 14, 2025

ORDER

1. Entitlement to an increased rating in excess of 40 percent for intervertebral disc syndrome with lumbar strain and degenerative disc disease (IVDS) is denied.

2. Entitlement to an increased rating in excess of 40 percent for left lower extremity radiculopathy is denied.

3. Entitlement to an increased rating in excess of 40 percent for right lower extremity radiculopathy is denied.

4. Entitlement to an increased rating in excess of 20 percent for degenerative arthritis of the left knee is denied.

5. Entitlement to an increased rating in excess of 20 percent for degenerative arthritis of the right knee is denied.

6. Entitlement to an increased rating in excess of 10 percent for left ankle strain is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran's IVDS is not manifested by unfavorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine.

2. Left lower extremity radiculopathy is not manifested by severe incomplete paralysis of the sciatic nerve.

3. Right lower extremity radiculopathy is not manifested by severe incomplete paralysis of the sciatic nerve.

4. Degenerative arthritis of the left knee is not manifested by flexion of the knee limited to 15 degrees or extension limited to 10 degrees or more.

5. Degenerative arthritis of the right knee is not manifested by flexion of the knee limited to 15 degrees or extension limited to 10 degrees or more.

6. Left ankle strain is not manifested by limited motion of the ankle that is marked (less than 5 degrees dorsiflexion or less than 10 degrees plantar flexion).

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for an increased rating in excess of 40 percent for IVDS have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.1, 4.3, 4.40, 4.45, 4.59, 4.71a, DC 5243.

2. The criteria for an increased rating in excess of 40 percent for left lower extremity radiculopathy have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.124a, DC 8520.

3. The criteria for an increased rating in excess of 40 percent for right lower extremity radiculopathy have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.124a, DC 8520.

4. The criteria for an increased rating in excess of 20 percent for degenerative arthritis of the left knee have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.1, 4.3, 4.40, 4.45, 4.59, 4.71, 4.71a, DC 5003-5260.

5. The criteria for an increased rating in excess of 20 percent for degenerative arthritis of the right knee have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.1, 4.3, 4.40, 4.45, 4.59, 4.71, 4.71a, DC 5003-5260.

6. The criteria for an increased rating in excess of 10 percent for left ankle strain have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.40, 4.45, 4.59, 4.71a, DC 5271.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from April 1986 to April 1989.

This appeal comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from a May 2023 rating decision by the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ), which granted increased ratings for IVDS, bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy, and bilateral degenerative of the knee, and continued the 10 percent rating for left ankle strain. The Veteran appealed the decision to the Board by submitting an October 2023 VA Form 10182, Notice of Disagreement, and elected the Direct Review docket.

In a Direct Review docket, the Board may consider only the evidence of record at the time of the May 2023 AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim[s], considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Increased Ratings

Disability evaluations are determined by evaluating the extent to which a Veteran's service-connected disability adversely affects the Veteran's ability to function under the ordinary conditions of daily life, including employment, by comparing the Veteran's symptomatology with the criteria set forth in the Schedule for Rating Disabilities. 38 C.F.R. Part 4. The percentage ratings represent as far as can practicably be determined the average impairment in earning capacity resulting from such diseases and injuries and the residual conditions in civilian occupations. Generally, the degree of disabilities specified are considered adequate to compensate for considerable loss of working time from exacerbation or illness proportionate to the severity of the several grades of disability. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1. Any reasonable doubt regarding the degree of disability will be resolved in favor of the Veteran. 38 C.F.R. § 4.3.

Disability of the musculoskeletal system is primarily the inability, due to damage or infection in parts of the system, to perform the normal working movements of the body with normal excursion, strength, speed, coordination, and endurance. It is essential that the examination upon which ratings are based adequately portray the anatomical damage, and the functional loss, with respect to all these elements. The functional loss may be due to absence of part, or all, of the necessary bones, joints and muscles, or associated structures, or to deformity, adhesions, defective innervations, or other pathology, or it may be due to pain, supported by adequate pathology and evidenced by the visible behavior of the claimant undertaking the motion. Weakness is as important as limitation of motion, and a part that becomes painful on use must be regarded as seriously disabled. A little used part of the musculoskeletal system may be expected to show evidence of disuse, either through atrophy, the condition of the skin, absence of normal callosity or the like. 38 C.F.R. § 4.40.

Evidence of pain, weakened movement, excess fatigability, or incoordination must be considered in determining the level of associated functional loss, taking into account any part of the musculoskeletal system that becomes painful on use. The provisions regarding the avoidance of pyramiding, see 38 C.F.R. § 4.14, do not forbid consideration of a higher rating based on greater limitation of motion due to pain on use, including flare ups. However, those provisions should only be considered in conjunction with the DCs predicated on limitation of motion. 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.40, 4.45.

The intent of the rating schedule is to recognize painful motion with joint or periarticular pathology as productive of disability. Painful motion is an important factor of joint disability, which is entitled to at least the minimum compensable rating for the joint. 38 C.F.R. § 4.59. However, the evaluation of painful motion as limited motion only applies when the limitation of motion is noncompensable under the applicable DC.

1. Entitlement to an increased rating in excess of 40 percent for IVDS

A May 2011 rating decision shows that the AOJ granted service connection for lumbar strain and assigned a 10 percent rating effective March 10, 2010. A September 2013 rating decision recharacterized the disability as lumbar strain and degenerative disc disease and continued the 10 percent rating. An April 2021 rating decision granted a 20 percent rating effective November 30, 2020, and once again recharacterized as interverbal disc syndrome with lumbar strain and degenerative disc disease. In the May 2023 rating decision currently on appeal, a 40 percent rating was assigned, effective January 5, 2023.

Rating Criteria

The Veteran's IVDS is rated under DC 5243. DCs 5242-5237 provide ratings pursuant to the General Rating Formula for Diseases and Injuries of the Spine (General Rating Formula). Under DC 5243 both prior to and since the regulatory change, IVDS (preoperatively or postoperatively) is rated either under the General Rating Formula or under the Formula for Rating IVDS Based on Incapacitating Episodes, whichever method results in the higher rating when all disabilities are combined under § 4.25. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, DC 5243.

Note (5) of 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a defines favorable and unfavorable ankylosis, with unfavorable ankylosis being defined as a condition in which the entire spine or an entire spinal segment is fixed in flexion or extension and the ankylosis results in one or more associated complications, such as difficulty walking because of a limited line of vision; restricted opening of the mouth and chewing; breathing limited to diaphragmatic respiration; gastrointestinal symptoms due to pressure of the costal margin on the abdomen; dyspnea or dysphagia; atlantoaxial or cervical subluxation or dislocation; or neurologic symptoms due to nerve root stretching. In contrast, ankylosis is considered favorable if the fixation is in a neutral position (0 degrees) or does not result in an associated complication under Note (5).

Under DC 5242, a 40 percent rating is warranted for forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine 30 degrees or less, or, favorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine. A 50 percent rating is warranted for unfavorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine and a 100 percent rating is warranted for ankylosis of the entire spine.

The Formula for Rating Intervertebral Disc Syndrome Based on Incapacitating Episodes provides that a 40 percent evaluation is warranted when there are incapacitating episodes having a total duration of at least 4 weeks but less than 6 weeks during the past 12 months. A 60 percent evaluation is warranted when there are incapacitating episodes having a total duration of at least 6 weeks during the past 12 months. Note (1) provides that an incapacitating episode is a period of acute signs and symptoms due to intervertebral disc syndrome that requires bed rest prescribed by a physician and treatment by a physician.

Analysis

The Board has carefully reviewed the evidence of record and finds that the evidence persuasively weighs against the award of an increased rating in excess of 40 percent for IVDS. The reasons follow.

The evidence shows that the Veteran's IVDS is manifested with pain and limitation of motion but does not result in unfavorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine or the functional equivalent to warrant a 50 percent rating. For example, the Veteran had forward flexion to 25 degrees, extension to 5 degrees, right lateral flexion to 10 degrees, left lateral flexion to 10 degrees, right lateral rotation to 10 degrees, and left lateral rotation to 10 degrees. Passive range of motion was performed, which demonstrated pain on all ranges of motion, and measurements of range of motion that were the same as active motion. There was evidence of pain on active motion, passive motion, and that causes functional loss with bending, sitting, crawling, jumping, or performing work that requires repetitive bending. There was no objective evidence of crepitus, localized tenderness, or pain on palpation of the joint or associated soft tissue. The Veteran was able to perform repetitive use testing with at least three repetitions with no additional loss of function or range of motion after three repetitions. The Veteran was not examined immediately after repeated use over time, but procured evidence suggested that pain, fatigability, weakness, and lack of endurance significantly limited functional ability with repeated use over time. this resulted in forward flexion to 15 degrees, extension to 0 degrees, right lateral flexion to 5 degrees, left lateral flexion to 5 degrees, right lateral rotation to 5 degrees, and left lateral rotation to 5 degrees. 

The examiner documented that the Veteran was not examined during a flare-up, but procured evidence suggested that pain, fatigability, weakness, and lack of endurance significantly limited functional ability with flare-ups. The Veteran reported that flare-ups of the back occur almost daily. He stated that the back flare-ups vary in severity, sometimes they are mild to moderate and other times the pain is severe. The back flare-ups last sometimes for several minutes and other times the pain will last for seconds at a time. He reported that his back flare-ups are precipitated by walking for long periods of time, sitting too long, going up and down ladder, exercising and having sex. The back flare-ups are alleviated by rest sometimes and at other times heat and cold compress will help with the pain.

The Veteran did not have localized tenderness, guarding or muscle spasm of the thoracolumbar spine, and had no additional factors contributing to disability. The Veteran had muscle strength rated 3/5 for bilateral hip flexion, 2/5 for bilateral knee extension, 3/5 for bilateral ankle plantar flexion, 3/5 for bilateral ankle dorsiflexion, and 2/5 for bilateral great toe extension. The examiner found that there was no ankylosis of the spine. While the Veteran did have IVDS of the thoracolumbar spine, he did not have episodes of acute signs and symptoms due to IVDS that required bed rest prescribed by a physician and treatment by a physician in the past 12 months. VA treatment records document ongoing complaints of back pain. 

The Board has considered the effects of the Veteran's symptoms, including pain and functional loss, and the Board concludes that the evidence persuasively weighs against a unfavorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine, which is the criteria needed for a 50 percent rating. Examination results throughout the appeal period show that the Veteran had forward flexion from 15 to 25 degrees, and the Veteran has not specifically alleged symptomatology producing the functional equivalent of ankylosis. Chavis v. McDonough, 34 Vet. App. 1 (2021). 

The findings of the March 2023 VA examination report weigh against a finding that the Veteran's back disability is manifested by the level of impairment that would warrant an increased rating.

Taking into account the evidence of record indicating the Veteran's regular complaints of pain and other findings of functional loss, the Board finds that the evidence does not reflect that such pain and functional limitations resulted in unfavorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine, which would be required for a finding that the Veteran was entitled to a 50 percent disability rating. The Board notes that pain that does not result in additional functional loss does not warrant a higher rating. See Mitchell v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 32, 42-43 (2011). Thus, a higher rating under the provisions of 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.40, 4.45, and 4.59 criteria is not approximated in the Veteran's disability picture for this appeal period.

For the above reasons, the evidence is neither evenly balanced nor approximately so with regard to whether entitlement to a 50 percent rating for IVDS is warranted. Rather, the evidence persuasively weighs against an increased rating. The benefit of the doubt doctrine, see 38?U.S.C. §?5107(b), is therefore not for application. Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc) (only when the evidence persuasively favors one side or another is the benefit of the doubt doctrine not for application).

2. Entitlement to an increased rating in excess of 40 percent for left lower extremity radiculopathy

3. Entitlement to an increased rating in excess of 40 percent for right lower extremity radiculopathy

An April 2021 rating decision granted service connection for bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy, and assigned each disability a 10 percent rating effective November 30, 2020. In the May 2023 rating decision currently on appeal, 40 percent ratings for each disability were assigned, effective January 5, 2023. 

Rating Criteria

The Veteran's bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy is rated under DC 8520. Paralysis of the sciatic nerve is evaluated in accordance with the criteria set forth in 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, DC 8520. (Neuritis and neuralgia of that group are evaluated under DCs 8620 and 8720). Under these criteria, moderately severe incomplete paralysis is rated as 40 percent disabling. Severe incomplete paralysis, with marked muscular atrophy is rated as 60 percent disabling. Complete paralysis, with the foot dangles and drops, no active movement possible of muscles below the knee, flexion of knee weakened or (very rarely) lost is rated as 80 percent disabling. 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a. The words "mild," "moderate," and "severe" as used in the various DCs are not defined in the Rating Schedule. Regulations provide that ratings for peripheral neurological disorders are to be assigned based the relative impairment of motor function, trophic changes, or sensory disturbance. 38 C.F.R. § 4.120. Consideration is also given for loss of reflexes, pain, and muscle atrophy. See 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.123, 4.124.

The term "incomplete paralysis" shows a degree of lost or impaired function substantially less than the picture for complete paralysis given with each nerve, whether due to varied level of the nerve lesion or to partial regeneration. When the involvement is wholly sensory, the rating is for the mild, or at most, the moderate degree. The disability ratings for the peripheral nerves are for unilateral involvement; when bilateral, the ratings combine with application of the bilateral factor. 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Note at "Diseases of the Peripheral Nerves." The Note to 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a establishes a maximum disability rating for conditions that are wholly sensory, as opposed to a minimum disability rating for conditions that are more than wholly sensory.

The words "mild," "moderate," and "severe" as used in the various DCs are not defined in the Rating Schedule. Regulations provide that ratings for peripheral neurological disorders are to be assigned based the relative impairment of motor function, trophic changes, or sensory disturbance. 38 C.F.R. § 4.120. Consideration is also given for loss of reflexes, pain, and muscle atrophy. See 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.123, 4.124.

The Board must define the relevant terms of the DC 8520 when assessing the severity of the Veteran's bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy. VA's Adjudication Procedures Manual (Manual), though not binding on the Board, provides also benchmarks for mild, moderate, moderately severe, and severe peripheral nerves conditions. Per the Manual, mild incomplete paralysis is described as the disability limited to sensory deficits that are lower graded, less persistent, or affecting a small area. Additionally, a very minimal reflex or motor abnormality potentially could also be consistent with mild incomplete paralysis. M21-1, III.iv.4.N.4.c.

A "moderately severe" evaluation level includes motor and/or reflex impairment at a grade reflecting a high level of limitation or disability, and potentially atrophy. To be described as "severe," it would be expected that there is marked muscular atrophy. Id.

The term "incomplete paralysis" shows a degree of impaired function substantially less than the type of picture for "complete paralysis" given for each nerve, whether due to varied level of the nerve lesion or to partial regeneration. 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Diseases of the Peripheral Nerves, Note. When the involvement is wholly sensory, the rating for incomplete paralysis should be for the mild, or, at most, the moderate degree. Id.; see also Miller v. Shulkin, 28 Vet. App. 376.

Analysis

The Board has carefully reviewed the evidence of record and finds that the evidence persuasively weighs against the award of an increased rating in excess of 40 percent for bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy. The reasons follow.

The evidence shows that the Veteran's bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy does not result in severe incomplete paralysis of the sciatic nerve, to warrant a 60 percent rating. For example, a March 2023 VA examination report shows that the Veteran had hypoactive reflexes in his bilateral knees and ankles. Upon sensory examination, the Veteran had normal results in the bilateral upper anterior thigh, thigh/knee, lower leg/ankle, and foot/toes regions. He also had positive results bilaterally for the straight leg raise test. The Veteran reported moderate constant pain, no intermittent pain, severe paresthesias and/or dysesthesias, and severe numbness in the right lower extremity. In the left lower extremity, the Veteran reported no constant pain, moderate intermittent pain, moderate paresthesias and/or dysesthesias, and moderate numbness. No other signs or symptoms of radiculopathy were reported. The examiner documented that the Veteran did not have muscle atrophy. 

VA treatment records do not support additional evaluation of the Veteran's bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy, or other symptoms indicative that an increased rating is warranted.

As the Veteran has not been found to have muscle atrophy, the evidence does not support a finding of marked muscular atrophy to warrant an increased rating. Although the Veteran reported severe paresthesias and/or dysesthesias and severe numbness in the right lower extremity, the Board finds that these two subjective reports of symptoms, coupled with the finding of no muscle atrophy, weigh against a finding that the Veteran's disability picture rises to the level of severe incomplete paralysis of the sciatic nerve. 

For the above reasons, the evidence is neither evenly balanced nor approximately so with regard to whether entitlement to a 60 percent rating for bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy is warranted. Rather, the evidence persuasively weighs against an increased rating. The benefit of the doubt doctrine, see 38?U.S.C. §?5107(b), is therefore not for application. Lynch, 21 F.4th 776.

4. Entitlement to an increased rating in excess of 20 percent for degenerative arthritis of the left knee

5. Entitlement to an increased rating in excess of 20 percent for degenerative arthritis of the right knee

In a May 2011 rating decision, the AOJ granted service connection for degenerative arthritis of the bilateral knee. Both knees were assigned a 10 percent rating, each of which was effective May 10, 2010. Rating decisions from September 2013 and April 2021 continued both 10 percent ratings. In the May 2023 rating decision currently on appeal, each knee was assigned a 20 percent rating effective January 5, 2023. 

Rating Criteria

The Veteran's bilateral knee disabilities are rated under DC 5003-5260. Under DC 5010, arthritis due to trauma, substantiated by x-ray findings, is to be rated as degenerative arthritis under DC 5003. Under DC 5003, degenerative changes established by x-ray findings are rated on the basis of limitation of motion under the appropriate DC for the specific joint involved. 38 U.S.C. § 4.71 a, DC 5003, 5010.

Under DC 5260, limitation of flexion of the knee to 60 degrees warrants a noncompensable rating. Limitation of flexion of the knee to 45 degrees warrants a 10 percent rating. Limitation of flexion of the knee to 30 degrees warrants a 20 percent rating. Limitation of flexion of the knee to 15 degrees warrants a 30 percent rating.

Under DC 5261, limitation of extension of the knee to 5 degrees warrants a zero or noncompensable rating. Limitation of extension of the knee to 10 degrees warrants a 10 percent rating. Limitation of extension of the knee to 15 degrees warrants a 20 percent rating. Limitation of extension of the knee to 20 degrees warrants a 30 percent rating. Limitation of extension to 30 degrees warrants a 40 percent rating, and extension limited to 45 degrees warrants a 50 percent rating.

Normal range of motion of the knee is from zero degrees of extension to 140 degrees of flexion. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71, Plate II.

A VA General Counsel opinion has also held that separate ratings could be provided for limitation of knee extension and flexion under DCs 5260 and 5261 as long as both ranges of motion meet the criteria for a compensable rating. VAOPGCPREC 9-2004; 69 Fed. Reg. 59,990 (2004).

Analysis

The Board has carefully reviewed the evidence of record and finds that the evidence persuasively weighs against the award of an increased rating in excess of 20 percent for a bilateral knee disability. The reasons follow.

The evidence shows that the Veteran's bilateral knee disability is manifested with pain and limitation of motion but does not result in flexion of the knee limited to 15 degrees to warrant a 30 percent rating. For example, a March 2023 VA examination report shows that the Veteran was found to have right knee flexion to 35 degrees and extension to 0 degrees. In the left knee, the Veteran had flexion to 50 degrees and extension to 0 degrees. In both knees, the passive range of motion was the same as active range of motion. The Veteran had pain on both flexion and extension. There was evidence of pain on active motion, passive motion, and that caused functional loss manifested by causing the Veteran difficulty in running, jumping, kneeling, crawling, squatting, performing repetitive knee movements, an inability to play sports, and limited ability on steps and ladders. There was no evidence of crepitus and no objective evidence of localized tenderness or pain on palpation of the joint or associated soft tissue. The Veteran was able to perform repetitive use testing with at least three repetitions with no additional loss of function or range of motion after three repetitions. The Veteran was not examined immediately after repeated use over time, and procured evidence suggested pain, fatigability, weakness, and lack of endurance significantly limited functional ability with repeated use over time. The estimated range of motion immediately after repeated use over time in the right knee was flexion to 20 degrees and extension to 0 degrees. With regard to the left knee, with repeated use over time, flexion was to 25 degrees and extension was to 0 degrees. 

The Veteran reported that flare-ups of the knees occur about twice a month that are exacerbated with increased walking or climbing stairs. The bilateral knee flare-ups are moderate, but can be severe with increased walking, climbing stairs, or ladders. He stated that flare-ups last about two days if moderate, but if the flare ups are more severe, the Veteran reported that they can last between four and five days. He stated that the right knee flare-ups are precipitated by getting in and out of work vehicles, stairs, walking for long distances, kneeling, standing for a long time, bending at the knees and are alleviated by pain medication, not walking or standing for long periods of time, not having to go up and down stairs or ladders, not kneeling or bending at the knees, or getting in and out of work trucks, rest and ice packs. The examination was not conducted during a flare-up, but procured evidence suggested that pain, fatigability, weakness, and lack of endurance significantly limited functional ability with flare-ups. The Veteran did not have muscle atrophy. There was no ankylosis of the knees. 

Additionally, the Veteran did not have recurrent subluxation or persistent instability, or a ligament tear in the bilateral knees. The Veteran did not have recurrent patellar dislocation, shin splints (medial tibial stress syndrome), stress fractures, or any other tibial or fibular impairment. The Veteran also did not have a meniscus condition. The Board has considered the effects of the Veteran's symptoms, including pain and functional loss, and the Board concludes that the evidence persuasively weighs against a flexion of the knee to 15 degrees, which is the criteria needed for a 30 percent rating. Examination results throughout the appeal period show that he had flexion from 20 to 35 degrees and the Veteran has not specifically alleged symptomatology producing the functional equivalent of ankylosis. Chavis, 34 Vet. App. 1. Additionally, as the Veteran has full extension, a separate rating for limitation of extension is not warranted, even if extension was painful. In order to receive a separate compensable rating for extension, the Veteran's extension would need to be limited to a compensable level, which is 10 degrees. VA treatment records do not support additional evaluation of the Veteran's knees during the appeal period. 

The fact that symptoms indicative of atrophy have not been reported, weighs against a finding that the Veteran's bilateral knee disability is manifested by more than moderate weakness, and is evidence against a finding of the level of impairment that would warrant an increased rating.

Taking into account the evidence of record indicating the Veteran's regular complaints of pain and other findings of functional loss, the Board finds that the evidence does not reflect that such pain and functional limitations resulted in flexion of the knee to 15 degrees, which would be required for a finding that the Veteran was entitled to a 30 percent disability rating. The Board notes that pain that does not result in additional functional loss does not warrant a higher rating. See Mitchell, 25 Vet. App. 32, 42-43. Thus, a higher rating under the provisions of 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.40, 4.45, and 4.59 criteria is not approximated in the Veteran's disability picture for this appeal period.

Based on the results of the March 2023 VA examination report, the Board finds that the evidence does not support either an increased rating under this DC, or a separate rating under another DC. 

For the above reasons, the evidence is neither evenly balanced nor approximately so with regard to whether entitlement to a 30 percent rating for a bilateral knee disability is warranted. Rather, the evidence persuasively weighs against an increased rating. The benefit of the doubt doctrine, see 38?U.S.C. §?5107(b), is therefore not for application. Lynch, 21 F.4th 776.

6. Entitlement to an increased rating in excess of 10 percent for left ankle strain

In a May 2011 rating decision, the Veteran was granted service connection for left ankle strain, and assigned a 10 percent rating effective May 10, 2010. A September 2013 rating decision, an April 2021 rating decision, and the currently appealed May 2023 rating decision, all continued the 10 percent rating. 

Rating Criteria

The Veteran's left ankle strain is rated under DC 5271. Effective February 7, 2021, DC 5271 is amended to provide for a 10 percent disability rating for limited motion of the ankle that is "moderate (less than 15 degrees dorsiflexion or less than 30 degrees plantar flexion)." A 20 percent disability rating is provided for limited motion of the ankle that is "marked (less than 5 degrees dorsiflexion or less than 10 degrees plantar flexion)."

Under the former criteria, DC 5271 provided for limited motion of the ankle to be rated as 10 percent disabling if "moderate" and 20 percent disabling if "marked." Id. The words "moderate" or "marked" were not defined in the VA Schedule. 

In proposing the amendment to DC 5271, VA noted that, "VA currently uses these standards to define marked and moderate, this change is intended as a clarification of current policy and would ensure consistent application of these criteria among rating personnel." Accordingly, in making changes to DC 5271, VA was codifying a previous policy to ensure more uniformity among its rating personnel. As such, even prior to February 7, 2021, marked limited motion of the ankle would mean less than 5 degrees of dorsiflexion or less than 10 degrees of plantar flexion. As the amended criteria provide greater clarity, the Board finds that using them is most beneficial to the Veteran. 

Analysis

The Board has carefully reviewed the evidence of record and finds that the evidence persuasively weighs against the award of an increased rating in excess of 10 percent for left ankle strain. The reasons follow.

The evidence shows that the Veteran's left ankle strain is manifested with pain and limitation of motion but does not result in limited motion of the ankle that is marked (less than 5 degrees dorsiflexion or less than 10 degrees plantar flexion), to warrant a 20 percent rating. At worst, the Veteran's left ankle was limited to 20 degrees of dorsiflexion and 35 degrees of plantar flexion in the March 2023 VA examination report.

The same examination showed that pain was exhibited on both ranges of motion. The Veteran's passive range of motion was plantar flexion to 40 degrees and dorsiflexion to 15 degrees, also with pain on both ranges of motion. There was evidence of pain on active motion, passive motion, and that caused functional loss with the Veteran being unable to stand for prolonged periods, with limited running, limited use of stairs without pain, limited use of vehicles, and difficulty walking on uneven surface. The examiner found objective evidence of crepitus and objective evidence of localized tenderness or pain on palpation of the joint or associated soft tissue. It was noted that the location was across the left ankle join, with moderate severity, and the Veteran's pain was related to left ankle strain. 

The Veteran was able to perform repetitive use testing with at least three repetitions, but this resulted in additional functional loss, caused by fatigability, weakness, and lack of endurance. The Veteran's plantar flexion was 35 degrees and dorsiflexion was 10 degrees upon repetitive use testing. The Veteran was not examined immediately after repeated use over time, and evidence suggested that pain and lack of endurance significantly limited functional ability with repeated use over time. The examiner estimated that the Veteran's range of motion immediately after repeated use over time was plantar flexion to 20 degrees and dorsiflexion to 10 degrees. 

The Veteran reported experiencing flare-ups for the left ankle, stating that they occurred about once or twice a week. He stated that they were usually moderate, and if there was swelling, the flare-ups will last a few days, but without swelling it will only last for a day at most. The left ankle flare-ups are precipitated by walking up and down ladders at work or walking up and down stairs while at work. Sometimes, the Veteran reported that his left ankle will be tender and swollen in the morning. The left ankle flare-ups are alleviated by not wearing safety boots, not putting pressure on ankle, ice, and by use of pain medication. The examination was not performed during a flare-up, but procured evidence suggested that pain, fatigability, weakness, and lack of endurance significantly limited functional ability during flare-ups. During flare-ups, the examiner estimated that the range of motion of the left ankle during flare-ups was plantar flexion to 20 degrees and dorsiflexion to 10 degrees. It was additionally noted that the Veteran had swelling in the base of the left ankle joint. The Veteran did not have either muscle atrophy or ankylosis of the left ankle, or of the subastragalar or tarsal joint. For the anterior drawer test, there was no absence of firm end point with asymmetric or excessive motion, and for the talar tilt test, there was no asymmetric or excessive motion. The Veteran did not have shin splints (medial tibial stress syndrome), stress fractures, Achilles tendonitis, Achilles tendon rupture, malunion of calcaneus (os calcis) or talus (astragalus), nor has the Veteran had a talectomy (astragalectomy)

VA treatment records do not support additional evaluation of the Veteran's left ankle during the appeal period. 

The Board has considered the effects of the Veteran's symptoms, including pain and functional loss, and the Board concludes that the evidence persuasively weighs against a limited motion of the ankle that is marked (less than 5 degrees dorsiflexion or less than 10 degrees plantar flexion), which is the criteria needed for a 20 percent rating. 

Taking into account the evidence of record indicating the Veteran's regular complaints of pain and other findings of functional loss, the Board finds that the evidence does not reflect that such pain and functional limitations resulted in limited motion of the ankle that is marked (less than 5 degrees dorsiflexion or less than 10 degrees plantar flexion), which would be required for a finding that the Veteran was entitled to a 20 percent disability rating. The Board notes that pain that does not result in additional functional loss does not warrant a higher rating. See Mitchell, 25 Vet. App. 32, 42-43. Thus, a higher rating under the provisions of 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.40, 4.45, and 4.59 criteria is not approximated in the Veteran's disability picture for this appeal period.

For the above reasons, the evidence is neither evenly balanced nor approximately so with regard to whether entitlement to a 20 percent rating for left ankle strain is warranted. Rather, the evidence persuasively weighs against an increased rating. The benefit of the doubt doctrine, see 38?U.S.C. §?5107(b), is therefore not for application. Lynch, 21 F.4th 776.

 

 

A. P. SIMPSON

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Husain, Rahat

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.