Citation Nr: A25034550
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 240905-469550
DATE: April 15, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for diabetes mellitus, type 2 is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for hyperlipidemia is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for hypertension is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from June 1985 to January 1994.

The rating decision on appeal was issued in September 2023 and constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.

The Veteran initially requested the hearing option in the VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) (NOD). In January 2025, the Veteran withdrew the hearing request; therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or his representative within 90 days following receipt of the withdrawal. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.302(b).

1. Entitlement to service connection for diabetes mellitus, type 2 is remanded.

The Veteran is seeking service connection for diabetes mellitus. 

The AOJ noted that participation in a Toxic Exposure Risk Activity (TERA) is confirmed based on asbestos exposure during service aboard a US Navy Ship and occupational exposure hazards of ionizing radiation and bodily fluid exposure as an Obstetrician Gynecologist.

Here, the Board finds the VA opinion obtained prior to the rating decision on appeal is inadequate, thus a remand is warranted to correct this pre-decisional duty to assist error.

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in June 2023. The examiner stated that the Veteran's diabetes mellitus was less likely than not caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activity(ies), after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran. The examiner noted that the exact cause of most types of diabetes is unknown. The examiner explained that in all cases, sugar builds up in the bloodstream because the pancreas does not produce enough insulin. The examiner expressed that both type 1 and type 2 diabetes may be caused by a combination of genetic or environmental factors.

The Board finds that the VA opinion is inadequate. The examiner stated that the exact cause of diabetes is unknown, however, the examiner thereafter indicated that it can be caused by a combination of genetic and/or environmental factors. The examiner did not discuss, consider, or provide adequate rationale as to whether the Veteran's TERA could be a factor in causing the Veteran's diabetes mellitus. Therefore, a remand is warranted for an adequate VA examination. 

2. Entitlement to service connection for hyperlipidemia is remanded.

The Veteran seeks service connection for hyperlipidemia. 

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in June 2023. The examiner stated that the Veteran's hyperlipidemia was less likely than not caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activity(ies), after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran. The examiner stated that hyperlipidemia is a term that encompasses various genetic and acquired disorders that describe elevated lipid levels within the body. The examiner noted that it is a very common disorder, especially in the Western hemisphere, but also throughout the world. The examiner stated that hyperlipidemia itself does not typically lead to critical symptoms itself, however, having this underlying pathology will often lead to serious illnesses that may ultimately lead to death.

Here, the Board finds the VA opinion obtained prior to the rating decision on appeal is inadequate, thus a remand is warranted to correct this pre-decisional duty to assist error. The examiner merely provided a definition/description of the diagnosis of hyperlipidemia. The examiner did not discuss the Veteran's participation in TERA, nor did the examiner discuss the cause of the Veteran's hyperlipidemia. Therefore, a remand is warranted for an adequate VA examination. 

3. Entitlement to service connection for hypertension is remanded.

The Veteran seeks service connection for hypertension. 

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in June 2023. The examiner indicated that the Veteran's hypertension was less likely than not caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activity(ies), after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran. The examiner stated that hypertension or high blood pressure usually develops over time. It can happen because of unhealthy lifestyle choices, such as not getting enough regular physical activity. Certain health conditions, such as diabetes and having obesity, can also increase the risk for developing high blood pressure.

Here, the Board finds the VA opinion obtained prior to the rating decision on appeal is inadequate, thus a remand is warranted to correct this pre-decisional duty to assist error. The examiner did not discuss, consider, or provide adequate rationale as to whether the Veteran's TERA could be a factor in causing the Veteran's hypertension. Therefore, a remand is warranted for an adequate VA examination. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination in order to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran diabetes mellitus, hyperlipidemia, and hypertension. If the Veteran is unable to attend the VA examination, obtain an addendum opinion. The entire claims file should be made available to, and reviewed by, the examiner. 

The examiner is then asked to provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's diabetes mellitus, hyperlipidemia, and hypertension is related to any incident of his active-duty service, to include his conceded TERA exposure of asbestos and occupational exposure hazards of ionizing radiation and bodily fluid exposure.

NOTE: The examiner is directed to consider the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran.

The clinician is advised that the Veteran is competent to report his symptoms and history. Such reports should be acknowledged and considered in formulating any opinion.

If medical literature is relied upon, the clinician should identify and specifically cite each reference material used. The clinician should specifically discuss any contradictory evidence in the claims file and reconcile that evidence with their findings.

All opinions should be accompanied by supporting rationale explaining how the clinician arrived at the conclusions expressed

 

 

Ardie A. Bland

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	M.D.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.1303.