Citation Nr: A25034666
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 241018-483633
DATE: April 15, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 70 percent for major depression, recurrent, moderate with anxious distress and alcohol use disorder is remanded.

Entitlement to a total disability rating based on individual unemployability due to service-connected disabilities (TDIU) is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Marine Corps from September 2014 to September 2018.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an October 2024 higher-level review decision, following a July 2024 rating decision by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) regional office, which is the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).

The Veteran elected the Board's Direct Review docket.  See October 2024 VA Form 10182. This restricts the Board's review to the evidence of record at the time of the July 2024 rating decision.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.

As will be discussed below, the Board finds that entitlement to TDIU has been reasonably raised by the record and is therefore properly before the Board.  Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447 (2009)

1. Entitlement to a rating in excess of 70 percent for major depression, recurrent, moderate with anxious distress and alcohol use disorder is remanded.

The Veteran reported to the April 2024 VA examiner that he was in ongoing private therapy with Calypso Counseling.  

The Board further notes that there are references to private counseling with Eastern Psychiatric and Behavioral throughout the VA treatment records.

While there are some private treatment records associated with the claims file, there are no records past December 2023, and it is not clear whether the records that have been associated with the claims file represent the complete treatment records from the period on appeal.

Here, the record does not reflect that an attempt to obtain complete private treatment records has been made in connection with the claim for an increased rating.  As such, the Board finds that the failure to attempt to obtain the identified, relevant private treatment records constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error, and therefore remand is warranted so that appropriate attempts may be made to obtain the outstanding records. 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.159(c)(1), 20.802(a). 

2. Entitlement to TDIU is remanded.

The Veteran reported to the April 2024 VA examiner that he stepped down from his previously full-time position to a part-time position, due to symptoms of his service-connected major depressive disorder.  Specifically, he reported working part time after stepping down from a supervisory role due to persistent irritability, easy frustration, snapping at customers, reduced focus and concentration, poor motivation, making mistakes, and arguing with supervisors.  He further stated that he now only works 10 to 15 hours per week and no longer has to deal directly with customers.  

The Board finds that this indicates that the Veteran's service-connected major depressive disorder has had a negative impact on his employment and that possible marginal employment and sheltered employment theories of entitlement to a TDIU have been reasonably raised by the record.  Rice, 22 Vet. App. 447.

Here, the AOJ failed to develop the issue of TDIU, or at least provide the Veteran with information regarding a TDIU, prior to the issue of the July 2024 decision on appeal.  Therefore, the issue of entitlement to TDIU is remanded to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error under 38 C.F.R. § 4.16(b).  See 38 C.F.R. § 20.802.

Finally, because a decision on the remanded issue of an increased rating for major depression could significantly impact a decision on the issue of entitlement to TDIU, the issues are inextricably intertwined and a remand is required.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Furnish the Veteran with a 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(b) notice letter for the TDIU claim, including any employment records, earnings records (e.g., federal or state tax returns), or other evidence from 2023 to the present to indicate any marginal or sheltered employment during the appeal period.  He should be allowed a reasonable period of time in which to respond, and any needed development following his response should be accomplished.

2. Ask the Veteran to complete a VA Form 21-4142 for Calypso Counseling.  Make two requests for the authorized records from Calypso Counseling. unless it is clear after the first request that a second request would be futile

3. Ask the Veteran to complete a VA Form 21-4142 for Eastern Psychiatric and Behavioral. Make two requests for the authorized records from Eastern Psychiatric and Behavioral unless it is clear after the first request that a second request would be futile

 

 

T. V. Casey

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Keeley, Brian

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.