Citation Nr: A25034025
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 240418-434005
DATE: April 11, 2025

ORDER

New and relevant evidence having been received, the readjudication of the claim of entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea is granted.

New and relevant evidence having been received, readjudication of the claim of entitlement to service connection for a right knee pain is granted.

New and relevant evidence having been received, readjudication of the claim of entitlement to service connection for a left knee pain is granted.

Entitlement to service connection for insomnia is denied. 

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for gastroesophageal reflux disease is remanded. 

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea is remanded. 

Entitlement to service connection for a right knee disorder is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a left knee disorder is remanded. 

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran's claim for service connection for sleep disturbances was denied in a September 1997 legacy rating decision and the petition to reopen the claim for service connection for sleep apnea was denied in a September 2017 legacy rating decision; the Veteran did not appeal those decisions and new and material evidence was not received within the one-year appeal period of either decision.  

2. The Veteran's petition to readjudicate the claim for service connection for sleep apnea was granted in an April 2023 rating decision and the claim was denied on the merits.

3. The Veteran's claims for service connection for right knee pain and left knee pain were denied in a September 1997 legacy rating decision and the petitions to reopen the claims for service connection for right knee pain and left knee pain were denied in a September 2017 legacy rating decision; the Veteran did not appeal those decisions and new and material evidence was not received within the one-year appeal period of either decision.  

4. Th Veteran's petitions to readjudicate his claims for service connection for right knee pain and left knee pain were in an April 2023 rating decision.

5. Evidence associated with the record since the April 2023 rating decision is both new and relevant to the claims of entitlement to service connection for right knee pain and left knee pain. 

6. The Veteran does not have insomnia separately diagnosed from his already service connected posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD).      

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. New and relevant evidence has been received and the claim seeking service connection for sleep apnea is readjudicated.  38 U.S.C. § 5108; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.156(d), 3.2501(a)(1), 19.2.

2. New and relevant evidence has been received and the claim seeking service connection for right knee pain is readjudicated.  38 U.S.C. § 5108; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.156(d), 3.2501(a)(1), 19.2.

3. New and relevant evidence has been received and the claim seeking service connection for left knee pain is readjudicated.  38 U.S.C. § 5108; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.156(d), 3.2501(a)(1), 19.2.

4. The criteria for service connection for insomnia have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.304, 3.310.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran had active military service from July 1976 to August 1996, to include service in Southwest Asia.   

This case comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from November 2023, December 2023, and January 2024 rating decisions issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA).  The rating decision on appeal constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies. 

In April 2019, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, and requested readjudication of the claims for entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea, right and left knee disorders, and upper and lower digestive problems, which were most recently addressed in a September 2017 rating decision.  In April 2023, the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) issued supplemental claim decisions, which found that new and relevant evidence had been received and denied the claims based on the evidence of record at the time of that decision.  

In July 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0995 and requested readjudication of the claims for entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea, right and left knee disorders, and upper and lower digestive problems, which were most recently addressed in a September 2017 rating decision.  In November 2023, the AOJ issued the supplemental claim decision on appeal, which found that new and relevant evidence had not been received to readjudicate the claims for service connection for right knee pain and left knee pain as well as sleep apnea. In December 2023, the AOJ issued supplemental claim decisions, which found that new and relevant evidence had been received to readjudicate the claims for service connection for gastroesophageal reflux disease and denied the claim on the merits. A January 2024 rating decision then denied the claim of entitlement to service connection for insomnia.  

In the April 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the November 2023, December 2023, and January 2024 AOJ decisions on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decisions on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. However, because the Board is remanding the claims of service connection for gastroesophageal reflux disease, obstructive sleep apnea, right knee pain and left knee pain, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

In the December 2023 rating decision, the AOJ found that new and relevant evidence was submitted to warrant readjudicating on the merits for the issue of entitlement to service connection for gastroesophageal reflux disease.  The Board is bound by this favorable finding.  38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).  

Applicable Statutes and Regulations

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a). Service connection requires: (1) the existence of a present disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004); see also Caluza v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 498 (1995).  A disability that is proximately due to, the result of, or aggravated by a service-connected disease or injury shall be service connected.  38 C.F.R. § 3.310.

Generally, when a claim in the former legacy appeal system is disallowed, it may not be reopened and allowed, and a claim based on the same factual basis may not be considered.  38 U.S.C. § 7105.  However, a claimant in the legacy system may reopen a finally adjudicated claim by submitting new and material evidence. 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.156(a).  New evidence means existing evidence not previously submitted to agency decision makers. Material evidence means existing evidence that, by itself or when considered with previous evidence of record, relates to an unestablished fact necessary to substantiate the claim. 

Material evidence is: (1) evidence on an element where the claimant initially failed to submit any competent evidence; (2) evidence on an element where the previously submitted evidence was found to be insufficient; (3) evidence on an element where the appellant did not have to submit evidence until a decision of the Secretary determined that an evidentiary presumption had been rebutted; or (4) some combination or variation of the above three situations. Kent v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 1 (2006).

In order to be new and material evidence, the evidence must not be cumulative or redundant, and must raise a reasonable possibility of substantiating the claim, which has been found to be enabling, not preclusive. Shade v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 110 (2010). When determining whether the claim should be reopened, the credibility of the newly submitted evidence is to be presumed. Justus v. Principi, 3 Vet. App. 510, 513 (1991).

Alternatively, for pending legacy claims not under the modernized review system, new and material evidence received prior to the expiration of the appeal period or prior to the appellate decision if a timely appeal has been filed shall be considered as having been filed in connection with the claim which was pending at the beginning of the appeal period. 38 C.F.R. § 3.156(b).

When VA fails to consider new and material evidence submitted within the one-year appeal period pursuant to § 3.156(b), and that evidence establishes entitlement to the benefit sought, the underlying AOJ decision does not become final. Young v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 461, 466 (2009); see also Buie v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 242, 252 (2011) (remanding for the Board to consider the application of 38 C.F.R.                § 3.156(b) and whether the regional office correctly viewed the statements in question as new claims). That is, when statements are received within one year of the rating decision, the Board's inquiry is not limited to whether those statements constitute notices of disagreement but whether those statements include the submission of new and material evidence under 38 C.F.R. § 3.156(b).

The United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit has held that the creation of VA treatment records containing new and material evidence within one year of a legacy decision may vitiate the finality of that decision, without regard to whether VA adjudicators are notified of the existence of these records within one year of the issuance of that decision. Lang v. Wilkie, 971 F.3d 1348 (Fed. Cir. 2020).  

Without regard to whether a previous adjudication was made under the legacy or AMA standard, at any time after VA issues a decision on a claim, if VA receives or associates with the claims record relevant official service department records that existed and had not been associated with the claims record when VA first decided the claim, VA will reconsider the claim. Such records include but are not limited to: (i) Service records that are related to a claimed in service event, injury, or disease, regardless of whether those records mention the Veteran by name; (ii) Additional service records forwarded by the Department of Defense or the service department to VA any time after VA's original request for service records; and (iii) Declassified records that could not have been obtained because the records were classified when VA decided the claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.156(c).

For claims to readjudicate submitted on or after February 19, 2019, there must be new and relevant evidence. 38 U.S.C. § 5108; 38 C.F.R. § 3.156(d). In this regard, new evidence is defined as evidence not previously part of the actual record before agency adjudicators. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501(a)1).  Relevant evidence is information that tends to prove or disprove a matter at issue in a claim.  Relevant evidenced includes evidence that raises a theory of entitlement that was not previously addressed.  Id. The relevant evidence standard is a lower standard than the previously utilized material evidence standard because the definition of relevant does not require that the new evidence relate to an unestablished fact or raise a reasonable possibility of substantiating the claim. 

The veteran can provide competent reports of factual matters of which he has first-hand knowledge, such as experiencing pain in service, reporting to sick call, being placed on limited duty, and undergoing physical therapy. See Washington v. Nicholson, 19 Vet. App. 362, 368 (2005). Lay evidence can be competent and sufficient to establish a diagnosis of a condition when (1) a lay person is competent to identify the medical condition (noting that sometimes the lay person will be competent to identify the condition where the condition is simple, for example a broken leg, and sometimes not, for example, a form of cancer), (2) the lay person is reporting a contemporaneous medical diagnosis, or (3) lay testimony describing symptoms at the time supports a later diagnosis by a medical professional. See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F. 3d 1372 (Fed. Cir. 2007). Similarly, laypersons are competent to diagnose and provide nexus opinions to some extent, notably where the diagnosis or opinion is not of a complex nature. Id., see also Davidson v. Shinseki, 581 F.3d 1313 (Fed. Cir. 2009).

Pertinent to a claim for service connection, such a determination requires a finding of a current disability that is related to an injury or disease in service. Watson v. Brown, 4 Vet. App. 309 (1993); Brammer v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 223, 225 (1992); Rabideau v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 141, 143 (1992). Under applicable regulation, the term "disability" means impairment in earning capacity resulting from diseases and injuries and their residual conditions. 38 C.F.R. § 4.1; see also Hunt v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 292, 296 (1991); Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439 (1995); Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356 (Fed. Cir. 2018) (the term "disability" as used in 38 U.S.C. § 1110 "refers to the functional impairment of earning capacity, not the underlying cause of said disability," and held that "pain alone can serve as a functional impairment and therefore qualify as a disability").

The existence of a current disability is the cornerstone of a claim for VA disability compensation. See Degmetich v. Brown, 104 F.3d 1328, 1332 (1997) (holding that §§ 1110 and 1131's requirement of the existence of a present disability for VA compensation purposes cannot be considered arbitrary); see also McClain v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 319, 323 (2007) (holding that the requirement of a current disability is met when a claimant has a disability at the time a claim for VA compensation is filed or during the pendency of that claim). Consequently, the evidence of record must show that the veteran currently has the disability for which benefits are being claimed.

When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, the Secretary shall resolve all reasonable doubt in favor of the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc).

New and relevant evidence having been received, readjudication of the claim for service connection for sleep apnea is granted. 

The AOJ denied the Veteran's claim for service connection for sleep disturbances in an October 1997 rating decision finding that the condition was neither incurred in nor caused by service.  Evidence considered included the Veteran's service treatment records and post-service VA and private treatment records.  The Veteran was provided notice of this decision and his appellate rights but did not appeal the decision or submit new and material evidence within one year of the decision.  Further, no VA treatment records were created within one year of the rating decision relevant to the Veteran's sleep apnea. Beraud v. McDonald, 766 F.3d 1402, 1406-07 (Fed. Cir. 2014); See Lang v. Wilkie, 971 F.3d 1348, (Fed. Cir. 2020).  Moreover, no additional relevant service records (warranting reconsideration of the claim) have been received at any time. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.156(b), (c).  Therefore, the October 1997 rating decision is final.  38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.104, 20.302, 20.1103.   

The AOJ subsequently denied the claim in a September 2017 rating decision, finding that the Veteran had not presented new and material evidence.  The Veteran was provided notice of the decision and his appellate rights but did not appeal this decision or submit new and material evidence within one year of the decision.  

Further, no VA treatment records were created within one year of the rating decision relevant to the Veteran's sleep apnea. Beraud v. McDonald, supra; See Lang v. Wilkie, supra.  Moreover, no additional relevant service records (warranting reconsideration of the claim) have been received at any time. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.156(b), (c).  Therefore, the September 2017 rating decision is final.  38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.104, 20.302, 20.1103.   

In an April 2023 rating decision, the AOJ found that new and relevant evidence had been received to readjudicate the claim for service connection for sleep apnea and denied the claim on the merits. The Veteran did not file a VA Form 10182 to appeal this decision to the Board and did not file a VA Form 20-0995 or a Request for Higher-Level Review (VA Form 20-0996). Accordingly, the April 2023 rating decision is final. 38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.104, 20.302, 20.1103.

The evidence received since the April 2023 rating decision includes evidence that is both new and relevant to the claim.  For example, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination related to his sleep apnea in October 2023, and the examiner commented that the Veteran's sleep apnea might be directly related to active service.  This new evidence tends to prove or disprove a matter at issue in the claim. Accordingly, the claim will be readjudicated on the merits. 

New and relevant evidence having been received, readjudication of the claim for service connection for right knee pain is granted. 

New and relevant evidence having been received, readjudication of the claim for service connection for left knee pain is granted. 

The AOJ denied the Veteran's claims for service connection for right knee pain and left knee pain in an October 1997 rating decision finding that the conditions were neither incurred in nor caused by service.  Evidence considered included the Veteran's service treatment records and post-service VA and private treatment records.  The Veteran was provided notice of this decision and his appellate rights but did not appeal the decision or submit new and material evidence within one year of the decision.  Further, no VA treatment records were created within one year of the rating decision relevant to the Veteran's claimed right knee disorder and left knee disorder. Beraud v. McDonald, supra; See Lang v. Wilkie, supra.  Moreover, no additional relevant service records (warranting reconsideration of the claim) have been received at any time. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.156(b), (c).  Therefore, the October 1997 decision is final.  38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.104, 20.302, 20.1103.   

The AOJ subsequently denied the claims in a September 2017 rating decision, finding that the Veteran had not presented new and material evidence.  The Veteran was provided notice of the decision and his appellate rights but did not appeal this decision or submit new and material evidence within one year of the decision.  Further, no VA treatment records were created within one year of the rating decision relevant to the Veteran's claimed right knee pain and left knee pain. Beraud v. McDonald, supra; See Lang v. Wilkie, supra.  Moreover, no additional relevant service records (warranting reconsideration of the claim) have been received at any time. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.156(b), (c).  Therefore, the September 2017 rating decision is final.  38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.104, 20.302, 20.1103.   

In an April 2023 rating decision, the AOJ found that new and relevant evidence had been received to readjudicate the claims for service connection for right knee pain and left knee pain and denied the claims on the merits. The Veteran did not file a VA Form 10182 to appeal this decision to the Board and did not file a VA Form 20-0995 or a VA Form 20-0996. Accordingly, the April 2023 rating decision is final. 38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.104, 20.302, 20.1103.

Evidence received since the April 2023 rating decision includes evidence that is both new and relevant to the claims. For example, the Veteran was afforded VA examinations related to his knees in October 2023, and he provided new statements regarding the onset of knee pain.  This new evidence tends to prove or disprove a matter at issue in the claims. Accordingly, the claims will be readjudicated on the merits. 

Entitlement to service connection for insomnia is denied. 

The Veteran generally asserts that his insomnia is related to his period of active service, to include as due to his service connected tinnitus.  See July 2023 Application for Disability Compensation and Related Compensation Benefits (VA Form 21-526EZ). The January 2024 rating decision made favorable findings that participation in toxic exposure risk activity is conceded and that the primary disability is service connected.  Specifically, that the Veteran has service-connected tinnitus. These favorable findings are binding on the Board. 38 U.S.C. § 5104A.

At the outset, the Board notes that the Veteran is currently service connected for PTSD, rated at 50 percent disabling, as well as tinnitus, rated 10 percent disabling, throughout the entire period on appeal.  In the November 2012 rating decision, the AOJ noted that the assigned 50 percent rating for the Veteran's PTSD contemplated symptoms to include chronic sleep impairment.  

The Veteran now asserts that insomnia should be separately rated.  Notably, the evaluation of the same manifestation under different diagnoses are to be avoided.  38 C.F.R. § 4.14; Esteban v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 259 (1994).  

Upon review of the evidence of record, the Board notes that the Veteran has insomnia, but finds that it is associated with his PTSD, for which he is already service connected.  In reaching this conclusion, the Board relies on the October 2023 VA examination report which indicates that the Veteran's sleep difficulty is a symptom of his PTSD and not separately diagnosable disability. Further, the Board also concludes that the Veteran does not have a current diagnosis of an insomnia disorder that is separate and distinct from his service connected PTSD and has not had one at any time during the pendency of the claim or recent to the filing of the claim. Martinez-Bodon v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 393 (2020); Romanowsky v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 289, 294 (2013); McClain v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 319, 321 (2007). 

Service treatment records are negative for any diagnoses relating an insomnia disorder. The VA examination conducted in October 2023 reflects that the Veteran's chronic sleep impairment was a symptom or manifestation of his service connected PTSD rather than a separately diagnosed disability. There is otherwise no diagnosis of an insomnia disorder in the record. As such, there is no evidence of a separately diagnosable insomnia disorder, separate and apart from the Veteran's service connected PTSD and associated symptomatology to include sleep difficulties. The Veteran does not claim, nor do his clinical records show that he experiences, any functional impairment due to an insomnia disorder that is separate and distinct from his service connected PTSD.  

As the record does not reflect a current diagnosis related to an insomnia disorder the cornerstone element of service connection has not been met, and service connection is not warranted. See Boyer v. West, 210 F.3d 1351, 1353 (Fed. Cir. 2000); Brammer v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 223, 225 (1992) (stating that service connection presupposes a current diagnosis of the condition claimed, to at least confirm the veteran has it; without this minimum level of proof, there can be no valid claim). No further discussion of the remaining elements is necessary. The Board acknowledges the Court's holding in Saunders but does not find a basis for determining that there is functional impairment related to a diagnosis of an insomnia disorder. See Saunders v. Wilkie, supra. Moreover, the Veteran has not alleged manifestations of similar severity, frequency and duration as those VA has determined by regulation would cause impaired earning capacity in an average person. Wait v. Wilkie, 33 Vet. App. 8 (2020).

In reaching this determination, the Board has also considered the lay assertions of record, including the contentions of the Veteran in support of a medical nexus. Although he believes that he has a separate insomnia disorder that is separate and distinct from his service-connected PTSD, the Veteran in this case is competent to provide an adequate etiology opinion regarding this issue. The issue is medically complex, as it requires knowledge of anatomical relationships, disease pathology and interpretation of complicated diagnostic medical testing. Therefore, it is outside the competence of the Veteran in this case because the record does not show that they have the skills or medical training to make such a determination. Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 n.4 (Fed. Cir. 2007); see also Kahana v. Shinseki, 24. Vet. App. 428 (2011).

Accordingly, the Board finds that service connection for an insomnia disorder is not warranted. The appeal is denied. 38 U.S.C. § 5107: 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, supra.

REASONS FOR REMAND

Entitlement to service connection for gastroesophageal reflux disease is remanded. 

The Veteran asserts that he has gastroesophageal reflux disease as a result of his active duty service. See August 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ. The December 2023 rating decision included favorable findings that the Veteran is diagnosed with gastroesophageal reflux disease, and that participation in toxic exposure risk activity is conceded. These favorable findings are binding on the Board. 38 U.S.C. § 5104A.

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in April 2022 and the examiner diagnosed gastroesophageal reflux disease.  In a corresponding opinion, the VA examiner opined that the Veteran's upper and lower digestive conditions were less likely than not incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness.  In support of this conclusion, the examiner commented that the Veteran's service treatment records were silent for treatment or diagnoses of upper or lower digestive conditions.  

An additional VA etiological opinion was obtained in October 2023.  The examiner opined that the Veteran's gastroesophageal reflux disease was less likely than not caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activity.  In support of this conclusion, the examiner commented that gastroesophageal reflux disease is caused by frequent acid reflux of nonacidic content from the stomach.  Specifically, the examiner noted that if the sphincter does not relax as it should or it weakens, then stomach acid can flow back in the esophagus. The examiner further noted that, as a result, the acid irritates the lining of the esophagus, often causing it to become inflamed.  

The Board finds that it is unable to decide the claim based on the findings contained within the April 2022 and October 2023 VA opinion reports. In this regard, the April 2022 examiner relied solely on the absence of documented treatment or a diagnosis of gastroesophageal reflux disease during service in forming the negative nexus opinion.  Moreover, the examiner did not explain the significance, if any, of treatment and diagnosis occurring several years following the Veteran's separation from service.  See Dalton v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 23 (2007) (an examination was inadequate where the examiner did not comment on a veteran's reports of in-service injury and instead relied on the absence of evidence in a Veteran's service treatment records to provide a negative opinion).  Additionally, the October 2023 examiner provided no supporting rationale for the opinion.  Rather, the examiner explained the pathophysiological process of gastroesophageal reflux disease without providing any rationale with regard to the etiology of the disability.  Monzingo v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 97, 105 (2012); Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295 (2008).  

Therefore, the Board finds that a new VA etiology opinion is warranted to address the nature and etiology of the Veteran's claimed gastroesophageal reflux disease. See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 312 (2007) (when VA undertakes to provide an examination or obtain a medical opinion, it must ensure that the examination or opinion is adequate). The failure to obtain an adequate etiology opinion is a pre-decisional duty to assist error. 

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea is remanded. 

The Veteran asserts that he has obstructive sleep apnea as a result of his active duty service. See August 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ. The November 2023 rating decision included favorable findings that the Veteran is diagnosed with obstructive sleep apnea, and that participation in toxic exposure risk activity is conceded.  These favorable findings are binding on the Board. 38 U.S.C. § 5104A.

In an undated Statement in Support of Claim (VA Form 21-4138) submitted in April 2022, the Veteran reported that he began experiencing sleep disturbances during his time in Southwest Asian from December 1990 to May 1991.  

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in August 2022 and the examiner diagnosed obstructive sleep apnea.  In a corresponding opinion, the VA examiner opined that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea was less likely than not incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness.  In support of this conclusion, the examiner commented that the Veteran's service treatment records were silent for treatment or a diagnosis of obstructive sleep apnea.    

An additional VA etiological opinion was obtained in March 2023.  The examiner opined that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea was less likely than not caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activity.  In support of this conclusion, the examiner commented that there was no medical or scientific evidence showing a relationship between the development of obstructive sleep apnea and exposure to the type of toxins that the Veteran was exposed to during active service.  The examiner indicated that risk factors include obesity, abnormal tongue shapes, tonsillar hypertrophy, and abnormal jaw shapes.   No further rationale was provided.  

An additional VA etiological opinion was obtained in October 2023.  The October 2023 VA examiner opined that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea was less likely than not caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activity.  The examiner commented that medical literature did not show a correlation between toxic exposures and obstructive sleep apnea.  The examiner also commented that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea might be directly related to his military service.    

The Board finds that it is unable to decide the claim based on the findings contained within the August 2022, March 2023, and October 2023 VA opinion reports. In this regard, the August 2022 examiner relied solely on the absence of documented treatment or a diagnosis of obstructive sleep apnea during service in forming the negative nexus opinion.  Moreover, the examiner did not explain the significance, if any, of treatment and diagnosis occurring several years following the Veteran's separation from service.  See Dalton v. Nicholson, supra.  With regard to the March 2023 opinion, the examiner did not indicate what, if any, of the mentioned risk factors were present with the Veteran.  See Bailey v. O'Rourke, 30 Vet. App. 54, 60 (2018) (finding that a medical rationale based solely on general medical literature without discussing the specific facts pertaining to a Veteran's condition or individual circumstances is inadequate).  Additionally, only the August 2022 opinion related to direct service connection, and the October 2023 VA examiner, who did not provide an opinion with regard to direct service connection, indicated that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea might be directly related to service.   

Therefore, the Board finds that a new VA etiology opinion is warranted to address the nature and etiology of the Veteran's claimed obstructive sleep apnea. See Barr v. Nicholson, supra. The failure to obtain an adequate etiology opinion is a pre-decisional duty to assist error. 

Entitlement to service connection for a right knee disorder is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a left knee disorder is remanded. 

The Veteran asserts that he has right and left knee disorders as a result of his active-duty service. See August 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ. The November 2023 rating decision included favorable findings that the Veteran is diagnosed with right knee strain and left knee strain as well as right and left knee subluxation and instability.  These favorable findings are binding on the Board. 38 U.S.C. § 5104A.

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in August 2022 and the examiner diagnosed right and left knee strains.  In a corresponding opinion, the VA examiner opined that the Veteran's right and left knee strains were less likely than not incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness.  In support of this conclusion, the examiner commented that the Veteran's service treatment records were silent for treatment or diagnoses of right or left knee disorders.      

The Veteran was afforded an additional VA examination in November 2022 and the examiner diagnosed right and left knee strains as well as left knee infrapatellar fat pad impingement.  In a corresponding opinion, the VA examiner opined that the Veteran's right and left knee disorders were less likely than not incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness.  In support of this conclusion, the examiner commented that the Veteran's service treatment records were silent for treatment or diagnoses of right or left knee disorders and that without chronicity during service or after service, a post-service event, injury, or illness was a more likely etiology.  

In March 2023 VA opinion, the examiner opined that the Veteran's right and left knee disorders were less likely than not caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activity.  The examiner commented that medical literature did not show a correlation between toxic exposures and his right and left knee disorders.      

The Veteran was afforded another VA examination in October 2023 and the examiner diagnosed right and left knee strains, recurrent subluxation, and instability.  In a corresponding opinion, the VA examiner opined that the Veteran's right and left knee disorders were less likely than not incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness.  In support of this conclusion, the examiner commented that the Veteran's service treatment records were silent for treatment or diagnoses of right or left knee disorders and that without chronicity during service or after service, a post-service event, injury, or illness was a more likely etiology.  

The Board finds that it is unable to decide the claim based on the findings contained within the August 2022, November 2022, March 2023, and October 2023 VA opinion reports. In this regard, the August 2022, November 2022, and October 2023 examiners, who provided opinions related to direct service connection, relied solely on the absence of documented treatment or a diagnosis of right and/or left knee conditions during service in forming the negative nexus opinions.  Moreover, the examiners did not explain the significance, if any, of treatment and diagnosis occurring several years following the Veteran's separation from service.  See Dalton v. Nicholson, supra.  

Therefore, the Board finds that new VA etiology opinions are warranted to address the nature and etiology of the Veteran's claimed right and left knee disorders. See Barr v. Nicholson, supra. The failure to obtain an adequate etiology opinion is a pre-decisional duty to assist error.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain an etiology opinion from an appropriate examiner to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's claimed gastroesophageal reflux disease.  The record must be made available to the examiner for review, and the examiner should indicate that the record was reviewed in connection with the examination. The need for further physical examination or telehealth evaluation is left to the discretion of the medical professional offering the medical opinion.

Based on the review of the record, the examiner must provide an opinion as to the following:

Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that gastroesophageal reflux disease had its onset during his active service or is otherwise etiologically related to such service, to include his conceded in-service environmental exposures in Southwest Asia (notwithstanding the fact that there may not be a presumed association)?

The examiner must consider the Veteran's statements regarding the onset and continuity of his symptoms, to include his October 2023 report that he began experiencing regurgitation of food, sour taste in his mouth and difficulty swallowing while service in Southwest Asia in 1991 and that he continued experiencing reflux symptoms since that time.  The examiner should also address the September 1991 in-service treatment for gastroenteritis, as well as treatment for abdominal pain in August 1995.  

A rationale should be provided for all opinions offered. 

The medical opinion must support the conclusions reached with an analysis that is adequate to consider and weigh against other evidence of record; medical opinions must contain not only clear conclusions with supporting data, but also a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two. If an opinion cannot be expressed without resort to speculation, ensure that the clinician so indicates and discusses why an opinion is not possible, to include whether there is additional evidence that could enable an opinion to be provided, or whether the inability to provide the opinion is based on the limits of medical knowledge.

2. Obtain an etiology opinion from an appropriate examiner to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's claimed obstructive sleep apnea.  The record must be made available to the examiner for review, and the examiner should indicate that the record was reviewed in connection with the examination. The need for further physical examination or telehealth evaluation is left to the discretion of the medical professional offering the medical opinion.

Based on the review of the record, the examiner must provide an opinion as to the following:

Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that obstructive sleep apnea had its onset during his active service or is otherwise etiologically related to such service, to include his conceded in-service environmental exposures in Southwest Asia (notwithstanding the fact that there may not be a presumed association)?

The examiner must consider the Veteran's statements regarding the onset and continuity of his symptoms, to include his April 2022 report that he began experiencing sleep disturbances during his time in Southwest Asian from December 1990 to May 1991.        

A rationale should be provided for all opinions offered. 

The medical opinion must support the conclusions reached with an analysis that is adequate to consider and weigh against other evidence of record; medical opinions must contain not only clear conclusions with supporting data, but also a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two. If an opinion cannot be expressed without resort to speculation, ensure that the clinician so indicates and discusses why an opinion is not possible, to include whether there is additional evidence that could enable an opinion to be provided, or whether the inability to provide the opinion is based on the limits of medical knowledge.

3. Obtain an etiology opinion from an appropriate examiner to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's claimed right knee and left knee disorders.  The record must be made available to the examiner for review, and the examiner should indicate that the record was reviewed in connection with the examination. The need for further physical examination or telehealth evaluation is left to the discretion of the medical professional offering the medical opinion.

Based on the review of the record, the examiner must provide an opinion as to the following:

(A) Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that any currently present right knee disorder, to include strain, subluxation, and instability, had its onset during his active service or is otherwise etiologically related to such service? 

(B) Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that any currently present left knee disorder, to include strain, subluxation, and instability, had its onset during his active service or is otherwise etiologically related to such service? 

The examiner must consider the Veteran's statements regarding the onset and continuity of his symptoms, to include his report that he began experiencing joint pain while stationed in Southwest Asia.  The examiner should also address the January 1989 in-service treatment for left knee pain. 

A rationale should be provided for all opinions offered. 

The medical opinion must support the conclusions reached with an analysis that is adequate to consider and weigh against other evidence of record; medical opinions must contain not only clear conclusions with supporting data, but also a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two. If an opinion cannot be expressed without resort to speculation, ensure that the clinician so indicates and discusses why an opinion is not possible, to include whether there is additional evidence that could enable an opinion to be provided, or whether the inability to provide the opinion is based on the limits of medical knowledge.  

 

 

KRISTY L. ZADORA

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Christopher O'Donnell, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.