Citation Nr: A25034652
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 240909-475616
DATE: April 15, 2025

ORDER

An effective date earlier than December 22, 1975, for the award of service connection for a gastrointestinal disorder, to include resolved duodenal ulcer and irritable bowel syndrome, is denied.

An effective date earlier than December 22, 1975, for the award of service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include posttraumatic stress disorder with depression (PTSD), is denied.

From December 22, 1975, an initial disability rating of 30 percent for a gastrointestinal disorder is granted.

From December 22, 1975, to January 24, 1999, an initial disability rating in excess of 30 percent for PTSD is denied.

From January 25, 1999, a 100 percent disability rating for PTSD is granted.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. On December 22, 1975, VA received the Veteran's service connection claims for a gastrointestinal disorder and an acquired psychiatric disorder; a May 2016 Board decision established service connection for these conditions, which was effectuated by an August 2016 rating decision and assigned effective dates of December 22, 1975, the date the Veteran's original service connection claims were received by VA.

2. From December 22, 1975, the evidence of record shows that the Veteran's gastrointestinal disorder resulted in abdominal distress, alternating diarrhea and constipation, disturbance of bowel function, and frequent episodes of bowel disturbance.

3. From December 22, 1975, to February 2, 1988, the evidence of record does not indicate that the Veteran's PTSD resulted in considerable impairment of social and industrial adaptability.

4. From February 3, 1988, to November 6, 1996, the evidence of record does not indicate that the Veteran's PTSD resulted in considerably impaired ability to establish or maintain effective or favorable relationships with people, and by reason of psychoneurotic symptoms, the reliability, flexibility, and efficiency levels were so reduced as to result in considerable industrial impairment.

5. From November 6, 1996, to January 24, 1999, the evidence of record does not indicate that the Veteran's PTSD resulted in occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.

6. From January 25, 1999, the Veteran's PTSD resulted in symptoms that included grossly inappropriate behavior and intermitted inability to perform activities of daily living, consistent with a 100 percent disability rating.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria are not met to establish an effective date earlier than December 22, 1975, for the award of service connection for a gastrointestinal disorder. 38 U.S.C. § 5110; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.155, 3.400.

2. The criteria are not met to establish an effective date earlier than December 22, 1975, for the award of service connection for PTSD. 38 U.S.C. § 5110; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.155, 3.400.

3. From December 22, 1975, the criteria are met to establish an initial disability rating of 30 percent for a gastrointestinal disorder. 38 C.F.R. § 4.114, Diagnostic Code 7319.

4. From December 22, 1975, to January 24, 1999, the criteria are not met to establish an initial disability rating in excess of 30 percent for PTSD. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411.

5. From January 25, 1999, the criteria are met to establish a disability rating of 100 percent for PTSD. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran had active service from October 1968 to September 1970.

The claims have a very long and involved procedural history. In an October 1977 decision, the Board denied the Veteran's initial service connection claims. However, in November 2015, the Board vacated the October 1977 decision because the record indicated the Veteran had a pending hearing request that was not addressed before issuing the October 1977 Board decision. The Board then remanded the claims for further development, including offering the Veteran a Board hearing, which the Veteran declined in January 2016.

In May 2016, the Board granted service connection for a gastrointestinal disorder and an acquired psychiatric disorder. In an August 2016 rating decision, the Veterans Benefits Administration (VBA) implemented the Board's May 2016 decision and assigned an initial rating of 10 percent for a gastrointestinal disorder and an initial rating of 10 percent for PTSD. The VBA assigned effective dates of December 22, 1975, for both these conditions.

A previous August 2016 rating decision had granted the service connection for PTSD and assigned an initial rating of 50 percent effective January 25, 1999. A November 2000 rating decision granted an increased rating of 70 percent effective August 18, 2000, and also granted a total disability rating based on individual unemployability (TDIU) effective November 11, 2000, which was a month after the date the Veteran claimed he last worked fulltime. The Veteran filed a notice of disagreement with the August 2016 rating decision in the legacy appeals system. A September 2016 rating decision granted an increased rating of 30 percent for a gastrointestinal disorders effective August 31, 2016, and in October 2016, the Veteran filed a notice of disagreement with this rating decision. 

In January 2019, the Veteran opted into the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), by submitting a Rapid Appeals Modernization Program (RAMP) election form and selected the option to have a hearing with a Veterans Law Judge. However, in December 2020, the Veteran indicated that he no longer wished to have a hearing and submitted a brief in support of the increased rating claims from December 22, 1975.

In December 2021, the Board remanded these matters for additional development, to include obtaining any outstanding medical records and obtaining an opinion regarding the severity of the Veteran's gastrointestinal disorder and PTSD since 1975.

Afterwards, a rating decision was issued in July 2022 and constitutes an initial decision; by law, the modernized review system, governed by the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.

In August 2022, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review, and requested readjudication of the claims most recently addressed in the July 2022 rating decision. Although the Veteran initially requested Higher-Level Review when submitting the August 2022 VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review, in an October 2022 rating decision, the Higher-Level Reviewer determined that there had been a duty to assist error and transferred the claims to the Supplemental Claim decision review option for additional development. In December 2023, the rating decision on appeal was issued that continued to deny increased ratings for both claims.

In a September 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Hearing docket. On November 1, 2024, the Veteran withdrew the hearing request. By law, for the claims appealed in this docket, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the December 2023 Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) rating decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran within 90 days following receipt of the withdrawal of the hearing request. 38 C.F.R. § 20.302(b). If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal and prior to receipt of the withdrawal, or (2) more than 90 days following receipt of the withdrawal, then, by law, the Board was not permitted to consider that evidence in this decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.302(b), 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Finally, the Board recognizes that the Veteran has continuously pursued these claims since he was granted service connection and assigned initial ratings by the August 2016 rating decision.

Effective Dates

Legal Criteria

Unless specifically provided otherwise, the effective date of an award of service connection for an original claim for service connection is based on facts found but may not be earlier than the date of receipt of application. With limited exceptions (none here applicable), the effective date of an award of service connection is the date the claim was received, or the date entitlement arose, whichever is later. 38 U.S.C. § 5110; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.156, 3.400.

Factual Background and Analysis

On December 22, 1975, the Veteran filed a request to reopen (the standard at the time) his service connection claim for a gastrointestinal disorder and filed a service connection claim for an acquired psychiatric disorder. The August 2016 rating decision granted service connection for these conditions and assigned effective dates of December 22, 1975, the date the Veteran's original service connection claims were received by VA.

The Veteran asserted that he was entitled to effective dates prior to December 22, 1975, although he did not make any specific assertions.

The critical question in this matter is when the Veteran filed his request to reopen his service connection claim for a gastrointestinal disorder and his service connection claim for an acquired psychiatric disorder.

The first communication from the Veteran to VA expressing intent to seek service connection for these conditions was received on December 22, 1975, when the Veteran submitted his request to reopen his service connection claim for a gastrointestinal disorder and a service connection claim for an acquired psychiatric disorder. While the Veteran may have experienced symptoms related to these conditions prior to December 22, 1975, he did not file a formal or informal service connection claim for these conditions until December 22, 1975.

The Board is bound by governing law and regulations and has no authority to award benefits not authorized by governing law. Because the Veteran is not shown to have filed a formal or informal service connection claim for either of these conditions prior to December 22, 1975, the law prevents VA from granting an effective date prior to December 22, 1975, for the award of service connection for a gastrointestinal disorder or for the award of service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder. As the earliest possible effective dates under governing law given the undisputed facts in this case is already assigned, the law is dispositive in this matter. See Sabonis v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 426 (1994).

Accordingly, the criteria are not met to establish an effective date prior to December 22, 1975, for the grant of service connection for a gastrointestinal disorder and an effective date prior to December 22, 1975, for the grant of service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, and the claims must be denied.

Increased Rating

Disability ratings are determined by applying a schedule of ratings that is based on average impairment of earning capacity. Separate diagnostic codes identify the various disabilities. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R., Part 4. Each disability must be viewed in relation to its history and the limitation of activity imposed by the disabling condition should be emphasized. 38 C.F.R. § 4.1. Examination reports are to be interpreted in light of the whole recorded history, and each disability must be considered from the point of view of the appellant working or seeking work. 38 C.F.R. § 4.2. Where there is a question as to which of two disability evaluations shall be applied, the higher evaluation is to be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating. Otherwise, the lower rating is to be assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7. Reasonable doubt regarding degree of disability is to be resolved in favor of the claimant. 38 C.F.R. § 4.3.

Gastrointestinal Disorder

Legal Criteria

Under Diagnostic Code 7319 for irritable colon syndrome (spastic colitis, mucous colitis, etc.), a 10 percent disability rating is assigned for moderate symptoms that include frequent episodes of bowel disturbance with abdominal distress. A 30 percent disability rating, the maximum rating, is assigned for severe symptoms that include diarrhea or alternating diarrhea and constipation with more or less constant abdominal distress. The Board notes that the criteria for this Diagnostic Code has not changed since December 1975.

Factual Background

The Veteran filed a service connection claim for a gastrointestinal disorder in December 1975. The Veteran has been assigned a 10 percent rating effective December 22, 1975, and a 30 percent rating effective August 31, 2016. He asserted that he was entitled to higher ratings.

At a March 1971 VA examination, the Veteran reported having stomach trouble resulting in cramping, burning, and vomiting. Objective medical testing was normal.

At a February 1976 VA examination, the objective medical evidence showed a minimal deformity of the duodenal bulb, the result of a healed duodenal ulcer, but the Veteran's esophagus outline was normal and there was no hernia noted.

The Veteran's post-service medical records show that in 2000, he treated for mild nausea and occasional stomach pain. He treated in 2003 for episodic abdominal pain and diarrhea. In 2006, he was evaluated for heartburn, but an EGD was normal. Treatment records from 2009 to 2016 did not contain any gastrointestinal complaints.

In August 2016, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination. He reported having chronic abdominal cramps, gas and bloating, and alternating constipation and diarrhea. The examiner indicated that the Veteran's gastrointestinal disorder resulted in alternating diarrhea and constipation, abdominal distension, and nausea three to four times per week. The examiner indicated that the Veteran's gastrointestinal disorder resulted in frequent episodes of bowel disturbance with abdominal distress. The examiner indicated that the Veteran did not have weight loss, malnutrition, complications, and other general health effects. The examiner reported that the Veteran's symptoms were most consistent with a diagnosis of IBS. The examiner reported that the Veteran did not have a diagnosis of peptic ulcer disease and his duodenal ulcer had resolved with no evidence of recurrence.

In May 2022, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination. He reported having issues with diarrhea and constipation in 1970 and that his symptoms persistent since onset. He reported he had a few episodes of diarrhea per week. The examiner indicated that the Veteran's gastrointestinal disorder had remained the same since onset. The examiner indicated that het Veteran did not have any symptoms due to a duodenal condition. The examiner indicated that the Veteran had occasional episodes of bowel disturbance with abdominal distress. The examiner indicated that the Veteran did not experience any incapacitating episodes, weight loss, malnutrition, complications, or other general health effects.

In October 2023, a VA examiner reviewed the Veteran's claims file. The examiner reported that the Veteran current symptoms were consistent with a diagnosis of IBS. The examiner reported that the Veteran did not have active symptoms of duodenal ulcer disease. The examiner noted that there were no objective findings in the claims file showing any residual duodenal ulcer disease or peptic ulcer disease. The examiner reported that the Veteran's duodenal disease had resolved in 1976 and later records show no recurrent duodenal problems. The examiner reported that the Veteran never had peptic ulcer disease as VA providers did not have access to the 1976 objective medical tests, which would be needed to make a diagnosis. The examiner reported that the Veteran's IBS was most consistent with the findings described in the 1976 VA examination and private 1982 treatment record showing he was prescribed medications for abdominal pain, diarrhea, bloating, flatulence, and constipation. The examiner noted that while the claims file does not reflect treatment, the Veteran learned to live with his IBS symptoms. The examiner reported that the Veteran's IBS symptoms were chronic over a period of many years and not very responsive to medications or treatment. The examiner reported that the VA examinations from 2016 and 2022 supported the Veteran's rating for his gastrointestinal disorder from August 2016. The examiner reported that the Veteran's treatment for polyps and colonoscopies were unrelated to the Veteran's gastrointestinal disorder and were not caused or aggravated by the Veteran's gastrointestinal disorder. The examiner concluded that the Veteran's gastrointestinal disorder was properly rated from August 2016. Prior to August 2016, the examiner opined it was less likely than not that the Veteran's gastrointestinal disorder resulted in findings in excess of the assigned 10 percent rating. The examiner reported that the Veteran's medical records do not suggest any significant changes from 1975 through 2006 and that the Veteran did not have significant progression or exacerbations from 2006 through 2016.

Analysis

After a complete review of the entire record, the Board finds that the weight of the evidence supports the assignment of a 30 percent disability rating since December 1975.

The February 1976 VA examination showed that the Veteran's duodenal ulcer had resolved. The August 2016 VA examiner reported that the Veteran's gastrointestinal disorder resulted in alternating diarrhea and constipation, abdominal distension, and nausea three to four times per week. The examiner indicated that the Veteran's gastrointestinal disorder resulted in frequent episodes of bowel disturbance with abdominal distress. Based on these findings, the AOJ granted a 30 percent rating effective August 31, 2016. At the May 2022 VA examination, the Veteran reported that his symptoms began in 1970 and persistent since onset. The examiner reported that the Veteran's gastrointestinal disorder symptoms had remained the same. While the October 2023 VA examiner opined that the Veteran's gastrointestinal disorder was less likely than not entitled to a rating in excess of 10 percent from 1975 to 2016, based on the credible reports of the Veteran and the findings of the August 2016 and May 2022 VA examiners, the Board finds that the Veteran's gastrointestinal disorder did not significantly change from onset through the present.

As the AOJ granted a 30 percent rating based on the findings of the August 2016 VA examiner, and the May 2022 VA examiner's report that the Veteran's gastrointestinal disorder had remained the same since onset, resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, from December 22, 1975, to August 30, 2016, the Veteran's gastrointestinal disorder resulted in abdominal distress, alternating diarrhea and constipation, disturbance of bowel function, and frequent episodes of bowel disturbance, which is consistent with a 30 percent rating, the maximum rating under Diagnostic Code 7319.

Finally, the record contains no evidence suggesting that the Veteran's gastrointestinal disorder causes such an unusual disability picture as to warrant consideration of an extraschedular disability rating.

The Board acknowledges that the Veteran's gastrointestinal disorder may be frustrating and cause some functional limitations. However, it is specifically based on the types and severity of this impairment for which the 30 percent disability rating is assigned.

The Board has considered other possible Diagnostic Codes for evaluating the Veteran's gastrointestinal disorder. However, the Diagnostic Code 7319 is directly on point for the disability on appeal, contemplates the symptoms caused by such disability, and grants a rating of 30 percent for the disability beginning December 22, 1975. VA examiners have reported that the Veteran's duodenal ulcer had resolved, and as such, a rating under Diagnostic Code 7305 is not warranted. Thus, a higher schedular disability rating is not possible.

Accordingly, the criteria have been met to establish an initial schedular rating of 30 percent for a gastrointestinal disorder, and the claim is granted.

Acquired Psychiatric Disorder

Legal Criteria

Prior to February 3, 1988, Diagnostic Code 9411 for PTSD was governed by a General Rating Formula for Psychotic Reactions. A 30 percent rating was assigned for definite impairment of social and industrial adaptability. A 50 percent rating was assigned for considerable impairment of social and industrial adaptability. A 70 percent rating was assigned for lesser symptoms, such as symptoms that would produce severe impairment of social and industrial adaptability. A 100 percent rating was assigned for active psychotic manifestations of such extent, severity, depth, persistence, or bizarreness as to produce complete social and industrial inadaptability.

Effective February 3, 1988, Diagnostic Code 9411 for PTSD was governed by a General Rating Formula for Psychoneurotic Disorders. A 30 percent rating was assigned for definite impairment in the ability to establish or maintain effective and wholesome relationships with people; and psychoneurotic symptoms that result in such reduction in initiative, flexibility, efficiency, and reliability levels as to produce definite industrial impairment. A 50 percent rating was assigned for considerably impaired ability to establish or maintain effective or favorable relationships with people, and by reason of psychoneurotic symptoms the reliability, flexibility, and efficiency levels are so reduced as to result in considerable industrial impairment. A 70 percent rating was assigned for severely impaired ability to establish and maintain effective or favorable relationships with people, and the psychoneurotic symptoms are of such severity and persistence that there is severe impairment in the ability to obtain or retain employment. A 100 percent rating was assigned for the attitudes of all contacts except the most intimate are so adversely affected as to result in virtual isolation in the community, and totally incapacitating psychoneurotic symptoms bordering on gross repudiation of realty with disturbed thoughts or behavioral processes associated with almost all daily activities such as fantasy, confusion, panic and explosions of aggressive energy resulting in profound retreat from mature behavior such that the veteran is demonstrably unable to obtain or retain employment.

Effective November 7, 1996, Diagnostic Code 9411 was governed by a General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders. A 30 percent evaluation is assigned when a veteran's mental disability causes occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks (although generally functioning satisfactorily, with routine behavior, self-care, and conversation normal), due to such symptoms as, for example: depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks (weekly or less often), chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss (such as forgetting names, directions, recent events).

A 50 percent evaluation is assigned when a veteran's mental disability causes occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to such symptoms as, for example: flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short- and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships.

A 70 percent evaluation is assigned when a veteran's mental disability causes occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas (such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood), due to such symptoms as for example: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control; spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances; an inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.

A 100 percent rating is assigned when a veteran's mental disability causes total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as, for example: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of living; disorientation to time or place; memory loss for names of close relatives, occupation, or own name.

When rating a mental disorder, VA must consider the frequency, severity, and duration of a veteran's psychiatric symptoms, the length of remissions, and the Veteran's capacity for adjustment during periods of remission. The rating agency must assign a rating based on all the evidence of record that bears on occupational and social impairment, rather than solely on the examiner's assessment of the level of disability at the moment of the examination. When rating the level of disability from a mental disorder, the rating agency must consider the extent of social impairment but cannot assign a rating solely on the basis of social impairment. 38 C.F.R. § 4.126.

Furthermore, the specified factors for each incremental rating are examples, rather than requirements, for a particular rating. The Board will not limit its analysis solely to whether the Veteran exhibited the symptoms listed in the rating criteria. Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436 (2002). Indeed, the symptoms listed under § 4.130 are not intended to serve as an exhaustive list of the symptoms that VA may consider but as examples of the type and degree of symptoms, or the effects, that would warrant a particular rating. Mauerhan, 16 Vet. App. at 442 (2002). The veteran's actual symptoms, and resulting social and occupational impairment, will be the primary focus when assigning a disability rating for a mental disorder, and the Veteran may qualify for a particular rating by demonstrating the particular symptoms associated with that percentage, or other symptoms of similar severity, frequency, and duration. Vazquez Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 116 17 (Fed. Cir. 2013).

Factual Background

The Veteran filed a service connection claim for an acquired psychiatric disorder in December 1975. The Veteran has been assigned a 30 percent rating effective December 22, 1975, a 50 percent rating effective January 25, 1999, and a 70 percent rating effective August 18, 2000. He asserted that he was entitled to higher ratings.

In February 1976, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination. He reported that he had been married for three years and had a good marriage. He reported that he had friends but avoided crowds. He reported he was laid off from his job and was unemployed. On examination, he was pleasant and cooperative with a flat affect. He denied having any delusions or hallucinations. His memory was intact. The examiner diagnosed the Veteran with anxiety neurosis mild to moderate in severity.

On January 25, 1999, the Veteran filed a service connection claim for his acquired psychiatric disorder as he was not yet granted service connection for this condition.

At a February 1999 treatment visit, the Veteran reported that he had suicidal ideation and acted inappropriately.

In May 1999, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination. He reported that he remained married and had two sons. He reported having PTSD symptoms of reexperiencing phenomena by dreams and nightmares, marked sleep disturbance, hypervigilance, awaking in an aroused state, checking the locks on windows and doors, looking outside to make sure everything is safe, cry with no specific triggers, irritable, anger, depression, and verbal rage. The examiner indicated that the Veteran had marked interpersonal difficulties, had no relationships with friends, and had an inability to sustain interpersonal relationships.

In October 2000, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination. He reported that he remained married, had two adult children, and had one grandchild. He reported having severe suicidal ideation. The examiner reported that his PTSD symptoms included intrusive recollections daily, memory impairment, markedly diminished interest, extreme difficulty concentrating, sleep difficulty, irritability, hypervigilance, and exaggerated startle response.

In a December 2000 claims form, the Veteran reported that he was employed with the United States Postal Service from March 1977 through October 2000

In June 2022, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination. He reported that his wife died one month previously. He reported his two children did not speak to him. He reported he did not have any friends. He reported he did not have a good relationship with any of his family members. The examiner indicated that the Veteran's PTSD symptoms included depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks more than once a week, near continuous panic or depression, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss, impairment of short and long term memory, flattened affect, difficulty in understanding complex commands, impaired judgment, impaired abstract thinking, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances, inability to establish and maintain effective relationships, obsessional rituals which interferes with normal activities, impaired impulse control such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence, and neglect of personal appearance and hygiene. The examiner indicated that the Veteran's PTSD resulted in occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most area.

In March 2023, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination. He reported that he had rare contact with his children. The examiner indicated that the Veteran's PTSD symptoms included depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks more than once a week, near continuous panic or depression, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances, inability to establish and maintain effective relationships, neglect of personal appearance and hygiene, intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene. The examiner indicated that the Veteran's PTSD resulted in occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas.

In October 2023, a VA examiner reviewed the Veteran's claims file. The examiner reported that the severity of the Veteran's PTSD symptoms from his separation from active service through February 1999 could not be determined. The examiner reported that the Veteran's PTSD symptoms were severe in 1999 and were ongoing. 

Analysis

The Veteran's medical records do not document from December 22, 1975, to February 2, 1988, that the Veteran's PTSD resulted in considerable impairment of social and industrial adaptability, from February 3, 1988, to November 5, 1996, that the Veteran's PTSD resulted in definite impairment in the ability to establish or maintain effective and wholesome relationships with people; and psychoneurotic symptoms that result in such reduction in initiative, flexibility, efficiency, and reliability levels as to produce definite industrial impairment, or from November 6, 1996, to January 24, 1999, resulted in occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.

The record contains no evidence of any mental complaints or health treatment from December 22, 1975, to January 24, 1999. At a February 1976 VA examination, he reported that he was married and had friends. He was pleasant and cooperative on examination with intact memory. He denied having any delusions or hallucinations. In the December 2000 claims form, he reported that he was employed with the United States Postal Service from March 1977 through October 2000. As such, findings consistent with the rating criteria prior to January 24, 1999, were not shown, and a rating in excess of 30 percent evaluation for the Veteran's PTSD from December 22, 1975, to January 24, 1999, is not warranted.

On January 25, 1999, the Veteran filed a service connection claim for PTSD, which will now be considered an increased rating claim indicating a worsening of his symptoms. A month later in February 1999, he reported having suicidal ideation and acted inappropriately. The May 1999 VA examiner had marked interpersonal difficulties and an inability to sustain interpersonal relationships. At the October 2000 VA examination, the Veteran reported severe suicidal ideation. The March 2023 VA examiner indicated that the Veteran's PTSD resulted in an intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene. Finally, the October 2023 VA examiner reported that the Veteran's PTSD symptoms were severe in 1999 and were ongoing.

After a review of the record, the Board finds that the Veteran's PTSD symptoms warrant a 100 percent rating beginning January 25, 1999. During this period, the Veteran displayed inappropriate behavior and intermitted inability to perform activities of daily living, also consistent with a 100 percent disability rating.

[CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE]?

Accordingly, the criteria are not met to establish an initial rating in excess of 30 percent from December 22, 1975, to January 24, 1999, and the claim is denied. The criteria are met to establish a 100 percent rating for PTSD from January 25, 1999, and the claim is granted in that regard.

 

 

VICTORIA MOSHIASHWILI

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	T. Berryman, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.