Citation Nr: A25034319
Decision Date: 04/14/25	Archive Date: 04/14/25

DOCKET NO. 240116-407759
DATE: April 14, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an initial evaluation of 70 percent, but no higher, for depressive disorder due to chronic pain with depressive features (previously rated as adjustment disorder with anxiety) (hereinafter acquired psychiatric disorder) is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

The symptomatology and functional impairment of the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder more nearly approximates occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, but not total occupational and social impairment. 

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for an initial disability evaluation of 70 percent, but no higher, for the Veteran's service-connected acquired psychiatric disorder have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.126. 4.130, Diagnostic Codes 9434, 9440. 

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty as a cadet at the United States Air Force Academy from June 2001 through May 2005, and on subsequent active duty in the United States Air Force from June 2005 through June 2017, and April 2018 through July 2018, to include Gulf War Era service. 

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a March 2023 rating decision issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA). 

In June 2022, the Veteran filed a VA Form 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim for his psychiatric disorder. Service connection for adjustment disorder with anxiety was granted in October 2022 with a 10 percent evaluation effective June 21, 2022. 

In December 2022, the Veteran filed a VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim for a higher rating for his acquired psychiatric disorder, and the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued a subsequent rating decision increasing the evaluation to 50 percent and recharacterizing the Veteran's disability as depressive disorder due to chronic pain with depressive features, in March 2023 with an effective date of December 23, 2022. 

In the January 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2023 AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Law and Analysis

Disability ratings are determined by applying the criteria set forth in the VA Schedule for Rating Disabilities, found in 38 C.F.R. Part 4. The rating schedule is primarily a guide in the evaluation of disability resulting from all types of diseases and injuries encountered as a result of, or incident to, military service. The ratings are intended to compensate, as far as can practicably be determined, the average impairment of earning capacity resulting from such diseases and injuries and their residual conditions in civilian occupations. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1. Where there is a question as to which of two evaluations shall be applied, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria for that rating. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7. 

In considering the severity of a disability, it is essential to trace the medical history of the Veteran. 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.41. Consideration of the whole-recorded history is necessary so that a rating may accurately reflect the elements of disability present. 38 C.F.R. § 4.2; Peyton v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 282 (1991). While the regulations require review of the recorded history of a disability by the adjudicator to ensure a more accurate evaluation, the regulations do not give past medical reports precedence over the current medical findings. 

Where entitlement to compensation has already been established and an increase in the disability rating is at issue, it is the present level of disability that is of primary concern. Francisco v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 55, 58 (1994). However, where the question for consideration is the propriety of the initial rating assigned, evaluation of the evidence since the effective date of the grant of service connection is required. Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119, 125-26 (1999). Where VA's adjudication of the claim for increase is lengthy and factual findings show distinct time periods where the service-connected disability exhibits symptoms which would warrant different ratings, different or "staged" ratings may be assigned for such different periods of time. Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505, 509-10 (2007); Fenderson, 12 Vet. App. at 126-27. 

Except as otherwise provided by law, a claimant has the responsibility to present and support a claim for benefits. VA shall consider all information and lay and medical evidence of record in a case and when there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, VA shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (benefit-of-the-doubt rule not for application when evidence persuasively favors one side or the other).

Acquired Psychiatric Disorder

By way of history, in June 2022, the Veteran filed a VA Form 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim for his psychiatric disorder. Service connection for adjustment disorder with anxiety was granted in October 2022 with an evaluation of 10 percent effective June 21, 2022. In December 2022, the Veteran filed a VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim for a higher rating for his acquired psychiatric disorder, and in March 2023 the AOJ issued a subsequent rating decision increasing the disability evaluation to 50 percent and recharacterizing the Veteran's disability as depressive disorder due to chronic pain with depressive features, with an effective date of December 23, 2022. The Board finds the Veteran has continuously pursued his claim. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.2500(c), (e)(2), 3.400.

The Veteran contends he is entitled to a higher evaluation for his acquired psychiatric disorder. See December 2022 VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim.

The Veteran is currently assigned a 50 percent evaluation for depressive disorder due to chronic pain with depressive features from December 23, 2022, pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9434, which is the diagnostic code for major depressive disorder. The Veteran is currently assigned a 10 percent evaluation for adjustment disorder with anxiety from June 21, 2022, through December 22, 2022, pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9440, which is the diagnostic code for chronic adjustment disorder. Both Diagnostic Codes 9434 and 9440 are rated under the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders.

Under the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders a ten percent evaluation is assigned for occupational and social impairment due to mild or transient symptoms which decrease work efficiency and ability to perform occupational tasks only during periods of significant stress, or symptoms controlled by continuous medication. 

A 30 percent evaluation is assigned for occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks (although generally functioning satisfactorily, with routine behavior, self-care, and conversation normal), due to such symptoms as: depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks (weekly or less often), chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss (such as forgetting names, directions, recent events). 

A 50 percent evaluation is warranted when there is occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to such symptoms as: flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short-and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships.

A 70 percent evaluation is warranted when there is occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a worklike setting); inability to establish and maintain effective relationships. 

A 100 percent evaluation is warranted when there is total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name. 

The symptoms recited in the criteria in the rating schedule for evaluating mental disorders are "not intended to constitute an exhaustive list, but rather are to serve as examples of the type and degree of the symptoms, or their effects, that would justify a particular rating." Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436, 442 (2002). 

"[A] Veteran may only qualify for a given disability rating under § 4.130 by demonstrating the particular symptoms associated with that percentage, or others of similar severity, frequency, and duration." Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112 (Fed. Cir. 2013). That section "requires not only the presence of certain symptoms but also that those symptoms have caused occupational and social impairment in most of the referenced areas." Id. 

When evaluating a mental disorder, the frequency, severity, and duration of psychiatric symptoms, the length of remissions, and the Veteran's capacity for adjustment during periods of remission must be considered. 38 C.F.R. § 4.126. In addition, the evaluation must be based on all the evidence of record that bears on occupational and social impairment rather than solely on the examiner's assessment of the level of disability at the moment of the examination. Id.

A mental disorder diagnosis must conform to the Fourth Edition of the American Psychiatric Association's Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-IV), or, for claims received by, or pending before the AOJ, on or after August 4, 2014, the DSM-5 (Fifth Edition). See 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.125, 4.130; 79 Fed. Reg. 45093 (Aug. 4, 2014). Because the Veteran's claim was certified to the Board after August 4, 2014, the regulations pertaining to the DSM-5 are for application.

Increased Initial Evaluation  

In a June 2022 statement the Veteran asked to be examined for a mental health condition pertaining to his service-connected disabilities of obstructive sleep apnea, bilateral shoulder arthritis, left knee pain, jaw pain, and chronic maxillary sinusitis. He stated these disabilities caused him pain and difficulty daily and limited his ability to actively participate in everyday activities, which made him feel down, sad, and unmotivated because he could no longer function the way he used to. He reported feeling overwhelmed and feeling anxious because of the limitations in his life and worried he would not be independent in the future because of these disabilities and that these limitations caused difficulties with his family. The Veteran also stated that due to his deployment to Afghanistan he had sensitivity to loud noise and that loud noises like fireworks could trigger his fear and anxiety. See June 2022 VA Form 21-4138 Statement in Support of Claim.

The Veteran underwent a VA medical examination in July 2022 for his acquired psychiatric disorder. The examiner found the Veteran was diagnosed with adjustment disorder with anxiety and that he described credible emotional distress in response to identifiable stressors of pain due to residuals of jaw surgery as well as increasing pain and limitations from medical conditions involving his knee, shoulder, and wrist. The examiner also noted the Veteran had been very resilient without notable emotional difficulties until 2017 or 2018 when the pain and loss of sensation after jaw surgery and a subsequent deployment to Afghanistan contributed to the development of anxiety which had not improved over time. Although the Veteran had not sought mental health treatment, he reported he was a pilot and was worried about being grounded if he sought any care to include mental health, and that he attempted multiple strategies to try and improve his emotional distress. The examiner found the Veteran had occupational and social impairment due to mild or transient symptoms which decrease work efficiency and ability to perform occupational tasks only during periods of significant stress, or symptoms controlled by medication. 

At the time of examination, the Veteran reported he had sleep difficulties for the past two to three years. When the Veteran was asked about feeling down or depressed, he said he worked hard on being strong mentally and that he learned mental toughness in the Air Force Academy and that had been his mindset for approaching life. He stated he thought having mental toughness was a personal asset but now found he had more difficulty managing his moods because there was no way to make himself mentally outlast the pain and limitations from his increasing physical and medical issues. The Veteran reported his anxiety began in Afghanistan and that since then he was extremely sensitive to noise especially when it was unexpected. He reported that his anxiety caused issues with his stomach and that he had a lot of anxiety day to day with pain management. When describing his physical limitations and pain he reported the biggest source of pain was residuals of his jaw surgery and that if his kids forgot and kissed him on his left cheek it was almost unbearable and felt like ants crawling inside his jaw. He reported that dealing with the daily pain made him irritable and that the pain and limitations have caused him more emotional difficulties. He reported becoming overwhelmed with overstimulation with too much noise or movement, and that his wife reported he was quicker to anger with his children and that if he has a bad pain day he "checks out" and is not engaged with his family. When asked why he had not sought treatment he mentioned there was a stigma with flying as a pilot and receiving mental health treatment, and that even now working as a financial analyst he did not want anything to affect his job. See July 2022 VA Mental Disorders Disability Benefits Questionnaire. 

In a December 2022 statement the Veteran reported his mental health was causing significant strain in his marriage, sudden bouts of shortness of breath, a tight chest, and an overwhelming sense of anxiety five times in a one-month period. He reported that these periods made him feel scared, confused, and that he needed to find a safe place until the feelings passed. The Veteran also reported difficulty sleeping and only being able to sleep five hours a night and having trouble staying asleep, which resulted in feeling tired, irritable, and unable to concentrate and be productive. He stated that he had thought about suicide in the past and made a plan to carry it out. He reported being concerned about the confidential nature of discussing suicidal thoughts as he did not want it to impact his career. See December 2022 VA Form 21-4138 Statement in Support of Claim. 

In a December 2022 private medical opinion PA-C, MPLC C.M.B (initials used to protect privacy) evaluated the Veteran and concluded his symptomatology aligned with a 70 percent evaluation. He noted the Veteran's lay statement which he asserted documented a more severe level of social and occupational impairment than the rating assigned by VA. C.M.B. found the Veteran's symptomatology included depressed mood, anxiety, panic attacks more than once a week, chronic sleep impairment, disturbances of motivation and mood, suicidal ideation, reduced activity, decreased participation in physical and social activities, social withdrawal, irritability, fatigue, and relationship problems. He concluded the Veteran demonstrated occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood. See December 2022 Private Medical Opinion. 

The Veteran underwent a second VA medical examination in January 2023. The examiner noted the Veteran's diagnosis of depressive disorder due to chronic pain with depressive features. The Veteran reported depressed mood one to three days a week, anger, being short tempered, yelling at his children, excessive worries about his health and the future, symptoms due to chronic pain from his jaw and shoulder, trouble staying asleep, low energy, and suicidal ideation two to three times per month. The Veteran also reported no longer keeping guns in the house after he attempted suicide in 2020 by putting his gun to his head and pulling the trigger, but the safety was on. He also reported losing seven friends in plane crashes and that he no longer flies. The examiner found the Veteran had occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity. The examiner found the Veteran at the time of examination had symptoms of depressed mood, anxiety, chronic sleep impairment, disturbances of motivation and mood, and suicidal ideation. The Veteran indicated he did not take medication or receive mental health counseling. See January 2023 VA Mental Disorders Disability Benefits Questionnaire. 

Based on the foregoing and resolving reasonable doubt in favor of the Veteran, the Board concludes that the disability picture, to include the severity, frequency, and duration of his symptoms, as well as the resulting impairment of social and occupational functioning, more nearly approximates the 70 percent criteria for the entire period on appeal with the following symptoms: chronic sleep impairment; suicidal ideation two to three times per month; near continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately, and effectively; anxiety; panic attacks more than once per week; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances; and an inability to establish and maintain effective relationships. 

The Board finds the Veteran's statements regarding not seeking treatment for his mental health due to worries about being removed from flight status or impacting his civilian job, as well as not wanting to report his suicide attempt and suicidal ideation for the same reasons, to be highly probative. The Board also finds his statements regarding the anxiety and depression caused by chronic pain and physical limitations from his service-connected injuries highly probative as well.

However, the Board finds that the evidence of record during the relevant time period does not show symptoms which rise to a level such that a total disability evaluation would be warranted. The evidence shows that the Veteran did not have gross impairment in thought process or communication, persistent delusions or hallucinations, grossly inappropriate behavior, persistent danger of hurting self or others, disorientation to time or place or memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name. 

Moreover, the Veteran has not demonstrated a level of impairment consistent with the 100 percent criteria, nor have his symptoms caused both total occupational and social impairment, to include in areas referenced by the 100 percent criteria. Mauerhan, supra, Vazquez-Claudio, supra; see also Melson v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 334 (1991) (use of the conjunctive "and" in a statutory provision meant that all of the conditions listed in the provision must be met); c.f. Johnson v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 95 (1994) (only one disjunctive "or" requirement must be met in order for an increased evaluation to be assigned). Indeed, the Veteran has been shown to be able to maintain employment and although he reports difficulties with anger regarding his wife and children, he also reported having good relationships with them. As such, it cannot be said that he has total occupational and social impairment. 

In addition, in the July 2022 VA medical examination the examiner found the Veteran had occupational and social impairment due to mild or transient symptoms which decrease work efficiency and ability to perform occupational tasks only during periods of significant stress, or; symptoms controlled by medication. While in December 2022 C.M.B. concluded the Veteran demonstrated occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood. In January 2023 the VA examiner found the Veteran had occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity. Notably, none of the examiners indicated that the Veteran had total occupational and social impairment. To the extent the symptoms associated with the 100 percent rating criteria may be shown or argued, the Board emphasizes that the disability has not been shown to be productive of both total social and occupational impairment.

After considering the evidence of record, the Board finds that the symptoms of the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder more closely approximate the criteria for a 70 percent evaluation throughout the appeal period. Overall, the Veteran has not demonstrated a level of impairment consistent with the 100 percent criteria, nor have the Veteran's symptoms caused total occupational and social functioning required by the 100 percent evaluation criteria. Mauerhan, supra, Vazquez-Claudio, supra. The criteria for the next higher rating of 100 percent have not been met or approximated. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, Diagnostic Codes 9434, 9440. 

Based on the foregoing, entitlement to an initial evaluation of 70 percent, but no higher, for the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder is granted. 

The Veteran and his representative have not raised any other issues, nor have any other issues been reasonably raised by the record. See Doucette v. Shulkin, 28 Vet. App. 366, 368 (2017) (confirming that the Board is not required to address issues unless they are specifically raised by the claimant or reasonably raised by the evidence of record).

 

Ann K. Minami

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Anna-Liisa Davis.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.