Citation Nr: A25034087
Decision Date: 04/14/25	Archive Date: 04/14/25

DOCKET NO. 240422-437114
DATE: April 14, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is denied.

FINDING OF FACT

The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that OSA began during active service or is otherwise related to an in-service injury or disease including conceded in-service toxic exposure.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for service connection for OSA are not met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.317.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from October 2008 to September 2012 including service in Iraq and Kuwait.

The rating decision on appeal was issued in December 2023 and constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.

In the April 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the December 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

As an initial matter the Board notes that the Veteran's representative submitted additional argument and evidence in an August 2024 Informal Hearing Presentation (IHP).  See August 2024 IHP.  The IHP contained fifteen links to research articles.  While the Board acknowledges the representative's arguments, the evidence submitted is outside the evidentiary window and has not been considered in this claim.

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea

The Veteran contends that he has OSA due to toxic exposure in service.  See November 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim.

Service Connection

Under the relevant laws and regulations, service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service.  38 U.S.C. § 1110.  Generally, the evidence must show: (1) the existence of a present disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service.  Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166-67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

Regulations also provide that service connection may be granted for a disability diagnosed after discharge, when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disability is due to disease or injury which was incurred in or aggravated by service.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).

Service connection may be granted to a Persian Gulf War veteran who exhibits objective indications of a "qualifying chronic disability." 38 U.S.C. § 1117; 38 C.F.R. § 3.317(a)(1).  The term "qualifying chronic disability" means a chronic disability resulting from an undiagnosed illness or a medically unexplained chronic multi-symptom illness that is defined by a cluster of signs or symptoms, such as chronic fatigue syndrome, fibromyalgia, or functional gastrointestinal disorders.  38 C.F.R. § 3.317(a)(2).  The symptoms must be manifest to a degree of 10 percent or more during the presumptive periods prescribed by the Secretary.  38 U.S.C. § 1117 (a)(1)(B); 38 C.F.R. § 3.317 (a)(1)(i).  By history, physical examination, and laboratory tests, the disability cannot be attributable to any known clinical diagnosis.  38 C.F.R. § 3.317 (a)(1)(ii).

A Persian Gulf veteran is one who served in the Southwest Asia Theater of operations during the Persian Gulf War.  38 C.F.R. § 3.317(e).  In this case, the Veteran's service personnel records confirm his service in the Southwest Asia theater of operations during the Persian Gulf War.  Accordingly, the Board finds the Veteran is a Persian Gulf veteran and the provisions of 38 U.S.C. § 1117 and 38 C.F.R. § 3.317 may apply if he is found to have a qualifying chronic disability.

In cases where a Veteran applies for service connection under 38 C.F.R. § 3.317 but is found to have a disability attributable to a known diagnosis, further consideration under the direct service connection provisions of 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110 and 1131 are warranted.  See Combee v. Brown, 34 F.3d 1039, 1042 (Fed. Cir. 1994).

Factual Background

The Veteran's service treatment records (STRs) are silent for any complaints or symptoms of sleep apnea or problems with sleep.  See STR-Medical.

In March 2014, the Veteran endorsed sleep issues, saying he had trouble "falling or staying asleep or sleeping too much."  See March 2014 Depression Screen, Leavenworth Veterans Medical Center (VAMC), June 2016 received in CAPRI.  During this visit, the Veteran answered, "not at all," to trouble falling or staying asleep.  Id.

In August 2017, the Veteran again endorsed difficulty sleeping, stating most of his "sleep disturbances are because of nightmares."  See August 2017 Mental Health Note, Leavenworth VAMC, October 2017 received in CAPRI.  The Veteran also noted that his sleep and anxiety problems began after his return from deployment in 2012.  Id.  In September 2017, the Veteran reported difficulty sleeping sometimes due to nightmares.  See September 2017 Addendum, Leavenworth VAMC, October 2017 received in CAPRI.

In August 2020, the Veteran reported, "he doesn't think he snores."  See August 2020 Physician Note, Leavenworth VAMC, November 2023 received in CAPRI.  In March 2021, the Veteran reported that his wife told him, "[h]e snored a lot and would twitch often."  See March 2021 Note, Leavenworth VAMC, November 2023 received in CAPRI.  In January 2023, the Veteran reported that, "he snores" and would like to get a sleep study done.  See January 2023 Note, Leavenworth VAMC, November 2023 received in CAPRI.  A sleep study was completed by the VA hospital in February 2023 and the Veteran was diagnosed with OSA in August 2023.  See generally 2023 Sleep Medicine Notes, Leavenworth VAMC, November 2023 received in CAPRI.

A VA opinion was provided in November 2023, where the Veteran's diagnosis of OSA was confirmed.  See November 2023 Sleep Apnea Disability Benefits Questionnaire (DBQ).  The November 2023 VA examiner opined the claimed condition was less likely than not (likelihood is less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activity(ies), after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the veteran.  See November 2023 Medical Opinion Disability Benefits Questionnaire (DBQ).  As rationale, the VA examiner reasoned that she had reviewed the toxic exposures of the Veteran contained in public health literature as well as the Veteran's ILER report and the Veteran had other risk factors for OSA outside of toxic exposure which included age, gender, body habitus, neck circumference, anatomy.  Id.  Additionally, the examiner noted:

Obstructive sleep apnea happens when the muscles in the back of the throat relax.  There muscles support the soft palate, the triangular piece of tissue hanging from the soft palate called the uvula, the tonsils, the side walls of the throat and the tongue.  When the muscles relax, your airway narrows or closes as you breathe in.  OSA is an issue with anatomy.  Burn pit exposure has not been found to change anatomy and contribute to OSA.

November 2023 Medical Opinion DBQ.

In December 2023, the AOJ made favorable findings for the OSA claim: 1) that the Veteran had been diagnosed with a disability; 2) that the Veteran had performed service in Iraq and Kuwait from January 2010 to August 2010; and 3) participation in a toxic exposure risk activity is conceded.  See December 2023 Rating Decision.

Subsequent to the December 2023 rating decision, in August 2024, the Veteran's representative submitted an IHP with multiple arguments.  The Veteran's representative contended that the Veteran did not have a separation physical and report of medical history as required by Army regulations, that the VA knows mood disorders are a diagnostic criteria for apnea, that the VA knows that mood disorders and other mental health issues aggravate apnea, that the VA knows that mental health has behavioral effects such as alcohol and tobacco use, physical inactivity and weight gain, that the VA knows of the epidemiology of apnea and military service, that the VA knows that apnea is underdiagnosed and even then, often only after years, and that asthma is related to sleep apnea.  See August 2024 IHP.

Current Disability

On VA examination in November 2023, the Veteran was diagnosed with OSA.  See November 2023 Sleep Apnea DBQ Examination Report.  Based on this evidence, the Board finds that the first element of service connection, a current disability, is met.

In-service Incurrence

As to the second element, the Veteran's service treatment records (STRs) are negative for any complaints of sleep disturbances or signs and symptoms of OSA.  See STR-Medical.  Nevertheless, as his personnel records reflect service in Southwest Asia and toxic exposure is conceded, the second element of service connection is met.  Under the AMA, the Board is bound by earlier favorable findings unless rebutted by evidence that identifies a clear and unmistakable error in the favorable finding.  38 U.S.C. § 5104A.

Nexus

The remaining question is whether there is a nexus between the Veteran's current OSA and his active-duty military service.  Upon review of the record, the Board finds that the evidence persuasively weighs against finding a nexus between the Veteran's OSA and active-duty service from conceded in service toxic exposures.

A medical opinion addressing the issue of nexus was provided in November 2023.  The examiner concluded that the claimed condition was less likely than not caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activities, after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran.  After citing that he had reviewed medical research, and the Veteran's record, the VA examiner reasoned that because the Veteran had other risk factors including age, gender, body habitus, neck circumference, and anatomy, that burn pit exposure could not change the Veteran's anatomy to cause OSA.

In this regard, the Board finds the November 2023 examination report and opinion to be highly probative.  The examiner addressed the Veteran's contentions, explained that OSA is caused by the anatomy and not environmental exposures, and determined the Veteran's OSA was likely caused by his other risk factors.  The Board finds that the opinion is probative because it is based on a sufficiently accurate medical history and provide explanations that contain clear conclusions as well as adequately addressing the Veteran's contentions regarding his OSA.  Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet.  App. 295, 304 (2008).

The only other evidence to address the etiology of the Veteran's OSA are his own assertions that this diagnosis is related to service.  Although laypersons, such as the Veteran, are sometimes competent to provide opinions on certain medical questions, the specific issue in this case falls outside the realm of common knowledge of a lay person as it involves making a definitive clinical determination of the nature and etiology of the Veteran's OSA based on medical knowledge.  See Kahana v. Shinseki, 24 Vet.  App. 428, 435 (2011).  Given such, the Veteran is not competent to provide an etiology opinion.

In the IHP, received in August 2024, the Veteran's representative has made general assertions without explaining the relevance or significance.  Without more explanation, the Board is unable to effectively address the Veteran's contention.  For instance, the Veteran's representative stated that the Veteran did not have a separation examination and report of medical history.  Notably, the Board has reviewed the record, and it appears the Veteran was not given a separation physical because he was discharged from the military by a Medical Evaluation Board.  See STR-Medical.  Essentially, the Board cannot guess why this would be relevant to the Veteran's claim without further explanation.

Next, the Veteran's representative states that VA knows that mood disorders are a diagnostic criterion for apnea, that mood disorders and other mental health issues aggravate apnea, and that mental health has behavioral effects.  While it appears that the Veteran is asserting that the Veteran's OSA is secondary to his service-connected PTSD and asthma, this assertion was not presented prior to the issuance of the December 2023 Rating Decision, when the evidentiary window closed nor was it reasonably raised by the record prior to the IHP.  See Robinson v. Peake, 21 Vet.  App. 545, 552-56 (2008) (the Board is required to address issues raised by either the claimant or the evidence of record); Sondel v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 218, 220 (1994) (when issue is not reasonably raised, Board is not required to "conduct an exercise in prognostication").

As a caveat, the Veteran's representative references multiple pages in the "VA/DoD CPG for the Management of Chronic Insomnia Disorder and Obstructive Sleep Apnea," https://www.healthquality.va.gov/guidelines/CD/insomnia/ VADoDSleepCPGFinal508.pdf and an article called "Negative Coping and PTSD", https://www.ptsd.va.gov/gethelp/negative_coping.asp which are not constructively before the Board.  In Lang v. Wilkie, the Federal Circuit Court of Appeals held that evidence is constructively received by a VA adjudicator post-decision if it is (1) generated by VA or submitted to VA, and (2) can reasonably be expected to be connected to the Veteran's claim.  971 F.3d 1348, 1354 (Fed. Cir. 2020).  

While the articles received were VA generated and the Veteran's representative asserted that these articles should be taken into account by the VA, there is no evidence that these articles would be expected to be connected to the Veteran's claim, especially where they were not material.  First, as discussed above, the Veteran's representative has not raised a reasonable argument prior to the submission of the IHP (outside of the evidentiary window) that the Veteran's OSA is secondary to the Veteran's PTSD and asthma and the suggestion has not been raised by the record.  Second, the articles do not describe a relationship between OSA and PTSD or asthma.  Specifically, in VA/DoD CPG for the Management of Chronic Insomnia Disorder and Obstructive Sleep Apnea, it is stated:

There was insufficient data to determine whether PTSD and OSA have a causal relationship.  Studies linking PTSD and OSA are limited in that there may be selection bias due to the high prevalence of both disorders in the Veteran population.  In one retrospective review in young military personnel, there was a significantly higher risk of PTSD among women with comorbid OSA and insomnia; however, no additional suitable data was retrieved regarding a causal association between OSA and PTSD.

https://www.healthquality.va.gov/guidelines/CD/insomnia/VADoDSleepCPGFinal508.pdf.

On page 75, it is stated, "the impact of PTSD and TBI on sleep and if they are independent risk factors for OSA has limited evidence.  The Work Group determined that prospective longitudinal studies would be helpful in making recommendations and evaluating these disorders as risk factors for OSA."  Id. at 75.  Regarding asthma, there is a reference to specific populations with a high prevalence of OSA to those with asthma but there is no suggestion of a causal relationship between the two.  Id at 30.  Furthermore, the article, Negative Coping and PTSD, appears to have no reference to OSA, a connection between OSA and PTSD or otherwise suggest a causal relationship between the two that would be referenced by the VA examiner upon examination.  See generally https://www.ptsd.va.gov/gethelp/ negative_coping.asp.

Accordingly, the evidence is not in approximate balance but is persuasively against the claim, the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine enunciated in 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b) is not applicable.  Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).  Thus, the claim for entitlement to service connection for OSA is denied.

The Board is grateful to the Veteran for his service, and regrets that it cannot render a favorable decision in this matter.

 

 

YVETTE R. WHITE

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	A. C., Abua-Barnes, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided.  This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability.  38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.