Citation Nr: A25034183
Decision Date: 04/14/25	Archive Date: 04/14/25

DOCKET NO. 250318-519393
DATE: April 14, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for prostate cancer is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for diabetes mellitus, type II (DMII) is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for bone cancer as secondary to prostate cancer is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a psychiatric disorder, to include anxiety and depression, as secondary to prostate cancer, bone cancer, and DMII is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral lower extremity gastrocnemius muscle spasm, as secondary to prostate cancer, bone cancer, and DMII is remanded.

Entitlement to special monthly compensation (SMC) based on aid and attendance (A&A) and/or housebound status is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from October 1967 to September 1969. 

This appeal to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) is from a February 25, 2025, rating decision of a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO), which is the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).

Although the Veteran initially requested Higher-Level Review when submitting the January 2025 VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review, the Higher-Level Reviewer determined that there had been a duty to assist error after issuance of the February 3, 2025, rating decision, and transferred the claim to the Supplemental Claim decision review option for additional development. This resulted in the issuance of the February 25, 2025, rating decision on appeal. 

On the March 2025 VA Form 10182, the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. As such, the Board's review is limited to the evidence of record at the time of the issuance of the rating decision on appeal (February 25, 2025). 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.301. The Board cannot consider evidence submitted during the period after the issuance of the decision on appeal (February 26, 2025, and later). Id. If evidence was associated with the claims file during a period of time when additional evidence was not allowed, the Board has not considered it in its decision on the claim. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.300. 

As a final preliminary matter, the Board notes that the Veteran did not waive the remainder of his window to request a change of dockets pursuant to Williams v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 305 (2024). However, the current decision is a remand which does not constitute a final determination on the benefit sought. Therefore, the absence of a waiver represents only harmless error by the Board.

The Veteran contends that his prostate cancer and DMII are due to toxic exposures during service; his prostate cancer has metastasized to his bones (claimed as bone cancer secondary to prostate cancer); his psychiatric disorder and bilateral lower extremity muscle spasms are secondary to his prostate cancer, DMII, and bone cancer; and that he requires SMC based on the need for permanent A&A due to these disabilities, each on an individual basis. 

Concerning the Veteran's psychiatric claim, the Veteran filed a claim for service connection for anxiety. A VA examiner provided a psychiatric diagnosis of depressive disorder. As a function of the Board's de novo review authority, the Board has recharacterized his psychiatric claim more broadly as a claim for a psychiatric disorder, to include anxiety and depression. See Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1, 6 (2009).

A March 2023 VA Memorandum confirms that the Veteran participated in toxic exposure risk activities (TERAs) based on his military occupational specialty (MOS) duties. The list of conceded exposures includes medical disinfectants such as alcohol, bleach, and ethylene oxide, as well as formaldehyde. However, prior to the issuance of the rating decision on appeal, the Veteran also contended that he was exposed to perfluoroalkyl and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) during service. The Veteran's conceded exposures are not considered PFAS. 

The Veteran's claim was subsequently developed on his conceded TERAs, but it does not appear that VA took additional steps to determine whether the Veteran had exposure to PFAS during his service, and if so, to what extent. The failure of the AOJ to develop this assertion by the Veteran constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error that must be corrected on remand. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.802(a).

Finally, the Board acknowledges the December 2024 private opinion that was associated with the claims file in February 2025. While this provides a positive nexus opinion between the Veteran's claimed exposure to PFAS during service and his claimed disorders, it is predicated upon exposure to PFAS during service, rather than providing evidence or an opinion supporting that the Veteran was exposed to PFAS during service. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Make all appropriate efforts, to include contacting all appropriate repositories of information, to develop the Veteran's claim of in-service toxic exposure to perfluoroalkyl and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) while participating in duties consistent his military occupational specialty (MOS) of medical specialist. Such development should reflect consideration of the Veteran's lay statements, as well as other lay statements of record, regarding his service and MOS. After completing this development, a TERA Memorandum should be issued and a formal finding should be made as to whether the Veteran did have in-service toxic exposure, and, if so, the extent thereof.

 

 

Jenna Brant

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	K. Pak

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.1303.