Citation Nr: A25034481
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 240327-426915
DATE: April 15, 2025

REMANDED

Service connection for pulmonary emphysema is remanded.

Service connection for atherosclerosis is remanded.

Service connection for thoracic aortic aneurysm is remanded.

Service connection for stroke residuals is remanded.

Service connection for sleep apnea is remanded.

Service connection for sarcoma, also claimed as skin cancer, is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran had active service from July 1973 to February 1980.

In April 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR), and requested review of a January 2023 rating decision. Following additional development ordered during the HLR, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) converted the claim to a supplemental claim and issued a rating decision in November 2023.

In the March 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

The appeal is remanded to correct a duty to assist error that occurred prior to the rating decision on appeal.

In this regard, the Veteran asserts that his claimed disabilities are a direct result of his exposure to toxins, such as jet fuel. See October 2022 Claim.

In September 2023, the AOJ completed a Toxic Exposure Risk Activity (TERA) memorandum. The memorandum did note the Veteran's participation in TERAs. Specifically, it cited the Veteran's military occupational specialty (MOS) of aircraft maintenance specialist and heavy equipment. 

VA medical opinions were subsequently obtained in October 2023. A VA examiner offered negative nexus opinions for the conditions of pulmonary emphysema, atherosclerosis, thoracic aortic aneurysm, and stroke residuals. Each opinion indicated that without any idea of the duration of exposure in service, there was no way to link the current disability to in-service exposure. Rather, the examiner linked the disabilities to a 30-year history of smoking. However, the Board finds the rationales for these opinions to be inadequate. Although the examiner attributed the claimed conditions to the Veteran's smoking, reasoning that the risk factor of smoking tobacco outweighed the in-service risk factors, there was no explanation as to why a smoking history was a more likely cause. 

The Board further finds that the opinions obtained for the claimed skin cancer and sleep apnea are inadequate. 

As for the condition of sleep apnea, the October 2023 VA examiner opined that sleep apnea was less likely as not due to the Veteran's TERA. Rather, the examiner pointed out that sleep apnea was characterized by the interruption in breathing by the blockage of air flow as a result of a collapse in the soft tissue walls of the throat, and that risk factors for sleep apnea included smoking, family history, allergies, and pulmonary emphysema. However, the examiner did not discuss whether or not the Veteran had these claimed risk factors or why the Veteran's sleep apnea was more likely related to a risk factor rather than the TERA in service. 

Finally, the October 2023 VA examiner, who furnished an opinion regarding the Veteran's claimed skin cancer, opined that the condition was less likely as not due to the Veteran's claimed exposures in service and more likely due to the Veteran's prolonged sun exposure. However, it is not clear whether the Veteran incurred prolonged sun exposure in service or after service; as such, the rationale is unclear.

Once the Secretary undertakes the effort to provide an examination, even if not statutorily obligated to do so, an adequate one must be provided. Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007).

Accordingly, under the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), a remand is required to correct pre-decisional duty to assist errors, which includes obtaining adequate medical opinions. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.802. Thus, a remand is required for adequate medical nexus opinions.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain addendum opinions for each claimed disability. The examiner should review the Veteran's medical history and the entirety of the claims file. Upon review of the record, the examiner should address the following:

Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the claimed disabilities of pulmonary emphysema, atherosclerosis, thoracic aortic aneurysm, stroke residuals, obstructive sleep apnea, and/or skin cancer, had onset during the Veteran's period of active service, to include toxic exposures therein as outlined in the September 2023 TERA memorandum?

In forming the opinion, the examiner must consider: (a) total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments; and (b) synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities.

The examiner(s) should consider and discuss the December 2022 private medical opinion submitted by the Veteran in support of his claims.

All opinions should be supported by a medical explanation or rationale.

2. Then, readjudicate the issues on appeal.

 

 

Leetra J. Harris

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Polly Johnson, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.1303.