Citation Nr: A25034206
Decision Date: 04/14/25	Archive Date: 04/14/25

DOCKET NO. 240614-448447
DATE: April 14, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for left foot numbness is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for right foot numbness is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from March 1981 to January 1989.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a December 2023 rating decision of a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In the June 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the December 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of service connection for left and right foot numbness, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

1. Entitlement to service connection for left foot numbness

2. Entitlement to service connection for right foot numbness is remanded.

The Veteran contends that he has developed bilateral foot numbness as a result of his active-duty service. 

Under the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), the Board must remand to the AOJ to correct pre-decisional duty to assist errors (including when the AOJ failed to make reasonable efforts to obtain VA treatment records or relevant federal or private treatment records, failed to obtain a VA examination, or provided an             inadequate VA examination or opinion).  38 C.F.R. § 20.802 (a).

For the reasons addressed below, the Board finds that VA failed to obtain an adequate medical opinion regarding the nature and etiology of the Veteran's left and right foot disorders.  As this constitutes a duty to assist error, remand is required.  

In December 2023 the Veteran was afforded a VA Toxic Exposure Risk Activity (TERA) examination in for his left foot condition.  Following a review of the Veteran's claims file and an in-person examination, the examiner opined that the Veteran's left foot disorder was less likely than not related to his toxic exposure risk activities, after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable deployments and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities.  Instead, the examiner attributed the metatarsalgia to a mechanical or anatomical issue and stated that the cause of tarsal tunnel syndrome is unknown, relatively rare, and more common in females than in males.  The examiner noted that the Veteran was most recently seen for the condition in 2017, and that the Veteran's diagnosis of metatarsalgia is one of the most reported in patients with foot problems.  The examiner further added that while there is a great array of causative factors for the condition, all are related to gait mechanics, foot anatomy, and foot or ankle deformity.

The Board finds the December 2023 TERA opinion to be inadequate to adjudicate the Veteran's claim for left foot numbness.  As to the Veteran's diagnosed tarsal tunnel syndrome, the Veteran did not address whether it is attributable to any of the Veteran's TERAs.  Instead, the examiner merely noted general information about the diagnosis, such as high occurrence in females rather than males, that it is a rare disease, and the cause is unknown.  As to the Veteran's diagnosed metatarsalgia, the examiner broadly discusses possible causes for the disorder such as gait mechanics, foot anatomy, and foot and ankle deformity, but the examiner does not relate any of these factors to the Veteran's case specifically.  Rather, the examiner discusses the factors as to the broader population.  As such, a new TERA opinion is also necessary.

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in December 2023 for his right foot disorder.  Following a review of the Veterans claims file and an in-person examination, the examiner opined that his right foot disorder was unrelated to service.  In the reasoning provided with the medical opinion, the examiner restated the facts of record.  The examiner noted that the claims file showed the Veteran was experiencing pain in his right foot due to a wart or callus, and the Veteran reported that he last saw a foot specialist in 2017, when he was diagnosed with tarsal syndrome and metatarsalgia, and has not seen anyone since.  The examiner stated that the Veteran is not taking any medications for his foot numbness and wears orthotics to alleviate symptoms.

The Board finds the December 2023 medical opinion to be inadequate to adjudicate the Veteran's claim for right foot numbness.  The examiner did not provide a well-reasoned rationale to support the conclusion reached.  Instead, the examiner merely restated the evidence of record pertaining to the Veteran's right foot, without explaining the significance of these facts in supporting the ultimate finding.  As such, remand for a new medical opinion is necessary.

The Veteran was also afforded a VA Toxic Exposure Risk Activity (TERA) examination in December 2023 for his right foot condition.  The opinion provided for the right foot is identical to the opinion provided for the left foot.  Following a review of the Veteran's claims file and an in-person examination, the examiner opined that the Veteran's right foot disorder was less likely than not related to his toxic exposure risk activities, after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable deployments and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities.  Instead, the examiner attributed the metatarsalgia to a mechanical or anatomical issue and stated that the cause of tarsal tunnel syndrome is unknown, relatively rare, and more common in females than in males.  The examiner noted that the Veteran was most recently seen for the condition in 2017, and that the Veteran's diagnosis of metatarsalgia is one of the most reported in patients with foot problems.  The examiner further added that while there is a great array of causative factors for the condition, all are related to gait mechanics, foot anatomy, and foot or ankle deformity.

As explained above in the context of the left foot, the Board also finds the December 2023 TERA opinion to be inadequate to adjudicate the Veteran's claim for right foot numbness.  As to the Veteran's diagnosed tarsal tunnel syndrome, the Veteran did not address whether it is attributable to any of the Veteran's TERAs.  Instead, the examiner merely noted general information about the diagnosis, such as high occurrence in females rather than males, that it is a rare disease, and the cause is unknown.  As to the Veteran's diagnosed metatarsalgia, the examiner broadly discusses possible causes for the disorder such as gait mechanics, foot anatomy, and foot and ankle deformity, but the examiner does not relate any of these factors to the Veteran's case specifically.  Rather, the examiner discusses the factors as to the broader population.  As such, a new TERA opinion is also necessary.

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain a new medical opinion from a qualified VA examiner regarding the nature and etiology of the Veteran's right foot disorders.  Provide a copy of this remand and the record to the examiner for review. The examiner must indicate review of all medical evidence of record. The examiner must address the following:

The examiner must provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not that any diagnosed right foot condition had its onset in, or is otherwise related to, the Veteran's active-duty service, taking into consideration the notations in the Veteran's service treatment records regarding issues he experienced with his right foot such as: the September 1988 Report of Medical Examination notation of hallux valgus of the right foot, October and November 1986 notation of right foot warts and right foot issues, and a February 1982 notation of a right foot bunion.

2. Obtain a new TERA opinion for the Veteran's right and left foot disorders, to include metatarsalgia and tarsal tunnel syndrome.

The examiner must address whether the Veteran's diagnosed right and left foot disorders are at least as likely as not etiologically related to his conceded TERAs.

The examiner must address the synergistic, combined effect of all of the Veteran's TERAs, and any potential toxic exposures from his MOS duties generally.  The examiner must provide an opinion as to each foot and the opinion must be supported by citations to the Veteran's specific medical history and not solely by citations regarding the etiology of the condition in the population as a whole.

For the purposes of the opinions requested, the examiner should assume the Veteran's statements about his symptoms are credible, unless they are inconsistent with the medical evidence or with medical principles concerning his condition. The Board emphasizes that this does not constitute a positive credibility determination, as the Board will weigh the evidence once the appeal returns.

If there is a medical basis to support or doubt the history provided by the Veteran, the examiner should provide a fully reasoned explanation. In doing so, the examiner may identify any discrepancies, inconsistencies, or contradictions contained in the evidence of record, and may state whether or not the Veteran's lay statements are supported by medical or other evidence. The examiner may not dismiss the Veteran's statements about his symptoms solely because they are not documented in contemporaneous treatment records.

 

M. HYLAND

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Makarenko, Darya A.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.