Citation Nr: A25034084
Decision Date: 04/14/25	Archive Date: 04/14/25

DOCKET NO. 250303-523970
DATE: April 14, 2025

ORDER

New and relevant evidence has been received sufficient to readjudicate the claim of entitlement to service connection for diplopia, to include as secondary to headaches; the appeal is granted to this extent only.  

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include as secondary to service-connected tinnitus, is remanded.  

Entitlement to service connection for headaches, to include as secondary to service-connected tinnitus, is remanded.  

Entitlement to service connection for vertigo, to include as secondary to service-connected tinnitus, is remanded.  

Entitlement to service connection for diplopia, to include as secondary to headaches, is remanded.  

FINDING OF FACT

New and relevant evidence has been received with respect to the previously denied claim of entitlement to service connection for diplopia.  

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for readjudicating the claim of entitlement to service connection for a diplopia, to include as secondary to headaches, have been met.  38 C.F.R. §§ 3.156(d), 3.2501.  

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

Preliminary Matters

The Veteran had honorable active-duty service with the United States Army from November 1961 to November 1964.  

On August 23, 2017, the President signed into law the Veterans Appeals Improvement and Modernization Act, 131 Stat. 1105 (2017), also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA).  

Historically, the Veteran has claimed service connection for various psychiatric disorders.  In Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1 (2009), the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) held that a claimant seeks service connection for the symptoms of a disability, regardless of how those symptoms are diagnosed or labeled.  Therefore, the claim has been recharacterized as one of entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder.  The issue has thus been restated.  

This matter is before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from rating decisions dated February 5, 2025, and February 12, 2025, of a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).  In the February 5, 2025, rating decision, the RO confirmed and continued the previous denial of service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder.  In the February 12, 2025, rating decision, the RO determined that the claim for service connection for diplopia remained denied, as no new and relevant evidence had been submitted in support of the claim.  The RO also confirmed and continued previous denials of service connection for headaches and vertigo.  

In the March 2025 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement (NOD)), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  He acknowledged that Direct Review would entail the Board reviewing the evidence of record at the time of the prior decisions, with no evidence submission or hearing requests.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the February 5, 2025, and February 12, 2025, decisions.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  

The Board notes that, with regard to the claims for an acquired psychiatric disorder, headaches, and vertigo, the RO found that new and relevant evidence had been received for each previously denied claim and reopened the claims.  As the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) reopened these claims for readjudication, the Board is bound by these favorable findings.  38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).  As noted above, the RO confirmed and continued the previous denials.  

The Board further notes the recent decision issued by the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) in the case of Williams v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 305.  In Williams v. McDonough, the Court held the Board must refrain from deciding a case until the case proceeds to the point where a docket switch is no longer permitted under the terms of 38 C.F.R. § 20.202(c)(2).  In the present case, the rating decisions on appeal were issued on February 7, 2025, and February 18, 2025.  Thus, the one-year period following each decision has not yet elapsed.  However, in the March 2025 VA Form 10182, the Veteran waived his right to a docket switch.  Thus, the Board will proceed to adjudicate the claims.  

As a final matter, the Board notes that evidence was added to the claims file during a period of time when new evidence was not allowed.   Therefore, the Board may not consider this evidence.  See 38 C.F.R. § 20.300.  That stated, the newly submitted evidence will be reviewed and considered by the AOJ after it completes the development ordered by the Board with respect to the issues being remanded.  

New and Relevant Evidence

Readjudication of the claim of entitlement to service connection for diplopia is warranted.  

Before VA will readjudicate a claim, new and relevant evidence must be presented or secured with respect to a supplemental claim.  38 U.S.C. § 5108(a).  If new and relevant evidence is presented or secured with respect to the supplemental claim, the AOJ will readjudicate the claim taking into consideration all the evidence of record.  38 C.F.R. §§ 3.156(d), 3.2501.  If new and relevant evidence is not presented or secured, the AOJ will issue a decision finding that there was insufficient evidence to readjudicate the claim.  Id.  

By regulation, evidence is "new" if it was not previously part of the actual record before agency adjudicators and "relevant" if it tends to prove or disprove a matter at issue in a claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501(a)(1).  Relevant evidence includes evidence that raises a theory of entitlement that was not previously addressed.  Id.  

In this case, an August 2024 rating decision denied entitlement to service connection for diplopia, as the evidence did not show an in-service occurrence.  The February 12, 2025, rating decision on appeal found that no new and relevant evidence had been received with regard to the claimed diplopia disability.  Therefore, the Board must determine whether new and relevant evidence has been received based on the evidence of record at the time of the February 12, 2025, rating decision on appeal.  

The Board finds that new and relevant evidence has been received with regard to the claim of entitlement to service connection for diplopia.  The record includes a statement from the Veteran in which he raises secondary service connection as a theory of entitlement, asserting that his double vision is caused by his headaches, which is on appeal in this matter.  

This evidence was not previously considered by the RO and tends to substantiate the claim on appeal.  Therefore, the evidence is new and relevant, and the petition to readjudicate the claim of entitlement to service connection for diplopia is granted.  

REASONS FOR REMAND

After thorough review of the record, the Board finds that additional evidentiary development is warranted before a final decision may be reached for the remaining issues on appeal.  

1. Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include as secondary to service-connected tinnitus, is remanded.  

The Veteran seeks entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder.  He asserts that this condition is secondary to his service-connected tinnitus.  

Favorable findings from the February 5, 2025, rating decision on appeal include a diagnosis of depressive disorder due to chronic pain with anxious distress and alcohol use disorder, in early remission.  The Board is bound by this favorable finding.  38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).  

The Veteran was provided a VA psychiatric examination in November 2024.  The examiner opined that the Veteran's depressive disorder is at least as likely as not due to his back disability, for which he is not service connected.  In a December 2024 addendum opinion, the examiner opined that the Veteran's current mental disorder diagnosis is less likely than not due to his service-connected tinnitus/hearing loss.  No rationale was provided.  The examiner provided another opinion in February 2025.  The examiner indicated that, during the evaluation, the Veteran did not indicate tinnitus as causing significant distress.  

The Board finds that the November 2024 VA examination report and the subsequent addendum opinions did not adequately consider the Veteran's lay statements and relevant medical records.  Specifically, the examiner did not address the medical treatise discussing the relationship between tinnitus and anxiety and depression submitted by the Veteran in August 2024.  Thus, the Board finds that the November 2024 VA examination and subsequent addendum opinions are inadequate.  The AOJ's failure to ensure that the VA examination and opinions are adequate constitutes a pre-decisional duty-to-assist error.  There is no other relevant examination of record.  As such, this is a duty-to-assist error which must be remedied on remand.  

2. Entitlement to service connection for headaches, to include as secondary to service-connected tinnitus, is remanded.  

The Veteran seeks entitlement to service connection for headaches.  He asserts that this condition is secondary to his service-connected tinnitus.  

The Veteran was provided a VA examination for his headaches in February 2025.  The examiner noted that there was insufficient data and evidence to support a chronic headache condition.  The examiner then stated, "It would be inappropriate and preemptive to make any association causally of veterans [sic] service-connected tinnitus and his new diagnosis of headaches."  Furthermore, the examiner indicated that the Veteran suffered symptoms of headache pain.  Thus, due to the inconsistency within the February 2025 VA examination report, the Board finds this examination to be inadequate.  The AOJ's failure to ensure that the VA examination is adequate constitutes a pre-decisional duty-to-assist error.  There is no other relevant examination of record.  As such, this is a duty-to-assist error which must be remedied on remand.  

3. Entitlement to service connection for vertigo, to include as secondary to service-connected tinnitus, is remanded.  

The Veteran seeks entitlement to service connection for vertigo.  He asserts that this condition is secondary to his service-connected tinnitus.  

The Veteran was provided a VA examination for his vertigo in February 2025.  The examiner noted that there was insufficient evidence to support a vertigo diagnosis at this time.  Instead of basing her conclusion on the evaluation, the examiner simply concluded that there was no diagnosis based on the findings of an ER physician and the Veteran's primary care provider.  Furthermore, the examiner failed to address a July 31, 2024, VA treatment record in which the Veteran was seen for vertigo challenges, which was a favorable finding established by the RO in an August 2024 rating decision.  38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).  

The Board finds the February 2025 VA examination to be inadequate, as the examiner did not adequately consider the Veteran's lay statements and relevant medical records.  The AOJ's failure to ensure that the VA examination is adequate constitutes a pre-decisional duty-to-assist error.  There is no other relevant examination of record.  As such, this is a duty-to-assist error which must be remedied on remand.  

4. Entitlement to service connection for diplopia, to include as secondary to headaches, is remanded.  

The Veteran contends that his diplopia is caused by his headaches.  

Favorable findings from the February 12, 2025, rating decision on appeal include a diagnosis of diplopia.  The RO found that current medical evidence from the Cheyenne VAMC supports a past medical history of a diplopia diagnosis as early as September 2023.  The Board is bound by this favorable finding.  38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).  

In a November 2024 statement, the Veteran indicated that when he gets a migraine, he gets the double vision.  He stated that "even after the migraines start to go away, the double vision stays."  He continued, "This also makes me fall so I have to lay down.  It makes getting things done almost impossible."  

The Board finds that the issue of entitlement to service connection for diplopia is inextricably intertwined with the development of the issue of entitlement to service connection for headaches such that a decision on entitlement to service connection for diplopia would be premature.  See Parseeya-Picchione v. McDonald, 28 Vet. App. 171, 177-78 (2016) (holding claims are inextricably intertwined when a decision on one could have a "significant impact" on the other); see also Harris v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 180, 183 (1991) (holding that where a decision on one issue would have a "significant impact" upon another, and that impact in turn could render any appellate review on the other claim meaningless and a waste of judicial resources, the two claims are inextricably intertwined).  

One of the effects of the AMA is to narrow the set of circumstances in which the Board must remand appeals to the AOJ for further development instead of immediately deciding them directly.  Although there was no error regarding this claim, 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(f)(2)(A); 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a) (providing that AMA remands may be based on pre-decisional duty-to-assist errors or any other errors in satisfying a statutory or regulatory duty), those bases are not necessarily exclusive in a situation such as this.  A decision on the issue of entitlement to service connection for headaches may impact the issue of entitlement to service connection for diplopia, considering the Veteran is only contending his diplopia is secondary to his headaches.  

As such, the issue of entitlement to service connection for diplopia is remanded as well.  

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

This appeal has been advanced on the Board's docket pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 20.900(c).  38 U.S.C. § 7107(a)(2).  

1. Schedule the Veteran for an examination before an appropriate clinician to determine the nature and etiology of his claimed psychiatric disorder.  The Veteran's claims file and a copy of this remand should be provided to the examiner and the examination report should reflect that these items were reviewed.  

The examiner should address the following:

(a) The examiner should identify all current psychiatric disorders found on examination.  

(b) The examiner must provide an opinion as to whether any diagnosed psychiatric condition, as defined in (a) above, during the claim period at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) originated during service or is otherwise etiologically related to service.  

The examiner must consider all of the statements of the Veteran and all pertinent medical records.  

(c) If a negative opinion is provided for (b), opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that any diagnosed psychiatric condition, as defined in (a) above, was caused or aggravated by the Veteran's service-connected tinnitus.  

The examiner must address the medical treatise submitted in August 2024.  

A complete rationale must be provided for all opinions offered.  If an opinion cannot be offered without resort to mere speculation, the examiner must fully explain why this is the case and identify what additional evidence, if any, would allow for a more definitive opinion.  

2. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination before an appropriate clinician to determine the nature and etiology of his claimed headache disability.  The Veteran's claims file and a copy of this remand should be provided to the examiner and the examination report should reflect that these items were reviewed.  

The examiner should address the following: 

(a) Determine whether the Veteran has a headache disorder.  

(b) The examiner must provide an opinion as to whether any diagnosed headache disorder, as defined in (a) above, during the claim period at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) originated during service or is otherwise etiologically related to service.  

The examiner must consider all of the statements of the Veteran and all pertinent medical records.  

(c) If a negative opinion is provided for (b), opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that any diagnosed headache disorder, as defined in (a) above, was caused or aggravated by the Veteran's service-connected tinnitus.  

The examiner must address the medical treatise cited by the Veteran in his November 2024 correspondence.  

A complete rationale must be provided for all opinions offered.  If an opinion cannot be offered without resort to mere speculation, the examiner must fully explain why this is the case and identify what additional evidence, if any, would allow for a more definitive opinion.  

3. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination before an appropriate clinician to determine the nature and etiology of his claimed vertigo disability.  The Veteran's claims file and a copy of this remand should be provided to the examiner and the examination report should reflect that these items were reviewed.  

The examiner should address the following: 

(a) The examiner must provide an opinion as to whether any diagnosed vertigo condition during the claim period at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) originated during service or is otherwise etiologically related to service.  

The clinician should be advised that the RO has favorably found that a July 31, 2024, VA treatment record shows that the Veteran was seen for vertigo challenges.  38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).  

The examiner must consider all of the statements of the Veteran and all pertinent medical records.  

(b) If a negative opinion is provided for (a), opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's vertigo was caused or aggravated by the Veteran's service-connected tinnitus.  

The examiner must address the medical treatise cited by the Veteran in his November 2024 correspondence.  

(Continued on next page)

A complete rationale must be provided for all opinions offered.  If an opinion cannot be offered without resort to mere speculation, the examiner must fully explain why this is the case and identify what additional evidence, if any, would allow for a more definitive opinion.  

 

 

Christopher Seppanen

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Y. MacDonald, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.