Citation Nr: A25034208
Decision Date: 04/14/25	Archive Date: 04/14/25

DOCKET NO. 240328-427963
DATE: April 14, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an initial disability rating of 30 percent for right knee chondromalacia patella with limitation of flexion is granted, subject to the laws and regulations governing the award of monetary benefits.

Entitlement to an initial compensable disability rating for right knee chondromalacia patella with limitation of extension is denied.

Entitlement to an initial disability rating of 30 percent for left knee chondromalacia patella with limitation of flexion is granted, subject to the laws and regulations governing the award of monetary benefits.

Entitlement to a separate disability rating of 10 percent, but no higher, for right knee instability is granted, subject to the laws and regulations governing the award of monetary benefits.

Entitlement to a separate disability rating of 10 percent, but no higher, for left knee instability is granted, subject to the laws and regulations governing the award of monetary benefits.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1.  Throughout the entire appeal period, the Veteran's symptoms of bilateral knee chondromalacia patella more nearly approximated range of motion of flexion limited to 15 degrees when considering functional loss during flare-ups.

2.  The Veteran's symptoms of right knee chondromalacia patella did not more nearly approximate range of motion of extension limited to 5 degrees, even when considering functional loss during flare-ups, at any point during the appeal period.

3.  Throughout the entire appeal period, the symptoms of the Veteran's bilateral knee instability more nearly approximated slight recurrent subluxation or lateral instability.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1.  Throughout the entire appeal period, the criteria for initial disability ratings of 30 percent for bilateral knee chondromalacia patella with limitation of flexion, when considering functional loss during flare-ups, are met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1-4.10, 4.71a, Diagnostic Code (DC) 5260.

2.  The criteria for an initial compensable disability rating for right knee chondromalacia patella with limitation of extension are not met at any point during the appeal period.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1-4.10, 4.71a, DC 5261.

3.  Throughout the entire appeal period, the criteria for separate disability ratings of 10 percent, but no higher, for bilateral knee instability are met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1-4.10, 4.71a, DC 5257.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from January 1979 to January 1982. 

These matters come before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a March 2024 rating decision of a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO) that continued the 10 percent evaluation for right knee chondromalacia patella (limitation of extension of leg), continued the noncompensable evaluation for right knee chondromalacia patella (limitation of flexion of leg), and continued the 10 percent evaluation for left knee chondromalacia patella.

The Veteran timely appealed the evaluations that were continued in the March 2024 rating decision, as confirmed in the Veteran's representative's April 2024 Informal Hearing Presentation (IHP), in a March 2024 Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) (VA Form 10182) and selected direct review by a Veterans Law Judge (VLJ). ?38 C.F.R. § 20.202(b)(1).  Accordingly, the Board will review the evidence of record as of the date of the October 2023 rating decision that resulted in a Request?for Higher-Level Review and?the March 2024 rating decision. ?38 U.S.C. § 7113(a); 38 C.F.R. § 3.2601(f), 20.301.  The Board will not consider evidence added to the record after the date of the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal.  If evidence was added during any ineligible period, the Board did not consider it.  If the Veteran wishes to have VA consider any evidence that was not considered, he may at any time file a supplemental claim with the AOJ after receiving this decision and?the additional evidence will be considered in connection with the supplemental claim. ?38 U.S.C. §§ 5104C(a)(1)(B), (b); 5108;?38 C.F.R. §§ 3.2501, 20.1105(a).  If filed within one year, this supplemental claim will preserve the date of the claim denied herein as the effective date of the grant of the benefit sought.  38 U.S.C. § 5110(a)(2)(B);?38 C.F.R. § 3.2500(h). 

Entitlement to higher initial disability ratings for bilateral knee chondromalacia patella

Disability evaluations are determined by the application of VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities, which is based on average impairment of earning capacity.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. Part 4.

Where an award of service connection for a disability has been granted and the assignment of an initial evaluation for that disability is disputed, separate evaluations may be assigned for separate periods of time based on the facts found. In other words, the evaluations may be staged.  Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119 (1999).

In evaluating a disability, the Board considers the current examination reports in light of the whole recorded history to ensure that the current rating accurately reflects the severity of the condition.  The medical as well as industrial history is to be considered, and a full description of the effects of the disability upon ordinary activity is also required.  38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.10. 

Where there is a question as to which of two evaluations shall be applied, the higher rating will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating.  Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7.

The Court has emphasized that when assigning a disability rating it is necessary to consider limitation of a joint's functional ability due to flare-ups, fatigability, incoordination, and pain on movement, or when it is used repeatedly over a period of time, functional loss due to flare-ups, fatigability, incoordination, and pain on movement.  DeLuca v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 202, 206-07 (1995); Mitchell v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 32, 44 (2011).  In Mitchell, the Court explained that pursuant to 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.40 and 4.45, the possible manifestations of functional loss include decreased or abnormal excursion, strength, speed, coordination, or endurance (38 C.F.R. § 4.40), as well as less or more movement than is normal, weakened movement, excess fatigability, and pain on movement (as well as swelling, deformity, and atrophy) that affects stability, standing, and weight-bearing (38 C.F.R. § 4.45).  Joints should be tested for pain on both active and passive motion, in weight-bearing and non-weight-bearing and, if possible, with range of motion measurements of the opposite undamaged joint.  38 C.F.R. § 4.59; Correia v. McDonald, 28 Vet. App. 158 (2016).

In Sharp v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 26 (2017), the Court held that a VA examiner must attempt to elicit information from the record and the Veteran regarding the severity, frequency, duration, or functional loss manifestations during flare-ups before determining that an estimate of motion loss in terms of degrees could not be given.  It also held that any inability to furnish such an estimate must be predicated on a lack of medical knowledge among the medical community at large, rather than insufficient knowledge by the individual examiner.

The Veteran is currently in receipt of a 10 percent evaluation for right knee chondromalacia patella under DC 5260 for limitation of flexion, a noncompensable evaluation for right knee instability under DC 5261 for limitation of extension, and a 10 percent evaluation for left knee chondromalacia patella under DC 5260 for limitation of flexion, all evaluations effective from August 9, 2022, the date of the award of service connection.  Although the AOJ characterized the Veteran's right knee disability with limitation of extension under DC 5261 as right knee instability, the Board will recharacterize the claim as one of right knee chondromalacia patella with limitation of extension.  

DC 5260, limitation of flexion of a leg, provides a 10 percent rating if flexion is limited to 45 degrees, and a 20 percent rating if flexion is limited to 30 degrees.  A maximum 30 percent rating is warranted for knee flexion that is limited to 15 degrees.  38 C.F.R. § 4.71a.

DC 5261, limitation of extension of a leg, provides a noncompensable disability rating when extension is limited to 5 degrees, a 10 percent rating when it is limited to 10 degrees, a 20 percent rating when it is limited to 15 degrees, a 30 percent rating when limited to 20 degrees, a 40 percent rating when limited to 30 degrees, and a 50 percent rating when limited to 45 degrees.

Normal range of motion of the knee is 0 degrees of extension to 140 degrees of flexion.  38 C.F.R. § 4.71; Plate II.  Separate ratings may be warranted for limitation of flexion and extension when the criteria for compensable ratings are met for such limitation under DCs 5260 and 5261.  See VAOPGCPREC 9-2004.

The Board notes that there are additional DCs that pertain to the knee.  However, as the evidence of record shows, the symptoms of the bilateral knee disability in this case have not either manifested as or been attributed to ankylosis or its functional equivalent, dislocated semilunar cartilage, symptomatic removal of semilunar cartilage, impairment of the tibia or fibula, or genu recurvatum.  Therefore, separate or higher disability ratings under these additional knee DCs do not merit further consideration.  38 C.F.R. §§ 4.14, 4.71a; DCs 5256, 5258, 5259, 5262, 5263.

During a September 2023 VA examination, the Veteran reported constant bilateral knee pain that was, at worst, a 10 out of 10 on a pain scale.  He further experienced increased pain and stiffness with sitting, standing, and walking for prolonged periods and when driving long distances.  The Veteran did not feel stable on his legs and had to use handrails when going up and down stairs.  He also had a lot of pain when bending, kneeling, squatting, and using the stairs.  The Veteran described severe flare-ups that occurred daily as a sharp, stabbing, intense, and nagging pain.  There was functional loss or functional impairment during flare-ups and after repeated use over time of limited sitting, standing, walking, or driving for prolonged periods of time, going up and down stairs, bending, kneeling, or squatting, and walking on uneven ground.  Active range of motion of the right knee was 65 degrees flexion to 0 degrees extension and 50 degrees flexion to 0 degrees extension of the left knee.  There was pain in both knees on flexion and extension, on active and passive motion, and pain caused functional loss.  Abnormal range of motion contributed to functional loss of limited bending, kneeling, and squatting.  Passive range of motion was the same as active range of motion.  The Veteran was able to perform repetitive use testing with no additional loss of function or range of motion after three repetitions in both knees.  There was pain that significantly limited functional ability with repetitive use over time and during flare-ups.  This was estimated in terms of range of motion as 60 and 0 degrees flexion to extension in the right knee and 45 to 0 degrees flexion to extension in the left knee.  There was no ankylosis or recurrent subluxation or persistent instability of either knee.  The Veteran did not use any assistive devices.  His bilateral knee disability impacted his ability to work in that he experienced limited sitting, standing, walking, or driving for prolonged periods of time, going up and down stairs, bending, kneeling, or squatting, and walking on uneven ground.  He would also have to take multiple breaks secondary to pain and to prevent flare-ups.

For the following reasons, initial disability ratings of 30 percent for right and left knee chondromalacia patella with limitation of flexion are warranted.  An initial compensable rating for right knee chondromalacia patella with limitation of extension is not warranted.

The Board must consider additional functional loss due to symptoms such as pain, repetitive motion, and flare-ups.  38 C.F.R. §§ 4.40, 4.45, 4.59; Mitchell, 25 Vet. App. at 44; Correia, 28 Vet. App. at 169-170; Sharp, 29 Vet. App. at 33.  Here, the Veteran has provided competent and credible reports throughout the appeal period of severe bilateral knee pain during flare-ups with functional loss or functional impairment during flare-ups and after repeated use over time of limited sitting, standing, walking, or driving for prolonged periods of time, going up and down stairs, bending, kneeling, or squatting, and walking on uneven ground.  He is competent to report the symptoms associated with his bilateral knee disability and the extent of his impairment during flare-ups of symptoms and following repetitive use, and the Board finds his reports credible, and therefore competent, as they have been consistent throughout the appeal period.  Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331, 1337 (Fed. Cir. 2006).

Thus, although range of motion testing conducted in the VA examinations did not reflect right and left knee flexion limited to 15 degrees, the Veteran has consistently reported significant and frequent flare-ups due to his bilateral knee pain symptoms.  Moreover, as the examination was not administered during a flare-up, it is reasonable to conclude that the Veteran's range of motion is much more limited, and his functional limitations and loss more severe during a flare-up.  The evidence of record, including the Veteran's descriptions of his flare-ups, thus reflects that the symptoms of the Veteran's bilateral knee chondromalacia patella more nearly approximated flexion of 15 degrees.

Therefore, in light of the Veteran's reported limitations during flare-ups, 30 percent disability ratings for bilateral knee chondromalacia patella with limitation during flexion under DC 5260 are warranted for the entire appeal period.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 4.3.  This is the maximum schedular rating allowable under DC 5260.

In regard to the Veteran's right knee limitation of extension, the evidence of record reflects extension of the right knee to 0 degrees, including during flare-ups and with repetitive use testing.  Even when considering the functional limitation noted during flare-ups and after repeated use over time, there is no evidence of record indicating that the Veteran's right knee limitation of extension more nearly approximated extension limited to 5 degrees at any point during the appeal period.  Therefore, the evidence is neither evenly balanced nor approximately so with regard to whether a compensable disability rating for right knee chondromalacia patella with limitation during extension is warranted at any point during the appeal period.  Rather, the evidence at this time weighs persuasively against approximation of the symptoms required for a compensable disability rating.  The benefit of the doubt doctrine is therefore not for application as to this claim.  Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 781-82 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc) (only when the evidence persuasively favors one side or another is the benefit of the doubt doctrine not for application).

Entitlement to separate disability ratings for bilateral knee instability

VA General Counsel provided guidance in VAOPGCPREC 23-97 (July 1997) that a veteran who has instability of the knee may be rated separately under DC 5257, provided that a separate rating must be based upon additional disability.

The schedular criteria for rating knee instability under DC 5257 were amended effective February 7, 2021.  The amendments apply to claims, such as the Veteran's, that were pending before VA as of that date, with the provision that the more favorable of the old and new criteria are to be applied.  If application of the revised regulation results in a higher rating, the effective date for the higher disability rating can be no earlier than the effective date of the change in the regulation.  38 U.S.C. § 5110(g).  Prior to the effective date of the change in the regulation, the Board can apply only the original version of the regulation.

Prior to February 7, 2021, DC 5257 provided a 10 percent rating for slight recurrent subluxation or lateral instability of the knee; a 20 percent rating for moderate recurrent subluxation or lateral instability of the knee; and a 30 percent rating for severe recurrent subluxation or lateral instability of the knee.

The terms slight, moderate, and severe as used in the various diagnostic codes are not defined in the VA Schedule for Rating Disabilities.  Rather than applying a mechanical formula, the Board must evaluate all of the evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 4.6. It should also be noted that use of terminology such as severe by VA examiners and others, although an element to be considered by the Board, is not dispositive of an issue.  All evidence must be evaluated in arriving at a decision regarding an increased rating.  38 C.F.R. §§ 4.2, 4.6.  In the absence of guidance, the Board will consider the following dictionary definitions for DC 5257's subjective adjectives. "Slight," as an adjective, is defined as "small of its kind or in amount." Slight, Merriam-Webster Dictionary Online, https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/slight, Definition 2, (last visited March 21, 2025). "Moderate," as an adjective, is defined as "not violent, severe, or intense"; "limited in scope or effect." Moderate, Merriam-Webster Dictionary Online, https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/moderate, Definitions 3 and 5 (last visited last visited March 21, 2025). "Severe," as an adjective, is defined as "causing discomfort or hardship"; "very painful or harmful"; "of a great degree." Severe, Merriam-Webster Dictionary Online, https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/severe, Definitions 6a, 6b, and 8 (last visited March 21, 2025).

Under the amended criteria, DC 5257 provides for recurrent subluxation or instability with a 30 percent rating that is unrepaired or failed repair of complete ligament tear causing persistent instability, and a medical provider prescribes both an assistive device (e.g., cane(s), crutch(es), walker) and bracing for ambulation; a 20 percent rating that is (a) a sprain, incomplete ligament tear, or repaired complete ligament tear causing persistent instability, and a medical provider prescribes a brace and/or assistive device (e.g., cane(s), crutch(es), walker) for ambulation (b) an unrepaired or failed repair of complete ligament tear causing persistent instability, and a medical provider prescribes either an assistive device (e.g., cane(s), crutch(es), walker) or bracing for ambulation; and a 10 percent rating for a sprain, incomplete ligament tear, or complete ligament tear (repaired, unrepaired, or failed repair) causing persistent instability, without a prescription from a medical provider for an assistive device (e.g., cane(s), crutch(es), walker) or bracing for ambulation.

DC 5257 also provides for patellar instability with a 30 percent rating for a diagnosed condition involving the patellofemoral complex with recurrent instability after surgical repair that requires a prescription by a medical provider for a brace and either a cane or a walker; a 20 percent rating for a diagnosed condition involving the patellofemoral complex with recurrent instability after surgical repair that requires a prescription by a medical provider for one of the following: a brace, cane, or walker; and a 10 percent rating for a diagnosed condition involving the patellofemoral complex with recurrent instability (with or without history of surgical repair) that does not require a prescription from a medical provider for a brace, cane, or walker.  Note (1) of the rating provides that for patellar instability, the patellofemoral complex consists of the quadriceps tendon, the patella, and the patellar tendon, and Note (2) states that a surgical procedure that does not involve repair of one or more patellofemoral components that contribute to the underlying instability shall not qualify as surgical repair for patellar instability (including, but not limited to, arthroscopy to remove loose bodies and joint aspiration).

As discussed further below, the evidence of record reflects that the schedular criteria of DC 5257 in effect prior to February 7, 2021 are more favorable to the Veteran and are for application here.

For the following reasons, separate disability ratings of 10 percent for bilateral knee instability are warranted.

The Veteran has consistently reported throughout the appeal period that his legs feel unstable all day and have caused him to fall.

In English v. Wilkie, the Court determined that DC 5257 does not "speak to the type of evidence required and, thus, objective medical evidence [is not] required to establish lateral knee instability under that DC."  30 Vet. App. 347, 349 (2018). The Court further held that "[t]he Board [cannot] categorically find objective medical evidence more probative than lay evidence with respect to [DC 5257] without supporting its conclusion with an adequate statement of reasons or bases." Id.

Given the Veteran's competent and credible lay statements in regard to his bilateral knee instability symptoms, those symptoms more nearly approximated slight recurrent subluxation or lateral instability.  However, in light of the specific and normal stability findings during the September 2023 VA examination, and a lack of indication in the Veteran's lay statements that the instability or recurrent subluxation was more than slight or small, the evidence does not reflect that the bilateral knee instability symptoms more nearly approximated moderate instability, or instability that is greater than small, but not violent, severe, or intense.

For the above reasons, the evidence of record reflects that, for the entire appeal period, the Veteran symptoms more closely approximated the criteria for disability ratings of 10 percent, but no higher, for his bilateral knee instability.  The evidence is neither evenly balanced nor approximately so with regard to whether disability ratings higher than 10 percent are warranted at any point during the appeal period.  Rather, the evidence at this time weighs persuasively against approximation of the symptoms required for disability ratings higher than 10 percent.  The benefit of the doubt doctrine is therefore not for application as to this claim.  Lynch, 21 F.4th at 781-82.

The Board has considered the Veteran's claims and decided entitlement based on the evidence.  The Veteran and his representative have not raised any other issues, nor have any other issues been reasonably raised by the record, with respect to his claims, to include entitlement to an extraschedular disability rating, entitlement to a separate disability rating, entitlement to a total disability rating based on individual unemployability due to service-connected disabilities (TDIU), or service connection secondary to bilateral knee disability.  Doucette v. Shulkin, 28 Vet. App. 366, 369-70 (2017).

 

Jonathan Hager

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	H. Styer, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.