Citation Nr: A25034915
Decision Date: 04/16/25	Archive Date: 04/16/25

DOCKET NO. 241007-484120
DATE: April 16, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for major depressive disorder, to include as secondary to service-connected postoperative reconstruction right anterior cruciate ligament (ACL), is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran had active service from December 1990 to November 1993.

This matter comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a January 2024 Higher Level Review rating decision by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In the October 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review in the January 2024 rating decision. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of that claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Entitlement to service connection for major depressive disorder

The Veteran contends that his major depressive disorder was caused by his service-connected postoperative reconstruction right ACL.

Service connection may be established on a secondary basis for a disability that is due to or the result of a service-connected disease or injury. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a). Service connection for a disability can be granted on a secondary basis if a Veteran has a (1) current disability; (2) a separate disability already subject to service connection; and (3) the first disability is due to or the result of or is aggravated by the service-connected disability. Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439 (1995); 38 C.F.R. § 3.310.

In the January 2024 rating decision, the RO made a favorable finding that the evidence showed a diagnosis of major depressive disorder. Therefore, with regard to the secondary service connection claim, the question for the Board is whether the Veteran's current disability is due to or aggravated by his service-connected postoperative reconstruction right ACL.

In March 2023, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination for his depression claim. He was diagnosed with major depressive disorder. The examiner opined that it was less likely than not that the Veteran's major depressive disorder was due to or the result of the Veteran's service-connected right knee condition. The examiner explained that the Veteran sought treatment for depression from 2012 to 2015 as his ability to function independently declined. The examiner noted that, at the time of his treatment for depression, the Veteran did not assert that his mood difficulties was due to his knee reconstruction, but rather to his confinement to a wheelchair and resulting social isolation and inability to work. The examiner determined that the severity of the Veteran's depressed mood was inconsistent with chronic arthritis and knee pain and, instead, was more consistent with his spinal cord injury and common psychological sequalae. The examiner noted that the Veteran's depressive symptoms were related to the MVA that occurred after service and his spinal cord injury, rather than the reconstruction of his right ACL.

There is, however, no opinion proffered as to whether the Veteran's major depressive disorder is aggravated by his service-connected postoperative reconstruction right ACL. See El-Amin v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 136 (2012) (a medical opinion addressing secondary service connection must discuss both causation and aggravation). 

Therefore, a remand is warranted to correct the pre-decisional duty to assist error and obtain an addendum opinion addressing aggravation so the Veteran's claim can be properly adjudicated.

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

1. Forward the Veteran's claims file to an appropriate medical professional for an addendum opinion to address the nature and etiology of the Veteran's major depressive disorder. The need for another clinical evaluation is left to the discretion of the medical professional offering the addendum opinion. The entire claims file must be made available to, and be reviewed by, the VA examiner.

The medical professional should provide an opinion on the following:

(a) Whether the Veteran's major depressive disorder is aggravated by the Veteran's service-connected postoperative reconstruction right ACL?

For the purposes of this remand only and for the limited purpose of conducting the examination and providing the above medical opinion, the examiner should assume that the Veteran's statements are true. If there is a medical reason to doubt their veracity, the examiner should explain why the Veteran's recollection is inconsistent with the principles of medical science or the evidence in this case.

The examiner is asked to explain the reasons behind any opinions expressed and conclusions rendered. If the examiner is unable to offer the requested opinion, it is essential that the examiner offer a rationale for the conclusion that an opinion cannot be provided without resort to speculation, together with a statement as to whether there is additional evidence that might enable an opinion to be provided, or whether the inability to provide the opinion is based on the limits of medical knowledge. See Jones v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 382, 390 (2010).

 

DUSTIN L. WARE

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	L. Derr, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.