Citation Nr: A25034455
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 240830-473277
DATE: April 15, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to a disabling rating in excess of 10 percent for service-connected left knee patellofemoral syndrome with synovial chondromatosis status post debridement of synovitis (left knee patellofemoral syndrome) is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a headache condition is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a sinus condition is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from October 2009 to October 2013.

The rating decision on appeal was issued in December 2023 under the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act.  In the decision, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) increased the disabling rating for the left knee patellofemoral syndrome to 10 percent, denied service connection for a headache condition, and denied service connection for a sinus condition.

In August 2024, the Veteran filed a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) and elected the Direct Review docket.  In its review, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the December 2023 AOJ decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  However, because the Board is remanding the claims, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

REMAND

Left Knee Patellofemoral Syndrome

The Veteran seeks a rating in excess of 10 percent for his service-connected left knee patellofemoral syndrome.  See August 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ.

For the following reasons, the Board remands the Veteran's claim to correct pre-decisional duty to assist errors under the provisions of 38?C.F.R. §?20.802.? 

In November 2023, the Veteran was afforded was Knee and Lower Leg VA Examination.  Notably, the examiner failed to provide the estimated range of motion measurements for the Veteran's disabilities after repeated use over time.  See November 2023 Knee and Lower Leg VA Examination.  

Prior to rating the Veteran's service-connected left knee patellofemoral syndrome at 10 percent disabling, the AOJ should have obtained an adequate medical examination addressing the current nature and severity of the Veteran's service-connected left knee patellofemoral syndrome.  See Sharp v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 26, 34-36 (2017).  On remand, an adequate medical examination should be obtained to correct the AOJ's pre-decisional duty to assist error.? 

Headaches & Sinus Condition

The Veteran seeks service connection for headaches and a sinus condition that he contends is caused by an in-service event, injury, or exposure.  He explained that he continued to have headaches with a stuffy nose that went away after nasal spray and Motrin.  See August 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim.

For the following reasons, the Board remands the Veteran's claim to correct pre-decisional duty to assist errors under the provisions of 38?C.F.R. §?20.802.? 

In October 2023, the Veteran was afforded a Headaches VA Examination.  The examiner noted that the Veteran has a diagnosis of migraine including migraine variants.  See October 2023 Headaches VA Examination.  The examiner acknowledged the Veteran's in-service complaint of headaches and that the Veteran participated in a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA) during service.  The examiner then opined that the Veteran's claimed condition was less likely than not caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activity, after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the veteran.  As a rationale, the examiner stated that there was no medical or scientific evidence available providing any indication of a relationship between the development of the condition at issue and the TERA and that no correlation could be confirmed between the toxic exposure and the development of the claimed condition.  See November 2023 Medical Opinion; see also September 2023 TERA Memo. 

In November 2023, the Veteran was afforded a Sinusitis/Rhinitis and Other Conditions of the Nose, Throat, Larynx, and Pharynx VA Examination.  The examiner stated the Veteran did not have or was ever diagnosed with a sinus, nose, throat, larynx, or pharynx condition.  See November 2023 Sinusitis/Rhinitis VA Examination.  As there was no diagnosis, the examiner did not render an opinion. 

A careful review of the record indocates that, while in service, the Veteran had cobblestoning of his pharynx.  See October 26, 2009, Record of Medical Care.  Also, while in service, the Veteran complained of headaches, nasal discharge, nasal congestion at night, and a sore throat.  The in-service examiner determined that the Veteran's tonsils were erythematous, inflamed, tender, enlarged, and showed an exudate and that he had pharyngitis.  See April 1, 2010, Record of Medical Care.  

When VA undertakes to obtain an evaluation, it must ensure that the evaluation is adequate.? See Barr v. Nicholson, 21?Vet. App.?303, 312 (2007).? Considering the foregoing records of medical care, the Board finds the medical opinion regarding headaches inadequate and the medical examination regarding sinusitis/rhinitis and other conditions of the nose, throat, larynx, and pharynx inadequate.  As to the medical opinion regarding headaches, the examiner did not consider whether the Veteran's headaches were at least as likely as not incurred in or caused by the documented in-service incurrence.  As to the medical examination regarding sinusitis/rhinitis and other conditions of the nose, throat, larynx, and pharynx, the examiner did not consider the in-service records evidencing pharynx issues.

Prior to denying the Veteran's service connection claim for a headache condition and a sinus condition, the AOJ should have obtained an adequate medical opinion addressing a headache condition and an adequate medical examination and opinion addressing a sinus condition.  On remand, an adequate medical examination and opinion should be obtained to correct the AOJ's pre-decisional duty to assist error.? 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for a VA exam to determine the current nature and severity of his service-connected left knee patellofemoral syndrome.  The examiner should ask the Veteran to provide a history as to the nature and severity of his left knee patellofemoral syndrome.  The examiner should provide a full description of the disability and report all signs and symptoms necessary for evaluating the Veteran's left knee patellofemoral syndrome under the rating criteria. 

All indicated tests and studies must be completed. Range of motion testing should be completed, to include testing for pain in active and passive motion, and in weight-bearing and non-weight-bearing.  If there is pain on range of motion, the examiner must state the range of motion point at which pain began. 

The examiner should ask the Veteran to (1) report any range of motion loss during flare-ups or following repeated use, (2) identify the frequency, duration, any precipitating factors, and any alleviating factors, and (3) describe additional functional loss, if any, suffered during flare-ups or following repeated use.

Additionally, based on the Veteran's reported history and the contemporaneous medical evidence, the examiner should provide an estimate of the functional loss, including loss of range of motion, due to flare-ups or following repeated use.  If it is not possible to provide a specific measurement, or an opinion regarding flare-ups or following repeated use, symptoms, or functional impairment without speculation, the examiner must state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training).

2. Obtain an addendum medical opinion from a new examiner addressing the nature and etiology of the Veteran's headache condition. The entire claims file should be made available to and reviewed by the examiner.

Following review of the entire record, the examiner should opine whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's headache condition had its onset during, or is otherwise related to, his military service, to specifically include his documented in-service incurrence.

All opinions should be supported by a medical explanation or rationale and must be based on consideration of all pertinent lay and medical evidence.

3. Schedule the Veteran for an examination to assess the nature and etiology of a sinusitis/rhinitis and other conditions of the nose, throat, larynx, and pharynx condition. The entire claims file should be reviewed by the examiner. The examiner should take a history from the Veteran as to the progression of his symptoms.

After review of the record, interview and examination of the Veteran, the examiner should respond to the following:

a)	Please clarify all disabilities affecting the Veteran's sinusitis/rhinitis and other conditions of the nose, throat, larynx, and pharynx.  Please note that a disability exists for VA purposes even when symptoms cannot be attributed to an underlying diagnosis if they cause functional impairment.  If no disability exists, this should be reconciled with the Veteran's report of symptoms.

b)	For each disability identified, opine whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that such either had onset in service, or is otherwise related to service, to specifically include his documented in-service incurrence.

All opinions should be supported by a medical explanation or rationale and must be based on consideration of all pertinent lay and medical evidence.

 

 

JIMMY L. BARDIN

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Ti'a L. Smith, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.