Citation Nr: A25034741
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 250214-509127
DATE: April 15, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an evaluation in excess of 30 percent for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include, post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and unspecified depressive disorder is denied. 

FINDING OF FACT

Giving the Veteran the benefit of all reasonable doubt, the Veteran's PTSD with unspecified depressive disorder, manifested, at most, in occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency. 

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for an evaluation in excess of 30 percent for PTSD with unspecified depression have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.125, 4.126, 4.130 Diagnostic Code (DC) 9411.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran retired from active duty after serving from January 1960 until August 1984. 

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from a February 2024 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ), which granted service connection for PTSD with depression evaluated at 30 percent. In February 2025, the Veteran filed a timely VA Form 10182, Notice of Disagreement (NOD) requesting the direct review docket with review by a Veterans Law Judge.  Accordingly, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

This appeal has been advanced on the docket pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 20.902(c). 

Entitlement to an evaluation in excess of 30 percent for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include, PTSD and unspecified depressive disorder is denied. 

Disability ratings are determined by the application of a schedule of ratings that is based on average impairment of earning capacity. 38 U.S.C. § 1155. Percentage ratings are determined by comparing the manifestations of a particular disability with the requirements contained in VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities. The percentage ratings contained in the Rating Schedule represent, as far as can practically be determined, the average impairment in earning capacity resulting from a disease or injury and the residual conditions in civilian occupations. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1.

If two ratings are potentially applicable, the higher rating will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating. Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7. In view of the number of atypical instances, it is not expected, especially with the more fully described grades of disabilities, that all cases will show all the findings specified. 38 C.F.R. § 4.21. It is the defined and consistently applied policy of VA to administer the law under a broad interpretation, consistent with the facts shown in every case. Any reasonable doubt regarding the degree of disability is resolved in favor of the Veteran. 38 C.F.R. § 3.102, 4.3.

All psychiatric disabilities are evaluated under a general rating formula for mental disorders. Under the general rating formula, a 10 percent rating is warranted for occupational and social impairment due to mild or transient symptoms which decrease work efficiency and ability to perform occupational tasks only during periods of significant stress, or symptoms controlled by continuous medication.

A 30 percent rating is assigned for occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks (although generally functioning satisfactorily, with routine behavior, self-care, and conversation normal), due to such symptoms as: depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks (weekly or less often), chronic sleep impairment, and mild memory loss (such as forgetting names, directions, recent events). Id.

A rating of 50 percent is assigned for occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to such symptoms as: flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped, speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short and long term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships.

A 70 percent rating is warranted for occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately, and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a worklike setting); and inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.

A rating of 100 percent is warranted when the disorder results in total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name.

The symptoms listed in the rating schedule are not intended to constitute an exhaustive list, but rather serve as examples of the type and degree of the symptoms, or their effects, that would justify a particular rating. See Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436 (2002). Nevertheless, all ratings in the general rating formula are associated with objectively observable symptomatology, and in Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 117 (2013), the Federal Circuit stated that "a veteran may only qualify for a given disability rating under § 4.130 by demonstrating the particular symptoms associated with that percentage, or others of similar severity, frequency, and duration." The Federal Circuit further noted that "§ 4.130 requires not only the presence of certain symptoms but also that those symptoms have caused occupational and social impairment in most of the referenced areas." Id. Thus, "[a]although the veteran's symptomatology is the primary consideration, the regulation also requires an ultimate factual conclusion as to the veteran's level of impairment in 'most areas.' "Id. at 118.

As such, the Board will consider both the Veteran's specific symptomatology as well as the occupational and social impairment to determine whether an evaluation higher than his current 30 percent rating is warranted.  

The July 2023 PTSD examination report noted that the Veteran stated he previously avoided talking about Vietnam. The Veteran's primary diagnosis is PTSD related to Veteran's military traumas which began when he was stationed in Vietnam. For one year while in Vietnam, he was assigned the task of unloading and loading dead bodies during the TET III offensive. The first truck he saw had dead bodies "piled wide and tall." While in Vietnam, the Veteran was also exposed to mortar and rocket attacks and feared for his life. 

After Vietnam, the Veteran had the same task of loading and unloading bodies at Travis Air Force Base for two years. There were times when the Veteran had to open the containers and view the bodies or body parts for identification purposes or to retrieve documentation that would provide information on where to send the bodies. 

Despite the Veteran's traumatic war experiences, the Veteran had a long and successful career. He served on active duty for 25 years and achieved the enlisted rank of E-8. After retiring from honorable military service, the Veteran worked for a defense contractor for a short period and then worked for the federal Government for approximately 15 years and retired at the end of 1999.

The Veteran's trauma symptoms include, chronic sleep impairment, some issues with shortened temper, being hypervigilant, and frequent and intrusive distressing memories of his military trauma. When he watches television with something that reminds him of bodies, he gets distressed and emotionally upset as he did in the psychologist's office during the VA examination.  The Veteran also has a depressed mood with disturbances of motivation and mood.

The Veteran had fair grooming and his psychomotor functioning was generally within normal limits, but his gait was somewhat slow and shuffling.  His manner of interaction was cooperative and courteous. His speech was normal in rate, rhythm, tone, and volume.  His thought processes were clear, logical, coherent, and goal-directed.  He reported his mood to be "down in the dumps," and his affect was mood congruent.  He was  tearful and sobbing as he spoke about his first time in Vietnam handling dead bodies, unloading them from a truck overflowing with bodies.  He said he has never gotten the image out of his mind. The Veteran denied any homicidal or suicidal ideations.  

The Veteran's wife passed away in 2012 after being married to the Veteran for approximately 47 years. He lives with his daughter and her family, which includes his son-in-law, granddaughters, and a great grandchild. The Veteran said stated he got along well with everyone in the home.    

The January 2024 addendum to the July 2023 VA PTSD examination report, stated that the Veteran's occupational and social impairment was due to mild or transient symptoms which decrease work efficiency and ability to perform occupational tasks only during significant periods of stress. Occupational and social impairment at this level is generally evaluated at 10 percent. 

After considering the evidence of record and giving the Veteran the benefit of all reasonable doubt, the Board finds that the Veteran's symptoms more closely approximate the criteria for a 30 percent disability rating and no higher. The Veteran does not have any of the symptoms describing a level of impairment consistent with the 50, 70, or 100 percent criteria for DC 9411. 

(continued on next page)

?

The criteria for the next higher rating of 50 percent have not been met or approximated. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, DC 9411. Therefore, the Board finds that the other specified trauma and stressor related disorder disability warrants a 30 percent evaluation, and no higher, and the claim must be denied.

 

 

B. D. WATSON

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	W. Polk

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.