Citation Nr: A25034172
Decision Date: 04/14/25	Archive Date: 04/14/25

DOCKET NO. 240822-466268
DATE: April 14, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea as secondary to posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for headaches as secondary to posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for erectile dysfunction (secondary to PTSD or medications) is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for hypertension, including as secondary to post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from September 1993 to September 1998.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from September 5, 2023, November 9, 2023, and November 15, 2023 rating decisions issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO), which denied the claims on appeal.

In the August 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

VA regulations require that the Board contact an appellant and request clarification if the Board cannot identify which review option an appellant intends to select. See 38 C.F.R. § 20.202(f). A Notice of Disagreement (NOD) may be unclear if an appellant attaches evidence to a NOD indicating that the appellant is seeking Direct Review, as evidence submitted along with an NOD may not be considered by the Board under that review option. See Edwards v. McDonough, 36 Vet. App. 56 (2023).

In the instant appeal, the Veteran's attorney submitted an argument along with the August 2024VA Form 10182. The argument did not include any new contentions or evidence. The present appeal is therefore factually distinguishable from Edwards, and the Board can proceed with a decision without clarifying the Veteran's intent pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 20.202(f).

The Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the September 5, 2023, November 9, 2023, and November 15, 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ/RO) decisions on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ/RO decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ/RO in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

By way of procedural background, the Veteran initially submitted claims for service connection in May 2022, which included claims for obstructive sleep apnea, erectile dysfunction, headaches and hypertension. A rating decision was issued in October 2022, which denied the claims due to no link to service and no diagnosis.  

In March 2023, the Veteran sought a supplemental claim for sleep apnea and erectile dysfunction. In April 2023, the Veteran sought a supplemental claim for hypertension. A rating decision was issued in May 2023 that denied the claim for erectile dysfunction (secondary to PTSD or mediation) as there was no nexus. The May 2023 rating decision noted new and relevant evidence and reconsidered the claim. Under the AMA, favorable findings made by the AOJ/RO are binding on the Board as there is no evidence to the contrary. 38?C.F.R. §?3.104(c).

In July 2023, the Veteran sought a supplemental claim for headaches. In September 2023, the Veteran sought a supplemental claim for erectile dysfunction.

A rating decision was issued in September 2023, which denied the claim for hypertension, including as secondary to posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) as it was not related a service connected disability nor was it incurred during military service. The September 2023 rating decision noted new and relevant evidence and reconsidered the claim. Under the AMA, favorable findings made by the AOJ/RO are binding on the Board as there is no evidence to the contrary. 38?C.F.R. § 3.104(c).

A rating decision was issued in October 2023, which denied the claim for obstructive sleep apnea as it neither incurred in nor was caused by service. 

Following the receipt of additional evidence, a rating decision was issued in November 2023, following a special review, which denied the claim for obstructive sleep apnea as it neither incurred in nor was caused by service. 

A rating decision was issued in November 2023, which denied the claims of erectile dysfunction (secondary to PTSD or medication) and headaches as secondary to posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) as there was no diagnosis. The November 2023 rating decision noted new and relevant evidence and reconsidered the claim. Under the AMA, favorable findings made by the AOJ/RO are binding on the Board as there is no evidence to the contrary. 38?C.F.R. §?3.104(c).

The Veteran timely submitted a notice of disagreement (10182/NOD) in August 2024, seeking review of the claim. As such, the claims for obstructive sleep apnea as secondary to posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), headaches as secondary to posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), erectile dysfunction (secondary to PTSD or medications) and hypertension, including as secondary to post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) are properly before the Board for adjudication.

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea as secondary to posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD).

The Veteran asserts that his service-connected PTSD has resulted in substantial weight gain which then caused or aggravated his obstructive sleep apnea. See August 2024 NOD argument. 

A review of the Veteran's service treatment records (STRs) are silent for any sleep, apnea, snoring or breathing problems. The Veterans STRs show that in February 1995, the Veteran's weight exceed the standard by 30 lbs. and the Veteran was assessed with exogenous obesity and sent to the nutrition clinic. 

During the Veteran's April 2022 VA treatment, the Veteran denied sleep apnea. See Houston VAMC. 

In a May 2022 statement, the Veteran reported "I am currently service connected for my PTSD. I have taken medications for my mental health condition to include Mirtazapine 15 mg. Because of my mental health condition, I have leg kicks during sleep and night time sweating."

The Veteran provided a May 2022 private medical opinion. The provider opined: "As a licensed health care provider, it is my professional medical opinion that it is at least as likely as not (a 50%/50% probability) that this veteran's weight gain and/or obesity is due to their service connected condition of PTSD, and that overweight/obesity condition led to, caused, and/or aggravated the current Obstructive Sleep Apnea." See Z.M., M.D.

The Board finds that the May 2022 private examiner opinion is overly-broad and is not specified to the Veteran. The private examiner relies on broad-based studies that are not specific to the Veteran and did not provide a rationale specific to the Veteran. The private provider included a "STOP-Bang Questionnaire" which noted the Veteran was at high risk for obstructive sleep apnea. The questionnaire did not support a relationship between weight gain/obesity and/or PTSD and/or sleep apnea. Furthermore, the provider relies on his being "a licensed health care provider" as the basis for is general conclusion. There is no evidence the provider reviewed the Veteran's military or medical record. As such, the Board does not find this opinion to be probative and no weight is assigned. 

The Veteran was afforded a May 2022 VA sleep apnea examination. The VA examiner noted a diagnosis of obstructive sleep apnea. The Veteran reported onset in 2012 when his wife noticed that he tossed and turned, snored loudly, and woke up short of breath. Veteran stated he woke up feeling tired and would wake up on the floor. The Veteran reported that he drank caffeine and took anti-oxidant packets. Medical attention was sought, and the Veteran was prescribed Mirtazapine 15mg taken daily before bedtime. The Veteran reported that Mirtazapine helped him sleep. The Veteran's sleep study showed moderate OSA. The Veteran reported he got 6-7 hours of sleep per night.

In a separate May 2022 medical opinion, the VA examiner opined that the claimed sleep apnea was less likely than not due to or the result of Veteran's service connected condition. The VA examiner reasoned: "Review of records note that the Veteran was diagnosed with PTSD in 2015. Obesity with a BMI of 30 was noted in 2011. Review of STRs note that he was able to lose 20 intentionally by changing his eating habits. He has been able to maintain his weight since 2017. There is no evidence that PTSD caused weight gain. Results of the Veteran's sleep study shows that the Veteran has obstructive sleep apnea, which is by itself not caused by a mental disorder. Obstructive sleep apnea occurs when the muscles in the back of the throat relax, causing the airway to narrow. This may lower the level of oxygen in the blood, causing the brain to sense this inability to breathe and briefly rouses the person from sleep so that the airway can be reopened. Mental health issues such as PTSD can contribute to sleep difficulties, however, OSA is caused by a mechanical problem, not by a mental disorder."

In a March 2023 private sleep apnea assessment and opinion, the private examiner cited to several medical studies and opined: 

Medical Opinion #1:

It is at least as likely as not (a 50%/50% probability) that the veteran's weight gain and obesity is due to and/or related to his service connected Posttraumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD).

Medical Opinion #2:

It is at least as likely as not (a 50%/50% probability) that the veteran's Obstructive Sleep Apnea is secondary to, related to, and/or aggravated by the weight gain and obesity from the service connected Posttraumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD).

Medical Opinion #3: 

It is at least as likely as not (a 50%/5O% probability) that without the veteran's weight gain and obesity his Obstructive Sleep Apnea would not have occurred. See C.M.B, PA-C, MPLC.	

The March 2023 private examiner stated: "Rationale as below are based upon a review of the available medical records and VA documentation which may include the following: Military service medical records and personnel records (C-File), Civilian medical records, Documentation in progress notes to include physical exams and diagnostic impressions, Radiological study reports, Laboratory studies, Claims file paperwork, VARO correspondence, Veteran lay statements, Previous C&P exams, Clinical experience and expertise, and Medical literature review."  

The Board notes that the private examiner notes the review may (emphasis added) include the items listed. The Board further notes that while the examiner reports a possible review of such record, the private examiner relied on the "Veteran's credible lay statement, he reports a current formal diagnosis of Posttraumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD), which is service-connected inclusive of commonly known symptomatology to include: nocturnal night kicks, vivid nightmares, and insomnia." 

The Board finds that if the private examiner had reviewed the Veteran's record, the private would not have to rely on "this Veteran's credible lay statement." The Board also finds that the private examiner provided numerous overly-broad studies with summaries of each. However, the Board finds that the various studies were not specific to the Veteran nor did the private examiner summarize the many studies as to the Veteran. The only discussion as to this specific Veteran was the Veteran's statement regarding a PTSD diagnosis, weight gain and the private examiner's overly broad opinions. As such, the Board does not find this private medical opinion to be probative. 

The Veteran was afforded a June 2023 VA sleep apnea examination. The VA examiner noted a diagnosis of obstructive sleep apnea. The Veteran reported onset in 2012 when his wife noticed his snoring, "flipping around" during sleep and that he was gasping for breath.

In a separate June 2023 medical opinion, the VA examiner opined that the claimed sleep apnea was less likely than not due to or the result of the Veteran's service connected condition. The VA examiner reasoned that the "veteran was diagnosed with sleep apnea and is claiming it is secondary to PTSD. There is no evidence to suggest that PTSD has a causal relationship with sleep apnea. Occasionally medications which treat PTSD may have a causal relationship, but I did not find one between Mirtazapine and sleep apnea. A reference found that Mirtazapine had no significant affect on claimants with sleep apnea, it may actually pose a benefit for individuals with sleep apnea." The VA examiner further reasoned that "the first reported trial in humans was a case study from Castillo et al. (24) in which they provided elderly male suffering from severe SDB (consisting of predominately CSA) with 150mg of mirtazapine for a 3-mo period. Following treatment, there was a significant decrease in AHI (54.9 to 9.3 events/h) and both a reduction in daytime sleepiness and improvement in self-reported daytime functioning. These positive findings were replicated in a randomized, double-blind placebo-controlled crossover trial assessing both males and females with moderate SDB (23). Following 7 days with 150mg of mirtazapine, mean AHI was significantly reduced from 22.3 to 11.4 events/h, arousal index was significantly reduced from 41.1 to 28.1 events/h, and sleep efficiency significantly increased from 82.9% to 90.1% compared with a placebo (23). Furthermore, it has also been established that mirtazapine can enhance sleep continuity and architecture in patients suffering from depression (27). In contrast, Marshall et al. (28) carried out two randomized placebo-controlled trials investigating the effect of mirtazapine on claimants with SDB and found no significant changes in any index of sleep or sleep apnea. Mirtazapine reduces susceptibility to hypocapnic central sleep apnea in males with sleep-disordered breathing: a pilot study...J Appl Physiol (1985). 2021 Jul 1; 131(1): 414-423. It is less likely than not that the sleep apnea is due to or the result of the veteran's PTSD."

In an October 2023 secondary medical opinion, the VA examiner opined that the claimed sleep apnea was less likely than not due to or the result of the Veteran's service connected condition. The VA examiner reasoned that the "veteran was diagnosed with Sleep apnea and is claiming it is related to obesity that developed secondary to his PTSD. The veteran's weight has been relatively stable for the last 20 yrs, fluctuating slightly between 195 and 207 pounds with his weight being 200 at the time of the evaluation for sleep apnea on 6/12/23. At his enlistment his weight was 194 so from enlistment to the time of his exam his weight changed by 6 pounds. His BMI was 29.5 which is considered overweight not obese, his neck circumference was 40.4 cm (15.9"), typically a neck circumference under 17" is not considered significant. I do agree that PTSD can be a cause of weight gain but since the veteran has not had a significant weight gain overall since his enlistment and his current weight and size are not considered significant signs of obesity. It is less likely than not that the veteran's OSA is due to PTSD and weight gain associated with PTSD."

The Board notes that the Veteran has been afforded secondary service connection examinations, but has not been afforded a medical opinion regarding aggravation of his sleep apnea by a service-connected condition. 

A remand is required for an adequate VA examination and opinion. Where VA provides the veteran with an examination in a service connection claim, the examination must be adequate. Barr v Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007). A medical opinion based upon an inaccurate factual premise has no probative value. Reonal v Brown, 5 Vet. App. 458, 461 (1993).

Under the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), the Board must remand to the AOJ/RO to correct pre-decisional duty to assist errors (including when the AOJ/RO failed to make reasonable efforts to obtain VA treatment records or relevant federal or private treatment records, failed to obtain a VA examination, or provided an inadequate VA examination or opinion). Additionally, the Board must remand for any pre-decisional error on the part of the AOJ/RO to satisfy its duties under 38 U.S.C. § 5103A and may remand for correction of any other error by the AOJ/RO in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty, if correction of the error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the appellant's claim. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802 (a).

For the above reasons, a remand is warranted for a new opinion to cure a pre-decisional duty to assist error.

Entitlement to service connection for headaches as secondary to posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD).

The Veteran asserts that his service-connected PTSD has resulted in the Veteran's headaches. See August 2024 NOD argument. 

A review of the Veteran's service treatment records (STRs) are silent for any headache, head or brain symptoms.  

The Veteran's post-service VA treatment is silent for headaches. See Houston VAMC. 

In a May 2022 statement, the Veteran reported "I am seeking a service connection for my Headaches secondary to my service-connected Posttraumatic Stress Disorder. I frequently experience stress and anxiety. I have noticed that I get headaches when these symptoms are at their worst. My headaches occur weekly. The headache pain generally occurs around my temple region. At least once every couple of months, they knock me out of commission to the point that I am incapacitated and unable to do any normal daily activities for 2 hours. During my headaches, I have dizziness and throbbing pain. I takeover-the-counter Aleve to help treat these symptoms."

The Veteran was afforded a June 2022 VA headache examination. The VA examiner noted no diagnosis of headaches was confirmed, there were no objective abnormalities noted from exam and the Veteran's symptoms were subjective only and did not warrant a diagnosis at the time of the examination. The Veteran reported onset of headaches in 2010 when he started noticing headaches across the forehead that would last 15 mins. The Veteran denied any specific injury. 

In a separate June 2022 medical opinion, the VA examiner opined that the Veteran's claimed headache condition was less likely than not due to or the result of Veteran's service connected condition. The VA examiner reasoned: "Unable to confirm a current chronic diagnosis with current available records and/or today's exam. Therefore no nexus or plausible secondary relationship is established." 

The Veteran provided a July 2023 private opinion regarding the Veteran's headaches. The private examiner opined "It is at least as likely as not (a 50%/50% probability) that the veteran's current Migraine Headaches condition is secondary to, related to, and/or aggravated by his service-connected Posttraumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD)." The private provider relied on the Veteran's statement and numerous medical studies. See C.M.B., PA-C, MPLC

The March 2023 private examiner stated: "Rationale as below are based upon a review of the available medical records and VA documentation which may include the following: Military service medical records and personnel records (C-File), Civilian medical records, Documentation in progress notes to include physical exams and diagnostic impressions, Radiological study reports, Laboratory studies, Claims file paperwork, VARO correspondence, Veteran lay statements, Previous C&P exams, Clinical experience and expertise, and Medical literature review."  

The Board notes that the private examiner notes the review may (emphasis added) include the items listed. The Board further notes that while the examiner reports a possible review of such record, the private examiner relied on the "Veteran's credible lay statement," but did not discuss the Veteran's headache history or as it manifested with regard to the Veteran's mental disorder. Rather, the private examiner stated that the Veteran "has symptomology consistent with the regulatory standard for the disability of migraine headaches per 38 CFR." The private examine did not discuss the Veteran's symptoms but stated, "The current literature, as seen below, provides a nexus between this veteran's current migraine headaches condition and his service-connected posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and associated stress."  

The Board finds the private examiner did not address the Veteran's headache history, but relied on numerous overly-broad studies with summaries of each. The Board finds that the various studies were not specific to the Veteran and did the private examiner did not provide any rationale specific to this Veteran and the cited medical literature. The only discussion as to this specific Veteran was the Veteran's statement regarding his headaches, diagnosis and the private examiner's overly broad opinion.  As such, the Board does not find this private medical opinion to be probative. 

The Veteran was afforded an August 2023 VA headache examination. The VA examiner noted a diagnosis of migraine, including migraine variants. The Veteran reported recurrent chronic headaches since 2010. The Veteran reported headaches were about 2-3 times per week, bilaterally, lasting several hours at a time. The Veteran reported he never had imaging or neurologic work up for this and took NSAIDs for the headaches as needed.

In a separate August 2023 medical opinion, the VA examiner opined that the claimed headache condition was less likely than not due to or the result of the Veteran's service connected condition. After a review of the Veteran's medical evidence, the VA examiner reasoned that "the claimed headaches condition was less likely than not incurred in or caused by the PTSD. There is no evidence to suggest that the headache condition is due to any one particular cause, namely the PTSD. The vast majority of migraines are idiopathic with completely unexplained causes. The condition is occasionally vascular in nature, hormonal, emotional, genetic, medication related, due to OSA or CPAP use, due to brain lesions/masses or many other causes. I see no supportive documentation in the e-file or the evidence specifically noted above to support such a connection. Attributing the headaches to PTSD without objective evidence would be entirely speculative."

The Board notes that the Veteran has been afforded secondary service connection examinations, but has not been afforded a medical opinion regarding aggravation of his headaches by a service-connected condition. 

A remand is required for an adequate VA examination and opinion. Where VA provides the veteran with an examination in a service connection claim, the examination must be adequate. Barr v Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007). A medical opinion based upon an inaccurate factual premise has no probative value. Reonal v Brown, 5 Vet. App. 458, 461 (1993).

Under the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), the Board must remand to the AOJ/RO to correct pre-decisional duty to assist errors (including when the AOJ/RO failed to make reasonable efforts to obtain VA treatment records or relevant federal or private treatment records, failed to obtain a VA examination, or provided an inadequate VA examination or opinion). Additionally, the Board must remand for any pre-decisional error on the part of the AOJ/RO to satisfy its duties under 38 U.S.C. § 5103A and may remand for correction of any other error by the AOJ/RO in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty, if correction of the error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the appellant's claim. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802 (a).

For the above reasons, a remand is warranted for a new opinion to cure a pre-decisional duty to assist error.

Entitlement to service connection for erectile dysfunction (secondary to PTSD or medications).

The Veteran asserts that his service-connected PTSD has resulted in erectile dysfunction (ED). See August 2024 NOD argument. 

A review of the Veteran's service treatment records (STRs) are silent for any erectile dysfunction or any sexual symptoms. 

The Veteran's post-service VA treatment is silent for any complaints, diagnosis or treatment for erectile dysfunction. See Houston VAMC. 

In a May 2022 statement, the Veteran reported, "I am seeking a service connection for my Erectile Dysfunction secondary to my Posttraumatic Stress Disorder. After being diagnosed with my service-connected PTSD, for which I take Mirtazapine 15mg. I started having difficulty achieving and maintaining an erection for purposes of sexual activity. My doctor prescribed Viagra for my ED. This has been a significant source of frustration for me and my wife."

The Veteran was afforded a June 2022 VA male reproductive examination. The VA examiner noted a diagnosis of erectile dysfunction, with or without penile deformity. The Veteran reported onset in 2007 and believed it could have been from his anxiety. 

In a separate June 2022 medical opinion, the VA examiner opined that the claimed ED condition was less likely than not due to or the result of Veteran's service connected condition. The VA examiner reasoned that the "Veteran claims ED (erectile dysfunction) secondary to PTSD. He does have a diagnosis for ED and has had treatment for it since 2019 according to available records. Although he does [have] PTSD which has been known to contribute to ED, he has other diagnoses which is more likely the cause.  He has had high cholesterol, hypertension, smoking and alcohol usage in his medical history which have been commonly known to cause ED. ED usually has a multifactorial etiology. Organic, physiologic, endocrine, and psychogenic factors are involved in the ability to obtain and maintain erections. In general, ED is divided into 2 broad categories, organic and psychogenic. Although most ED was once attributed to psychological factors, pure psychogenic ED is in fact uncommon; however, many men with organic etiologies may also have an associated psychogenic component. Organic ED involves abnormalities the penile arteries, veins, or both and is the most common cause of ED, especially in older men. When the problem is arterial, it is usually caused by arteriosclerosis, or hardening of the arteries, although trauma to the arteries may be the cause. The controllable risk factors for arteriosclerosis--being overweight, lack of exercise, high cholesterol, high blood pressure, and cigarette smoking--can cause erectile failure often before progressing to affect the heart. Therefore, his ED is less likely than not (less than 50 percent probability) due to or the result of the Veteran's PTSD." (Citations omitted.)

The Veteran provided a March 2023 private medical opinion. The examiner opined "it is at least as likely as not (a 50%/50% probability) that the veteran's Erectile Dysfunction condition is secondary to, related to, and/or aggravated by his service-connected Posttraumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) with medication treatment." The private examiner relied on the Veteran's statement and several medical studies. See C.M.B., PA-C, MPLC.

The March 2023 private examiner stated: "Rationale as below are based upon a review of the available medical records and VA documentation which may include the following: Military service medical records and personnel records (C-File), Civilian medical records, Documentation in progress notes to include physical exams and diagnostic impressions, Radiological study reports, Laboratory studies, Claims file paperwork, VARO correspondence, Veteran lay statements, Previous C&P exams, Clinical experience and expertise, and Medical literature review."  

The Board notes that the private examiner notes the review may (emphasis added) include the items listed. The Board further notes that while the examiner reports a possible review of such record, the private examiner relied on the "Veteran's credible lay statement," in which the Veteran reported he took 15 mg of Mirtazapine for his service-connected PTSD. The Board finds that if the private examiner had reviewed the Veteran's record, the private would not have to rely on "this Veteran's credible lay statement" to identify when and how much of the medication the Veteran had been prescribed. 

The Board also finds that the private examiner provided numerous overly-broad studies with summaries of each. However, the Board finds that the various studies were not specific to the Veteran nor did the private examiner summarize the many studies as to the Veteran. The only discussion as to this specific Veteran was the Veteran's statement regarding his erectile dysfunction, diagnosis and the private examiner's overly broad opinion. As such, the Board does not find this private medical opinion to be probative. 

The Veteran was afforded an April 2023 VA male reproductive examination. The VA examiner noted a diagnosis of erectile dysfunction, with or without penile deformity. The Veteran reported onset in 2009 when he began to notice he could not achieve an erection and if he could, he could not keep his erection. Medical attention was sought and medication was prescribed with some improvement. The Veteran stated he recently noticed medication was not helping anymore, his dosage was adjusted and the medication then worked again. The Veteran reported he had taken mirtazapine for PTSD since 2016 and did drink a 6 pack of beer daily and currently smoked 1 pack per day (PPD).

In a separate April 2023 medical opinion, the VA examiner opined that the claimed ED condition was less likely than not due to or the result of the Veteran's service connected condition. The VA examiner reasoned that the "Veterans claimed erectile dysfunction (secondary to PTSD or medications) is less likely than not due to or the result of posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD). Records indicate that the Veteran was on mirtazapine for PTSD prior to his ED condition. A nexus cannot be established."

The Veteran provided a private September 2023 medical opinion. The private examiner opined: "It is at least as likely as not (a 50%/50% probability) that the veteran's Erectile Dysfunction is secondary to, related to, and/or aggravated by his service-connected Posttraumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) with medication treatment." See D.G.P., RN, FNP-C.

The Board notes the private examiner offered a broad medical opinion but did not provide a rationale. The private examiner provided numerous medical studies but none were specific to the Veteran nor did the private examiner provide a rationale specific to the Veteran in light of those various studies. Because the opinion lacks a rationale, the Board does not find this opinion to be probative. 

As part of his September 2023 supplemental claim, the Veteran provided a statement. The Veteran reported: "I am seeking service-connection for my Erectile Dysfunction. After being diagnosed with my service-connected Post Traumatic Stress Disorder, for which I take Mirtazapine, I started having difficulty achieving and maintaining an erection for purposes of sexual activity. My doctor prescribed Viagra and Cialis for my ED, but it is not always effective. This had been a significant source of frustration for me and my wife. It almost caused a divorce, and low self esteem."

The Board notes that the Veteran has been afforded secondary service connection examinations, but has not been afforded a medical opinion regarding aggravation of his sleep apnea by a service-connected condition. 

A remand is required for an adequate VA examination and opinion. Where VA provides the veteran with an examination in a service connection claim, the examination must be adequate. Barr v Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007). A medical opinion based upon an inaccurate factual premise has no probative value. Reonal v Brown, 5 Vet. App. 458, 461 (1993).

Under the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), the Board must remand to the AOJ/RO to correct pre-decisional duty to assist errors (including when the AOJ/RO failed to make reasonable efforts to obtain VA treatment records or relevant federal or private treatment records, failed to obtain a VA examination, or provided an inadequate VA examination or opinion). Additionally, the Board must remand for any pre-decisional error on the part of the AOJ/RO to satisfy its duties under 38 U.S.C. § 5103A and may remand for correction of any other error by the AOJ/RO in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty, if correction of the error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the appellant's claim. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802 (a).

For the above reasons, a remand is warranted for a new opinion to cure a pre-decisional duty to assist error.

Entitlement to service connection for hypertension, including as secondary to post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD).

The Veteran asserts that his service-connected PTSD has resulted in hypertension (HTN). See August 2024 NOD argument. 

A review of the Veteran's service treatment records (STRs) are silent for any elevated blood pressure or hypertension symptoms. 

A review of the Veteran's post-service VA treatment records the Veteran's blood pressure readings from April 1999 and was initially 152/69. See Houston VAMC. 

In a May 2022 statement, the Veteran reported: "I am seeking a service connection for Hypertension related to my service-connected Posttraumatic Stress Disorder. After developing my service-connected PTSD, I have been less motivated, less active, and have eaten less-healthy food options as a source of comfort. I believe that my Hypertension condition developed as a direct result of my weight gain, which I attribute to my PTSD and related symptoms. I weighed about 178 lbs. at the military entrance, 195 lbs. at separation, and currently, weigh 198lbs."

The Veteran was afforded a June 2022 VA hypertension examination. The VA examiner noted a diagnosis of hypertension. The Veteran reported onset around 2008 when he went to the ER for pain in his knee and was kept several more hours due to high blood pressure.

 In a separate June 2022 medical opinion, the VA examiner opined that the claimed hypertension condition was less likely than not due to or the result of Veteran's service connected condition. The VA examiner reasoned that the "Veteran claims HTN (hypertension) secondary to PTSD. Although PTSD may contribute to HTN, his other conditions are the more likely the cause.  He does have the following conditions and risk factors that are the likely caused of his HTN which have been documented in his records: obesity, history of smoking, poor diet (excessive drinking) and poor exercise. Therefore claimed HTN is less likely than not (less than 50 percent probability) due to or the result of the Veteran's service connected PTSD." (Citations omitted.)

The Veteran provided a March 2023 private medical opinion. The examiner opined "it is at least as likely as not (a 50%/50% probability) that the veteran's current Hypertension condition is secondary to, related to, and/or aggravated by his service-connected Post Traumatic Stress Disorder." The private examiner relied on the Veteran's statement and several medical studies. See C.M.B., PA-C, MPLC.

The March 2023 private examiner stated: "Rationale as below are based upon a review of the available medical records and VA documentation which may include the following: Military service medical records and personnel records (C-File), Civilian medical records, Documentation in progress notes to include physical exams and diagnostic impressions, Radiological study reports, Laboratory studies, Claims file paperwork, VARO correspondence, Veteran lay statements, Previous C&P exams, Clinical experience and expertise, and Medical literature review."  

The Board notes that the private examiner notes the review may (emphasis added) include the items listed. The Board further notes that while the examiner reports a possible review of such record, the private examiner relied on the "Veteran's credible lay statement," in which the Veteran reported he did not have a history of high blood pressure prior to his mental health condition. 

The Board finds the private examiner did not address the Veteran's blood pressure history. The Board also finds that the private examiner provided numerous overly-broad studies with summaries of each. However, the Board finds that the various studies were not specific to the Veteran nor did the private examiner summarize the many studies as to the Veteran. The only discussion as to this specific Veteran was the Veteran's statement regarding his hypertension, diagnosis and the private examiner's overly broad opinion. As such, the Board does not find this private medical opinion to be probative. 

The Veteran was afforded an August 2023 VA hypertension examination. After a thorough review and recitation of the Veteran's medical history, the VA examiner noted a diagnosis of hypertension. 

At the August 2023 VA hypertension examination, the Veteran reported the following: the Veteran reported to the ER after straining a hamstring during ball game. The Veteran stated his BP "was really high and they wouldn't let me leave until it came down." The Veteran reported that he "could see stars... was having SOB [shortness of breath]. My chest was fluttering." The Veteran stated a doctor told him sxs [his symptoms] were due to his high BP. The Veteran doesn't recall what BP was. BP came down and the Veteran was advised to f/u [follow-up] with PCP [primary care provider] re starting HTN med. Reports he was f/u with PCP at Kelsey Seybold next day and started on meds at that time. States he was started on a "water pill." When he initiated care at MEDVAMC, he was started on amlodipine and prior med was d/c [discontinued].  States BP well controlled on meds since then. He checks his BP at home and wife checks once per month. Runs 120/80s. Reports having PTSD sxs since "couple years after Army." He didn't seek treatment until 10 yrs after separation. Seen somewhere besides VA but doesn't recall details. Veteran states he was not receiving tx [treatment] for PTSD when he went to ER. States he was having same sxs few times per week 'for couple years" before dx of HTN [hypertension]. Veteran reports PTSD sxs "manageable" now. Reports problems falling asleep, anxiety, depressed at times. Has panic attacks couple times per month; "hard to breathe," "heart racing.... Beating a thousand times per minute." Denies having NMs, FBs, SI/HI.  No weight or appetite changes, anhedonia. On mirtazapine & compliant with med. Also uses energy drinks (one each AM) & smoke cigarettes so notes sometimes BP elevated in AM. No h/o [history of] CVAs, CAD, CHF, MI, congenital heart defect, murmurs. No cp, SOB, palpitations, BLE edema, PND, orthopnea.

In a separate August 2023 medical opinion, the VA examiner opined that the claimed hypertension was less likely than not due to or the result of the Veteran's service connected condition. The VA examiner reasoned that: "Credible medical references do not show PTSD is a risk factor for development of HTN. HTN is not recognized as a comorbidity of PTSD. Given this and the concerns expressed regarding Veteran's personal statements and the IME opinion submitted, it is my opinion that it is less likely than not that Veteran's hypertension is due to or the result of his SC [service-connected] PTSD."

The Board finds that the August 2023 VA examiner provided an extensive review of the medical references regarding hypertension, secondary hypertension, PTSD and the impact of PTSD on blood pressure and heart rate and the Veteran population. The Board will not recite them here as the opinion is incorporated by reference.

The Board notes that the Veteran has been afforded secondary service connection examinations, but has not been afforded a medical opinion regarding aggravation of his hypertension by a service-connected condition. 

A remand is required for an adequate VA examination and opinion. Where VA provides the veteran with an examination in a service connection claim, the examination must be adequate. Barr v Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007). A medical opinion based upon an inaccurate factual premise has no probative value. Reonal v Brown, 5 Vet. App. 458, 461 (1993).

Under the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), the Board must remand to the AOJ/RO to correct pre-decisional duty to assist errors (including when the AOJ/RO failed to make reasonable efforts to obtain VA treatment records or relevant federal or private treatment records, failed to obtain a VA examination, or provided an inadequate VA examination or opinion). Additionally, the Board must remand for any pre-decisional error on the part of the AOJ/RO to satisfy its duties under 38 U.S.C. § 5103A and may remand for correction of any other error by the AOJ/RO in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty, if correction of the error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the appellant's claim. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802 (a).

For the above reasons, a remand is warranted for a new opinion to cure a pre-decisional duty to assist error.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Obtain an opinion from an appropriate clinician in which the examiner is to address the nature and etiology of the Veteran's claimed disabilities of obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) as secondary to posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), headaches as secondary to posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), erectile dysfunction as secondary to posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and hypertension, including as secondary to posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD). The examiner is to review the claims file, including all lay and medical evidence. The examiner is to specifically provide an opinion for the following: 

1. Whether the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea as secondary to posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) aggravated by of the service-connected PTSD.

2. Whether the Veteran's headaches as secondary to posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) aggravated by of the service-connected PTSD.

3. Whether the Veteran's erectile dysfunction as secondary to posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) aggravated by of the service-connected PTSD.

4. Whether the Veteran's hypertension as secondary to posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) aggravated by of the service-connected PTSD.

**The examiner is advised that aggravation of the cervical spine disorder need NOT be permanent, and as such should consider any incremental increase in severity. See Ward v. Wilkie, 31 Vet. App. 233 (2019).

5. The examiner should address the nature and etiology of the Veteran's obesity as an intermediate step in causing, or aggravating, the Veteran's diagnosed OSA. Specifically, the examiner should address the following:

(a.) Whether the Veteran is currently or has been diagnosed with obesity; 

(b.) Whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the service-connected disability of PTSD caused the Veteran to become obese;

(c.) Whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that such obesity was a substantial factor in causing the currently diagnosed OSA, headaches, erectile dysfunction and/or hypertension; and if so, 

(d.) Whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's diagnosed OSA, headaches, erectile dysfunction and/or hypertension would not have occurred but for the obesity caused by the Veteran's service-connected disability of PTSD;

(e.) Whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's obesity (resulting from the service-connected disabilities) aggravated the currently diagnosed OSA, headaches, erectile dysfunction and/or hypertension. 

6. A complete and detailed rationale for all opinions must be provided. If the examiner cannot provide an opinion without resorting to mere speculation, he or she must make clear that he or she has considered all procurable data, but any member of the medical community at large could not provide such an opinion without resorting to speculation. If the examiner cannot provide an opinion without resort to speculation, the examiner must state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training).

7. After ensuring full compliance with this remand, readjudicate the claim on appeal.

 

 

Danette Mincey

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	MELNYK, H.    

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.