Citation Nr: A25034331
Decision Date: 04/14/25	Archive Date: 04/14/25

DOCKET NO. 241015-483893
DATE: April 14, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a left hip disability is remanded.

Entitlement ot service connection for a migraine headache disability is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran had active service in the U.S. Navy from December 1977 to June 1982 and February 1992 to March 1996.  The Veteran also had service in the Navy Reserves with numerous periods of active duty for training (ACDUTRA) and inactive duty for training (INACDUTRA).

The Appeals Modernization Act (AMA) creates a new framework for Veterans dissatisfied with Department of Veterans Affairs' (VA) decision on their claim to seek review.? The AMA applies to all?initial?decisions issued after February 19, 2019.?? 

This appeal comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from a July 2024 rating decision issued by the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).? The Veteran timely appealed this rating decision to the Board in an October 2024 VA Form 10182 Notice of Disagreement.  

Under the AMA, the Board must remand a claim to correct an error by AOJ to satisfy its duty to assist the Veteran under 38 U.S.C. § 5103A, if the error occurred prior to the AOJ decision on appeal. 38 U.S.C. § 5103A (f)(2)(A); 38 C.F.R. § 20.802 (a). The Board may also remand a claim to correct any other AOJ error "in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty, if correction of the error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating" the claim. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802 (a). For the reasons set forth below, the Board finds that remand is warranted to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error.

1. Entitlement to service connection for a left hip disability

The Veteran maintains that his left hip disability is secondary to his service-connected cervical spine disability.  He also reported that his left hip disability had its onset during service in 1994. 

In April 2024, a VA examiner was asked to evaluate whether the Veteran's left hip disability was caused or aggravated by his service-connected traumatic arthritis of the cervical spine.  The examiner offered a negative opinion, reasoning that the Veteran's left hip condition was not proximately due to or the result of traumatic arthritis because an x-ray of the left hip was negative for arthritis.  

The rationale for this opinion lacks a clear and logical connection of the question posed to the examiner.  It appears the examiner is saying that the Veteran's left hip disability is not caused by arthritis because he does not have arthritis in the hip.  This is not the question that was before the examiner, and even if it was, x-rays from May 2021 showed mild degenerative changes of the left hip.  

Additionally, the Board notes that the Veteran reported an onset of his left hip disability during service in 1994.  The Veteran also reported during a 2006 treating visit that he his hip pain had been present for several years.  The Board notes that the Veteran is competent to report the onset and continuity of his symptoms and there is no reason to doubt the credibility of these statements. 38?C.F.R. § 3.303(a).  Despite these statements, the VA examiner failed to offer an opinion as to direct service connection.  Given these errors, the Board finds that the opinion is inadequate.  

Failure to obtain an adequate VA opinion constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error and remand is necessary to obtain an addendum opinion. 

2. Entitlement to service connection for a migraine disability.

In April 2024, the Veteran filed a service connection claim for a migraine disability in which he alleged that he his disability was aggravated by military service.  He reported that he had migraines as a child, but he never required medication, nor did he miss a day of school.  He elaborated that the stress and impact of military service aggravated his migraines to the point that he required prescription medication.  Given the Veteran's admission, there is no dispute that his migraine disability clearly and unmistakably preexisted service.  

With respect to aggravation, a VA examiner concluded in April 2024 that the Veteran's migraine disability was not clearly and unmistakably aggravated beyond its natural progression by an in-service injury, event, or illness.  In support of this conclusion, the examiner noted that an enlistment examination dated April 16, 1975 documented seldom and mild headaches that were relieved by ACA (aspirin, caffeine, and acetaminophen).  The examiner further noted that a report of medical history indicates that the Veteran was diagnosed with migraines in February 1988, which was not during a period of active duty.

However, the Board finds that the examiner misinterpreted the record.  Initially, the Board notes that the Veteran completed 2 tours of active duty: the first spanning from December 1977 to June 1982, and the second from February 1992 to March 1996. Between these active duty periods, the Veteran served in the Navy reserve, which included numerous periods of ACDUTRA and INACDUTRA.  Relevant here, he was on ACDTURA from January 19, 1988 to July 2, 1988.  

Additionally, there is no mention of a migraine or headache disability on examinations performed in 1975 or in 1977.  Seldom and mild headaches were documented in an April 1982 report of medical history.  In the record, this document came right after the 1975 exam that was referenced by the examiner.  Moreover, the Veteran was serving his first tour of active duty when he reported the mild headaches.  

By February 1988, the Veteran was serving on ACDUTRA between his first and second tour.  This was the first time he was prescribed medication for his migraines.  Meanwhile, medical records from 1990 through 1998 reveal that the Veteran continued to take prescription medication for his migraines, and he reported having migraine episodes two to three times a month.  This evidence demonstrates that the Veteran's migraines progressed since his first report of mild infrequent episodes in 1982.  Given this evidence, the Board finds that aggravation of the Veteran's preexisting migraine disability has been demonstrated.  

Based on the foregoing, the Board finds that the VA examiner opinion is inadequate.  Failure to obtain an adequate VA opinion constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error and remand is necessary to obtain an addendum opinion as to whether the Veteran's migraine disability was aggravated by service. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain an addendum opinion from qualified examiners concerning the nature and etiology of the Veteran's left hip disability and migraine headache disability

The examiners should then address the following.? A thorough rationale is required for all conclusions:

LEFT HIP

(a)	Whether it is at least as likely as not (an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence) that the Veteran's left hip disability was caused by his service-connected cervical spine disability.  Explain why or why not. 

(b)	Whether it is at least as likely as not (an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence) that the Veteran's left hip disability was aggravated by his service-connected cervical spine disability.  Explain why or why not.

(c)	Whether it is at least as likely as not (an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence) that the Veteran's left hip disability is directly related to service.  Explain why or why not.

* The examiner must address the Veteran's competent and credible lay statements that his left hip pain began during service in 1994.

The examiner must also address treating records from February 2006 in which the Veteran reported having intermittent left hip pain that had been present for several hears.    

		MIGRAINE HEADACHES

(a)	Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's in-service aggravation of his migraine headache disability, and his subsequent symptomatology, is related to his current migraine headache disability.  Why or why not. 

2. After ensuring that the opinions comply with the terms of this remand, the AOJ should re-adjudicate the claims.

 

 

GAYLE STROMMEN

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Beech, T.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.