Citation Nr: A25034977
Decision Date: 04/16/25	Archive Date: 04/16/25

DOCKET NO. 210524-162032
DATE: April 16, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for asthma is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for allergic rhinitis, claimed as breathing problems and allergies is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for headaches, to include migraines is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for gastric ulcers with gastroesophageal reflux disease claimed as acid reflux and gastrointestinal signs/symptoms is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from December 1987 to September 1991 with service in the Persian Gulf.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a December 2020 rating decision by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA). In the May 24, 2021, VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Evidence Submission docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the December 2020 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or his representative with, or within 90 days from receipt of, the VA Form 10182. 38 C.F.R. § 20.303. If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal and prior to the date the Board received the VA Form 10182, or (2) more than 90 days following the date the Board received the VA Form 10182, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.303, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of entitlement ot service connection for asthma, rhinitis, headaches, and gastric ulcers, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

1. Entitlement to service connection for asthma is remanded.

2. Entitlement to service connection for allergic rhinitis, claimed as breathing problems and allergies is remanded.

The Veteran contends that his asthma and rhinitis had its onset shortly after returning from deployment in the Persian Gulf Theatre. The Veteran contends that these conditions are proximately due to airborne contaminants or particulates he was exposed to while overseas. 

A review of the Veteran's claims file shows the Veteran underwent a VA examination in March 2015 for these conditions. The VA examiner then found that the Veteran did not have asthma. The VA examiner noted that while the Veteran's private treatment records were requested, they were not available for review during the examination. See March 2015 Compensation & Pension examination. 

The Board finds that the March 2015 VA examination is inadequate because it is not based on sufficient facts particular to the Veteran as the examiner was unable to review the Veteran's private treatment records. Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008).

The Veteran filed a supplemental claim in October 2020 and with it provided various private treatment records indicating a diagnosis of asthma and other pulmonary conditions are recently as 2018. As the Veteran has (1) provided competent evidence of a current asthma diagnosis, (2) an in-service event while he was deployed, (3) that the diagnosed condition may be associated with the in-service event, and (4) because there is otherwise insufficient evidence to decide the claim, a remand is necessary to determine the etiology of the Veteran's asthma/rhinitis. See McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006). 

The failure of the AOJ to provide the Veteran with an adequate examination prior to issuing its decision constitutes a pre-decisional duty-to-assist error which must be remanded to correct. 

3. Entitlement to service connection for headaches, to include migraines is remanded.

The Veteran contends that his migraines had their onset shortly after returning from deployment in the Persian Gulf Theatre. The Veteran contends that this condition is proximately due to airborne contaminants or particulates he was exposed to while overseas. 

A review of the Veteran's private treatment records show the Veteran has complained of migraine headaches for some time with varying degrees of severity. 

However, the Veteran has not yet been afforded a VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of his migraine headaches and the Veteran's private treatment records do not discuss etiology.

The Board finds there is sufficient evidence in the Veteran file to afford the Veteran a VA examination at the time the AOJ issued its decision denying the Veteran's claim. See McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006).  Accordingly, the failure of the AOJ to provide the Veteran with an examination constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error which must be remanded and correct.

4. Entitlement to service connection for gastric ulcers with gastroesophageal reflux disease claimed as acid reflux and gastrointestinal signs/symptoms is remanded.

The Veteran contends that his gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) had its onset shortly after service in 1991. 

The Board notes that during the pendency of the Veteran's claim, he was awarded service connection for irritable bowel syndrome. While this may be a similar condition to IBS, the Board is nevertheless addressing the issue as it is unclear from the evidence of record whether the Veteran's GERD and IBS are separate, distinct disabilities. 

A review of the Veteran's claims file shows the Veteran has complained of GERD-like symptoms since at least 2018 with regular visits to a gastrointestinal specialist. Further the Board notes that the Veteran has not been afforded a VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's condition. Additionally, the Board finds that there was sufficient evidence in the Veteran's file that he should have been afforded a VA examination. See McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006).  Accordingly, the failure of the AOJ to provide the Veteran with an examination constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error which must be remanded and correct.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Schedule the Veteran for VA examinations with appropriate clinicians for his asthma, allergic rhinitis, migraines, and GERD disabilities.  The examiner(s) must review the claims file.

If a diagnosis cannot be provided but the Veteran's condition manifests in symptoms that cause functional impairment, then the examiner should consider them a "disability" for the purpose of providing the requested opinions below.

The examiners are asked to provide a response to the following:

(a.) Is the Veteran's asthma at least as likely as not related to service, including exposure to burning oil fields, dust, and other toxic exposure?

(b.) Is the Veteran's allergic rhinitis at least as likely as not related to service, including exposure to burning oil fields, dust, and other toxic exposure?

(c.) Are the Veteran's migraine headaches at least as likely as not related to service, including exposure to burning oil fields, dust, and other toxic exposure?

(d.) Is the Veteran's GERD at least as likely as not related to service, including exposure to burning oil fields, dust, and other toxic exposure? The examiner should also address whether the Veteran's GERD is a separate disability from his service-connected irritable bowel syndrome.

Provide a rationale to support the opinions.  The examiner(s) must also address the Veteran's private treatment records indicating diagnoses for the above conditions.

In providing the requested opinion, consider the Veteran's description of the in-service injury and symptoms as well as post-service symptoms.  If there is any medical reason to accept or reject the proposition that the Veteran's reported injury and symptoms in service and thereafter represented the onset of the current disability, this should be noted.  Stated another way, do the Veteran's reports about the symptoms align with how the currently diagnosed disability is known to develop or are the 

?

Veteran's reports generally inconsistent with medical knowledge or implausible?

 

 

L. M. BARNARD

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	A. M. Gallino, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.