Citation Nr: A25034820
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 240719-456742
DATE: April 15, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea, to include as secondary to service-connected right ankle strain, is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from September 1999 to September 2003.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from a July 2023 rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO). 

In the July 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal, the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the rating decision on appeal.

1. Entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea, to include as secondary to service-connected right ankle strain, is remanded.

The Veteran asserts entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea. Specifically, the Veteran contends that his sleep apnea is caused and/or aggravated by his service-connected right ankle strain, which makes it difficult for him to exercise and causes pain while he sleeps. See April 2023 Statement in Support of Claim.

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in May 2023. The VA examiner noted a diagnosis of obstructive sleep apnea. Following the examination, the VA examiner opined that the Veteran's sleep apnea is less likely than not proximately due to or the result of his service-connected right ankle strain. In support of this opinion, the VA examiner reasoned that sleep apnea is caused by obstruction of the upper airway. The VA examiner further reasoned that the Veteran's non-service connected lower back and lower extremity nerve conditions are more likely to be limiting the Veteran's ability to exercise. The VA examiner did not provide an aggravation opinion. 

The Board finds the May 2023 opinion is inadequate to address the evidence in this case. The opinion is inadequate, on its face, because the examiner only opined as to whether the Veteran's sleep apnea was caused by his right knee strain. In addition to direct service connection, a disability may also be found service connected on a secondary basis by demonstrating that the disability is either proximately due to or the result of an already service-connected disease or injury or aggravated by a service-connected disease or injury. See Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439, 448 (1995); 38 C.F.R. ยง 3.310. Any medical opinion which addresses secondary service connection must include an aggravation opinion. The report does not provide the requisite opinions.

Such failure to obtain the necessary opinions is inaction by the RO which constitutes a duty to assist error, requiring remand to correct.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain an addendum VA opinion from a qualified clinician regarding the Veteran's diabetes mellitus type II. The examiner should review the Veteran's claims file and provide a complete explanation for any decision reached. Based on a review of the record (and a new examination only if deemed necessary by the VA medical opinion provider), the examiner must address the following:

2. Whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's sleep apnea was caused and/or aggravated by his service-connected right ankle disability;

3. Whether it is at least as likely as not that the right ankle disability (i) is caused by, is due to, results from or is (ii) aggravated the Veteran's obesity;

4. If the answer to (b.) is yes, then whether it is as least as likely as not that the Veteran's obesity was a substantial factor in causing his sleep apnea; and

5. If the answer to (c.) is yes, then, whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's sleep apnea would not have occurred but for obesity caused by the Veteran's right ankle disability.

"Aggravation" means any increase in severity of a nonservice-connected disease or injury that is proximately due to or the result of a service-connected disease.

If aggravation is found, the examiner should attempt to quantify the extent of additional disability due to the aggravation.

 

 

Ardie A. Bland

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	A.C. Slaughter, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.1303.