Citation Nr: A25034221
Decision Date: 04/14/25	Archive Date: 04/14/25

DOCKET NO. 210121-134723
DATE: April 14, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for schizophrenia, chronic undifferentiated type, is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the Navy from October 5, 1978, to October 20, 1978, and in the Army from November 7, 1979, to June 2, 1980.

This matter is before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a December 2020 Appeals Modernization Act (AMA) rating decision by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO), which found new and relevant evidence had not been submitted to warrant readjudicating the claim for service connection for schizophrenia. The Veteran appealed the decision to the Board by submitting a VA Form 10182 (Notice of Disagreement) and selecting the hearing docket. The Board scheduled a hearing for December 2, 2024; however, the Veteran cancelled his request for a Board hearing on the same day.

As this is an AMA case on the hearing docket, the Board may consider only the evidence of record at the time the RO issued the December 2020 rating decision, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or his representative within 90 days following receipt of the Veteran's request to cancel his hearing, which request was received on December 2, 2024, and 90 days from that time would be March 3, 2025. 38 C.F.R. § 20.302(b). 

The Board cannot consider (1) evidence submitted during the period after the RO issued the rating decision on appeal and before the withdrawal of the Board hearing, or (2) evidence submitted more than 90 days after the cancellation of the request for a Board hearing. 38 C.F.R. § 20.302.

If evidence was associated with the claims file during a period when additional evidence was not allowed, the Board has not considered it in its decision here. 38 C.F.R. § 20.300. If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was added to the claims file that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

During the evidentiary window on appeal, the Veteran submitted copies of his service treatment records (STRs) and private treatment records from March 2020.

Regarding the RO's finding that new and relevant evidence had not been submitted, in the rating decision on appeal, the RO also reviewed the evidence of record and made factual findings. As such, the RO did, in fact, readjudicate the claim. Accordingly, the Board finds that a new and relevant evidence analysis is not warranted, and the Board will proceed with analysis of the merits of the claim. 

Entitlement to service connection for schizophrenia is remanded.

The Veteran contends that he is entitled to service connection for schizophrenia. In denying this claim, the RO obtained a medical opinion addressing direct service connection. However, the RO did not obtain a medical opinion addressing the issue of aggravation of a pre-existing disability. For the reasons discussed below, the Board finds that this was a pre-decisional duty to assist error, and remand is warranted to obtain a new medical opinion.

In all cases, a veteran is presumed to have been sound upon entry into active service, except as to defects, infirmities, or disorders noted at the time of the acceptance, examination, or enrollment, or where clear and unmistakable evidence demonstrates that the condition existed before acceptance and enrollment and was not aggravated by such service. 38 U.S.C. § 1111; 38 C.F.R. § 3.304(b). In other words, "[w]hen no preexisting condition is noted upon entry into service, the veteran is presumed to have been sound upon entry." Wagner v. Principi, 370 F.3d 1089, 1096 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

If the presumption of soundness applies, the burden then shifts to "the government to rebut the presumption of soundness by clear and unmistakable evidence that the veteran's disability was both preexisting and not aggravated by service." Wagner, 370 F.3d at 1096. Accordingly, once the presumption of soundness applies, the burden of proof remains with the government on both the preexistence and the aggravation prong; it never shifts back to the claimant. This burden must be met by "affirmative evidence" demonstrating that there was no aggravation. Id. 

The Veteran's STRs included copies of a hospitalization report from when the Veteran was hospitalized in a mental ward from October 1977 to January 1978, which is prior to entry into either period of active-duty service, and that he was diagnosed with schizophrenia. Thus, there is clear and unmistakable evidence that the Veteran had schizophrenia prior to service, which was a fact that the April 2018 VA examiner recognized as well. However, the VA examiner addressed only the issue of direct service connection, not aggravation of a pre-existing disability, and VA did not obtain an opinion as to whether the Veteran's schizophrenia was not aggravated by his service. As such, remand is warranted to cure this pre-decisional duty to assist error and obtain a new opinion.

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Schedule the Veteran for an examination by an appropriate clinician to determine the nature and etiology of the schizophrenia, to include whether schizophrenia was NOT aggravated during either period of service. The examiner should have access to the claims file. 

The agency of original jurisdiction must provide the below facts to the examiner.

To assist in a review of the claims file, the examiner is informed of the following facts with citations in the record, when applicable:

"	The Veteran served on active duty in the Navy from October 5, 1978, to October 20, 1978 (15 days), and in the Army from November 7, 1979, to June 2, 1980 (6 months, 26 days).

"	A January 1978 medical record contained within the Veteran's STRs reflects that he was hospitalized at a mental health center in Atlanta, Georgia, from October 12, 1977, to January 9, 1978. He was admitted for the chief complaints of confusion and withdrawal. He reported that the condition began three weeks prior to admission. The Veteran had expressed to his mother depression and withdrawal from a few friends, little social life, and poor school performance. The actual illness, however, appeared by history through the parents to predate the admission by three years. Upon admission, the Veteran was overtly hallucinating, disorganized, and agitated, with marked deterioration of defense mechanisms. He was put on several antipsychotic medications and diagnosed with acute paranoid schizophrenia. See VBMS entry with Document Type, "STR - Medical," Receipt Date 04/29/1980, pgs. 125-126 of 198.

"	The Board finds as fact that the above hospitalization records show that schizophrenia pre-existed both periods of active duty. 

"	An October 1978 Report of Medical Examination upon enlistment into the Navy reflects that the Veteran had a clinically normal psychiatric system (item 42). See VBMS entry with Document Type, "Military Personnel Record," Receipt Date 03/20/2018, with "#1" in the Subject field, pgs. 20 21 of 24.

"	In an October 1978 Report of Medical History upon enlistment into the Navy, the Veteran denied a positive history of frequent trouble sleeping, depression, excessive worry, loss of memory, and nervous trouble of any sort (item 11, third column). He reported that he had been treated for a mental condition in the past (item 16), but there was no further notation as to that hospitalization. See VBMS entry with Document Type, "Military Personnel Record," Receipt Date 03/20/2018, with "#1" in the Subject field, pgs. 22-23 of 24.

"	October 1978 STRs reflect that the Veteran was hospitalized from October 7, 1978, to October 12, 1978. The Veteran presented to the emergency room with complaints of nervousness and inability to sleep, concentrate, or eat adequately four days prior to admission. He told the ER physician that he had a great reliance on psychopharmacological agents, which had been prescribed for him nine months prior to enlistment, but that he had stopped taking them and he had withdrawal symptoms. The physician noted the previous diagnosis of schizophrenia, but the physician was unsure if that was the correct diagnosis given there was no evidence of delusions, hallucinations, or thought disorders. Upon discharge, the Veteran was diagnosed with emotionally unstable and immature personality disorder. See VBMS entry with Document Type, "STR - Medical," Receipt Date 03/20/2018, pgs. 7-10 of 24.

"	In October 1978, the Naval Aptitude Board unanimously voted to discharge him. See VBMS entry with Document Type, "STR - Medical," Receipt Date 03/20/2018, pg. 6 of 24.

"	A September 1979 Report of Medical Examination upon enlistment into the Army reflects that the Veteran's psychiatric system was clinically normal (item 42). See VBMS entry with Document Type, "STR - Medical," Receipt Date 04/29/1980, pgs. 46-47 of 198.

"	In a September 1979 Report of Medical History upon enlistment into the Army, the Veteran denied a positive history of frequent trouble sleeping, depression, excessive worry, loss of memory, and nervous trouble of any sort (item 11, third column). See VBMS entry with Document Type, "STR - Medical," Receipt Date 04/29/1980, pg. 48 of 198.

"	A February 1980 STR reflects that the Veteran presented to the emergency room complaining of severe left testicular pain. A preliminary examination revealed a small, tender left varicocele and he was admitted to the Urology ward. The record shows that the Veteran had a quiet night, but upon wakening, he was noted to experience bizarre behavior, inappropriate responses, agitation, and confabulations. A psychiatrist recommended transfer to the mental ward. See VBMS entry with Document Type, "STR - Medical," Receipt Date 04/29/1980, pg. 16 of 198.

"	The Veteran was transferred to the mental ward from February 1980 to April 1980. The Veteran maintained that his behavior on the Urology ward was due to having gotten a Demerol injection in the ER prior to admission. While in the mental ward he was eventually started on Prolixin. During his hospitalization, the Veteran admitted to faking the severe testicle pain he presented with at the ER. The hospital summary report shows that the was diagnosed with schizophrenia, chronic undifferentiated type, severe in partial remission, manifested by aggressive or otherwise bizarre behavior, psychotic denial, inappropriate affect, hostility, perplexity, auditory hallucinations, short attention span, and poor judgment. See VBMS entry with Document Type, "STR - Medical," Receipt Date 04/29/1980, pgs. 12-15 of 198.

"	In April 1980, an Army Medical Board reviewed his case, noting that the Veteran was diagnosed with schizophrenia, chronic undifferentiated type, severe, in partial remission. The Medical Board found the Veteran was unfit because of his mental disease which it determined existed prior to service based on the civilian medical records and had not been aggravated by service. This determination was made by three medical professionals, and they agreed that the determination was unanimous. See VBMS entry with Document Type, "STR - Medical," Receipt Date 04/29/1980, pgs. 7-11 of 198.

"	In a February 1981 statement, the Veteran asserted that while stationed at Fort Sam Houston, Texas, he was treated for a mental condition and discharged. He maintained that he was in good mental health when he entered service. See VBMS entry with Document Type, "VA Form 21-4138 Statement in Support of Claim," Receipt Date 02/23/1981.

"	In April 2018, the Veteran underwent a VA examination for mental disorders, at which he was diagnosed under the DSM-5 with schizoaffective disorder, depressive type, with symptoms of delusions, disorganized thoughts, anxiety, depression, and difficulties adjusting to occupational and social stressors. The Veteran claimed that his current mental condition was due to events during his six months of service in the Army. He described having injured his testicles when he fell off an obstacle course. While being examined in a medical hospital, he claimed to have become angry and scared when he woke up while a doctor was examining his testicles, and "before you know it, [he] was being escorted to a psychiatric hospital." According to the Veteran, his discharge was due to physical injuries to his testes and not due to psychiatric reasons. The VA examiner found that the Veteran appeared to be an unreliable historian, and his thought content was abnormal, with paranoid delusions and obsessions, with evidence of psychosis and cognitive impairment. See VBMS entry with Document Type, "C&P Exam," Receipt Date 05/03/2018.

"	A February 2020 VA treatment record shows that the Veteran had positive posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and depression screens. See VBMS entry with Document Type, "CAPRI," Receipt Date 12/31/2020, pgs. 149-152 of 157.

"	In February 2020, the Veteran established care with VA. He reported having auditory and visual hallucinations and suicidal ideation without a plan. The Veteran stated he did not followup with mental health treatment following discharge from service and life had been difficult dealing with a psychotic disorder, alcohol use, cannabis use, homelessness, and social issues. He reported fears of becoming "confused again." He refused a request for a brief voluntary inpatient stay for stabilization of symptoms but stated he would be willing to be placed on antipsychotic medication again and attend therapy. See VBMS entry with Document Type, "CAPRI," Receipt Date 12/31/2020, pgs. 115-149 of 157.

"	March 2020 private treatment records reflect that the Veteran was admitted to a mental hospital from March 11, 2020, to March 18, 2020, for suicidal ideation with a plan, depression, auditory hallucinations, and delusions. Upon discharge, the Veteran was diagnosed with PTSD, bipolar disorder, THC abuse, and THC induced psychiatric disorder. See VBMS entry with Document Type, "Medical Treatment Record - Non-Government Facility," Receipt Date 10/23/2020.

"	In March 2020, the Veteran submitted a correspondence while hospitalized, in which he asserted that while in service, he slipped while walking on a beam and landed groin-first on the beam. He described being in intense pain but was told by a superior to suck it up. When he got to A.I.T. school, he realized he needed to get checked out at Brooke Army Hospital, where he told two male nurses about his testicle pain, but they laughed at him and gave him a codeine shot. According to the Veteran, the next morning he woke up to a male nurse examining his groin. The Veteran maintained that the nurses thought he was just seeking special treatment, but he felt he was in real pain from a real injury. He stated that he received anti-psychotic medication as punishment for not having any damage to his groin and was transferred to the psychiatric ward of the hospital. The Veteran contends that the hospital personnel mistakenly placed him in the psychiatric ward because they mistook his shock from the pain as a psychosis. See VBMS entry with Document Type, "Correspondence," Receipt Date 12/06/2024.

"	A March 2020 VA treatment record reflects that the psychiatrist reviewed the Veteran's in-patient hospitalization. The Veteran reported that he felt much better, but the psychiatrist noted that he would get side-tracked and discuss conspiracies regarding aliens and the C.I.A. trying to disrupt his life. The psychiatrist observed that the Veteran was still on the manic side but had fewer intensive symptoms. According to the psychiatrist, the Veteran had a potential diagnostic combination that could account for the symptoms: a bipolar I disorder combined with a consistent and longstanding schizotypal picture of odd beliefs. See VBMS entry with Document Type, "CAPRI," Receipt Date 12/31/2020, pgs. 89-90 of 157.

"	In a March 2020 buddy statement, K.B. wrote that she had known the Veteran since 2000 and had an on-again-off-again romantic relationship with him. She noted that the Veteran was obsessive about locks, had mood swings, would be defensive, lacked emotional availability, and was controlling. The Veteran expressed delusional thinking towards her and her family, including auditory and visual hallucinations, and he seemed manic-depressive. See VBMS entry with Document Type, "Buddy/Lay Statement," Receipt Date 07/17/2020, pgs. 1-6 of 7.

"	An April 2020 VA treatment record reflects that the Veteran reported he was told by a private doctor that he had PTSD. He stated that he lived with demons for 40 years and he did not want to resume antipsychotic medication. See VBMS entry with Document Type, "CAPRI," Receipt Date 12/31/2020, pgs. 71-72 of 157. 

"	In a July 2020 claim for service connection for chronic undifferentiated schizophrenia, the Veteran asserted that while he served in the military, he was exposed to training that caused him to become over stressed with anxiety and caused a nervous breakdown and hospital admission to the mental ward. See VBMS entry with Document Type, "VA 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim (Compensation)," Receipt Date 07/04/2020.

"	In a buddy statement from C.A., he wrote that the Veteran struggled on a daily basis with ideas and delusions. The Veteran believed that he had a child with an alien that was currently flying around in space. The Veteran thought that he was abducted around 1985, and he also thought that the C.I.A. was targeting him with a satellite in hopes of retrieving the child he had with an alien. See VBMS entry with Document Type, "Buddy/Lay Statement," Receipt Date 07/17/2020.

"	In a buddy statement from J.W., he wrote that he was a friend of the Veteran, and the Veteran told him that aliens had sex with him and took him to space. The Veteran also told him that the CIA and FBI were hunting him for being with the aliens. See VBMS entry with Document Type, "Buddy/Lay Statement," Receipt Date 07/17/2020.

"	In a buddy statement from P.R., he wrote that the Veteran was his friend, and he came up with crazy ideas about aliens and how they abducted him and that he now had an alien child. The Veteran also claimed that the CIA was torturing him with a satellite, sending magnetic pulses down on him in his Winnebago while he slept, because they want his child from outer space. See VBMS entry with Document Type, "Buddy/Lay Statement," Receipt Date 07/17/2020.

"	In a statement from the Veteran's mother, she wrote that after he returned from the Army, the Veteran changed. She would not let him into her house because he kept talking about seeing aliens. She wrote that he struggled to make friends and to keep a job. See VBMS entry with Document Type, "Buddy/Lay Statement," Receipt Date 07/17/2020.

"	The Board does not find the Veteran's mother's statement to be credible that there was a change in the Veteran's behavior after he got out of the Army in 1980, as the January 1977 hospitalization record shows that the Veteran was overtly hallucinating, was withdrawn and had few friends with little social life, and poor school performance. 

"	In a July 2020 supplemental claim, the Veteran asserted that he had chronic undifferentiated schizophrenia from being over stressed and having anxiety. This resulted in a mental breakdown, with a 40-year struggle since then. See VBMS entry with Document Type, "VA Form 20-0995 Supplemental Claim Application," Receipt Date 07/17/2020.

"	The Veteran submitted a buddy statement from C.A., who wrote that she was friends with the Veteran and that she observed the Veteran struggle with voices and delusions since she had known him. See VBMS entry with Document Type, "Buddy/Lay Statement," Receipt Date 07/17/2020, pg. 7 of 7.

"	In an October 2020 statement, the Veteran asserted that his current undifferentiated schizophrenia was not paranoid schizophrenia, for which he was diagnosed with as a teenager, and, therefore, it was not pre-existing. He maintained that the schizophrenia was induced by mistreatment at Brooke hospital in service. According to the Veteran, he was in good health mentally and physically at time of entry in the Army. The Veteran contended that the Army induced it by repeatedly administering shots of Prolixin. Regarding his pre-service mental hospitalization, the Veteran wrote that he smoked marijuana in high school and his mother made him see a psychologist, who then milked the insurance company for money. Additionally, the Veteran stated that not getting treatment for the hip injury in service gave him schizophrenia. See VBMS entry with Document Type, "VA Form 20-0996 Request for Higher-Level Review," Receipt Date 10/02/2020.

"	An October 2020 VA treatment record shows that the Veteran attended a neuropsychologist appointment. When addressing the reason for the referral, the psychologist wrote that the Veteran had been diagnosed with schizophrenia, "though has an atypical presentation." The psychologist diagnosed the Veteran under DSM-5 criteria with probable malingering, unspecified personality disorder or bipolar I disorder. The Veteran reported he lived independently for the past 40 years (albeit with episodes of homelessness). The psychologist observed that the Veteran had a past diagnosis of schizophrenia but noted that due to his atypical presentation and reported clear intent to achieve service-connected compensation benefits for a psychotic disorder, it had been difficult to adequately characterize the psychiatric diagnosis. Furthermore, she noted that the Veteran's performance on cognitive testing was uninterpretable due to evidence of clear exaggeration and probable feigning of cognitive impairment. Additionally, he produced improbable test results across multiple domains of cognitive functioning that were inconsistent with his reported and observed functional abilities and inconsistent with the known neurocognitive profile of individuals with schizophrenia. Similarly, the Veteran produced invalid results on measures of psychiatric symptom reporting, including results designed specifically to detect malingering of cognitive, neurological, and psychotic symptoms. The psychologist noted that the Veteran's symptom presentation was observed only in individuals with the most debilitating and chronic psychiatric disorders who required intense inpatient and outpatient treatment. However, he had not received any treatment for his symptoms in over 40 years and had been able to live independently and manage his own personal affairs until this time. Furthermore, she noted that this atypical and non-credible cognitive and psychiatric symptom presentation occurred in the context of clear incentive to present as impaired in an effort to gain service-connected monetary compensation. Based on her examination and review, the psychologist believed that the examination results strongly supported probable malingering of cognitive and psychiatric symptoms. However, she recognized that it was possible that the Veteran may be experiencing psychiatric symptoms and distress, but not with the quality and severity that he presented. Therefore, the psychologist wrote that it was important to consider the possibility of an underlying personality disorder (i.e., antisocial, schizotypal), as well as a possible superimposed mood disorder with psychotic features, such as Bipolar I Disorder. See VBMS entry with Document Type, "CAPRI," Receipt Date 12/31/2020, pgs. 16-24 of 157.

"	In a statement received in November 2020, the Veteran wrote that after he had a fall, he went to get checked out at Brooke Army Hospital in Fort Sam Houston, Texas, at which he told the male nurses that he fell on his groin and smashed his testicles. He wrote that they put him under, and when he woke up, he was alarmed to see a male nurse looking at his groin. He was then transferred to the mental ward. According to the Veteran, the chronic undifferentiated schizophrenia started there, and he was totally confused as to why. See VBMS entry with Document Type, "Medical Treatment Record - Government Facility," Receipt Date 11/17/2020, pg. 2 of 2.

"	In a January 2024 statement, the Veteran asserted that his mom made him see a psychologist while in high school for paranoia and marijuana use. He asserted that service aggravated the schizophrenia because at the time of enlistment he was in a good mental and physical shape. After he was injured, his problems started to affect him while he dealt with the severe pain. See VBMS entry with Document Type, "VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement)," Receipt Date 01/21/2021.

"	The examiner's review of the record is NOT restricted to the evidence listed above. This list is provided to assist the examiner in locating potentially relevant evidence.

The examiner is asked to opine:

"	What psychiatric diagnosis do you believe is warranted? Please explain upon what facts, medical principles, and/or medical literature the opinion is based.

"	In the event that the examiner finds that the Veteran has a psychiatric disorder that is not a personality disorder, the examiner is asked if the Veteran's schizophrenia that was diagnosed in 1977 prior to service entrance was NOT aggravated by his active service in the Navy from October 5, 1978, to October 20, 1978. While the wording of this question may seem strange, this is the question that VA needs to determine to decide this claim. Please explain upon what facts, medical principles, and/or medical literature the opinion is based.

"	In the event that the examiner finds that the Veteran has a psychiatric disorder that is not a personality disorder, the examiner is asked if the Veteran's schizophrenia was NOT aggravated by his active service in the Army from November 7, 1979, to June 2, 1980. Please explain upon what facts, medical principles, and/or medical literature the opinion is based.

"	If your determination is that schizophrenia was aggravated during one or both periods of service, the examiner should address whether schizophrenia had its onset during that period of active duty. Please explain upon what facts, medical principles, and/or medical literature the opinion is based.

The examiner is asked to provide a rationale for each opinion given, including providing the medical principles and evidence relied upon for each opinion. If the examiner is unable to provide an opinion without resorting to speculation, he or she should explain why this is so and what, if any, additional evidence would be necessary before an opinion could be rendered.

 

 

A. P. SIMPSON

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Tarkenton, A

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.