Citation Nr: A25034035
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 240422-437445
DATE: April 11, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is granted.  This issue is granted pursuant to the Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxins Act of 2022 (PACT Act). 

Entitlement to service connection for gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) is granted. 

Entitlement to service connection for anemia, as secondary to service-connected Crohn's disease, is granted. 

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for gallbladder removal is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran's COPD is presumed to be etiologically related to his in-service toxic exposure. 

2. The persuasive weight of the evidence favors a finding that the Veteran's GERD was incurred during his active-duty service.

3. The evidence is at least in approximate balance as to whether the Veteran's anemia is proximately due to his service-connected Crohn's disease.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for COPD have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1116; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.304, 3.307, 3.309; Honoring our PACT Act of 2022, Pub. L. 117-168 (2022).

2. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for GERD have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

3. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for anemia, as secondary to service-connected Crohn's disease, have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.310.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Air Force from December 2001 to August 2006.

This case comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from rating decisions issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO) in April 2023 and February 2024.  In the April 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the April 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal for the claim of COPD, and the evidence of record at the time of the February 2024 AOJ decision on appeal for the claims of GERD, anemia, and gallbladder removal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim[s], considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of entitlement to service connection for gallbladder removal, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of that claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

As an initial matter, the Board notes that the Veteran's April 2024 Notice of Disagreement listed service connection for pneumonia as one of the issues on appeal.  See April 2024 VA Form 10182.  However, the Veteran had previously appealed this issue in July 2023.  See July 2023 VA Form 10182.  On his July 2023 Notice of Disagreement, the Veteran requested a hearing before a Veterans Law Judge.  See July 2023 VA Form 10182.  As such, the Veteran's claim of entitlement to service connection for pneumonia is still pending before the Board.  See July 2023 BVA Docketing Letter.  Accordingly, with respect to the Veteran's claim for pneumonia, the April 2024 Notice of Disagreement is invalid, and the matter will not be addressed in the present decision.

Service Connection

Service connection on a direct basis requires evidence of three elements: (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship or nexus between the current disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during active service.  Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166-67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

Service connection may also be established on a secondary basis for a disability which is proximately due to, or the result of, a service-connected disability.  38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a).  Service connection on a secondary basis may also be established for a disorder which is aggravated by a service-connected disability; compensation may be provided for the degree of disability (but only that degree) over and above the degree of disability existing prior to the aggravation.  38 C.F.R. § 3.310(b); Allen v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 374 (1995).

In order to prevail on the issue of secondary service connection, the record must show: (1) a current disability; (2) a service-connected disability; and (3) a medical nexus between the current disability and the service-connected disability.  See Wallin v. West, 11 Vet. App. 509 (1998); Allen v. Brown, supra.

For certain diseases, service connection may be granted on a presumptive basis due to exposure to specified toxins.  See 38 U.S.C. § 1119; 38 C.F.R. § 3.309.  

In August 2022, Congress passed the Honoring our PACT Act of 2022 (PACT Act).  This law increases eligibility to benefits by expanding lists of locations, timeframes, and presumptive conditions related to toxic exposures.  Under the PACT Act, COPD is presumed to be associated with exposure to burn pits and other toxins (BPOT).  Honoring our PACT Act of 2022, Pub. L. 117-168 (2022).

1. Entitlement to service connection for COPD is granted.

The Veteran seeks entitlement to service connection for COPD pursuant to the presumptions created the PACT Act.  See April 2024 VA Form 10182.  

As noted above, the PACT Act increased eligibility to benefits by expanding lists of locations, timeframes, and presumptive conditions related to toxic exposures. Under the PACT Act, COPD is presumed to be associated with exposure to burn pits and other toxins.  Honoring our PACT Act of 2022, Pub. L. 117-168 (2022).

Here, the evidence of record indicates that the Veteran has a current diagnosis of COPD.  VA treatment records reveal consistent annotations of COPD when discussing the Veteran's past medical history and a note from March 8, 2023, states that the Veteran "carries a diagnosis of COPD."  See March 2023 Persian Gulf Registry E&M Note. 

Additionally, the Veteran's active-duty service included a deployment to Southwest Asia in 2003.  See November 2023 Rating Decision.  Specifically, the Veteran was deployed to Iraq from July 2003 to November 2003.  See December 2022 VA Memorandum.  Accordingly, the Veteran is entitled to a presumption of exposure to toxic substances, chemicals, and airborne hazards under 38 U.S.C. § 1119.  Id.    

As the evidence reveals that the Veteran has a current diagnosis of COPD, and as exposure to BPOT is conceded, entitlement to service connection for COPD, on a presumptive basis as a result of BPOT exposure, is warranted.  See 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307, 3.309; Honoring our PACT Act of 2022, Pub. L. 117-168 (2022).  Therefore, the claim of entitlement to service connection for COPD is granted.

2. Entitlement to service connection for GERD is granted.

The Veteran seeks entitlement to service connection for GERD.  Upon review, the Board finds that service connection for GERD is warranted on a direct basis as the Veteran's condition was incurred during his active-duty service.  

Relevant Factual Background

In July 2001, the Veteran underwent an enlistment exam which noted no abnormalities upon clinical evaluation.  See July 2001 Report of Medical Examination.  

The Veteran's subsequent service treatment records (STRs) reveal complaints heartburn and diagnoses of chronic reflux esophagitis and GERD.  See STR - Medical.  In March 2005, the Veteran was treated for complaints of heartburn and was prescribed Rabeprazole.  See March/April 2005 Chronological Record of Medical Care.  In March 2006, the Veteran was diagnosed with chronic reflux esophagitis and was instructed to continue taking Prilosec.  See March 2006 Chronological Record of Medical Care.  Treatment notes from March 2006 also indicate that the Veteran had a history of GERD.  See March 2006 Chronological Record of Medical Care.  

In November 2023, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination for GERD.  See November 2023 Esophageal Conditions Disability Benefits Questionnaire (DBQ).  The Veteran was diagnosed with GERD and the examiner indicated a diagnosis date of November 2005.  Id.  The Veteran related that his symptoms began in 2005 when he was having reflux and began regurgitating food.  Id.  

In January 2024, a VA medical opinion was obtained pertaining to the Veteran's GERD.  See January 2024 Medical Opinion DBQ.  The examiner was asked to opine whether the Veteran's GERD was secondary to his service-connected Crohn's Disease/Irritable Bowel Syndrome.  Id.  In response to this inquiry, the examiner opined that the Veteran's GERD was less likely than not proximately due to his service-connected condition.  In support of this opinion, the examiner stated that although there is medical literature to support that GERD is more common in patients with IBS, there is no evidence that the Veteran had esophageal involvement.  Id.

Analysis

As noted above, service connection on a direct basis requires evidence of three elements: (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship or nexus between the current disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during active service.  Shedden v. Principi, supra.  

Here, the Veteran's current diagnosis of GERD is not disputed.  In the February 2024 rating decision, the AOJ made a favorable finding that the Veteran has a current diagnosis of GERD.  See February 2024 Rating Decision.  

Pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 20.801, any findings favorable to the claimant, as identified by the AOJ, are binding on the Board of Veterans' Appeals adjudicators unless rebutted by evidence that identifies a clear and unmistakable error in the favorable finding.  The Board finds no evidence of error and notes that the November 2023 VA examiner indicated a diagnosis of GERD.  See September 2023 Esophageal Conditions DBQ.  In light of the foregoing, the Board finds that the first element of service connection, a current disability, has been satisfied.

With regard to the second element of service connection, the Board observes that STRs document complaints of heartburn dating back to March 2005.  See STR - Medical.  Further, diagnoses of chronic reflux esophagitis and GERD were documented in March 2006.  Id.  As these complaints and diagnoses occurred while the Veteran was on active duty, the Board finds that the in-service incurrence element of service connection has been satisfied.  

Thus, the final remaining question is whether a medical nexus exists between the Veteran's in-service incurrence of GERD and his current diagnosis.  Weighing in favor of a medical nexus are the Veteran's VA treatment records which document consistent complaints of reflux and the treatment thereof.  In June 2014, the Veteran's physician indicated that the Veteran suffered from chronic reflux esophagitis that persisted despite the use of multiple proton pump inhibitors.  See June 2014 Physician Note.  In April 2017, a diagnosis of chronic reflux esophagitis was noted by the Veteran's gastroenterologist.  See April 2017 Physician Note.  A note from January 2021 indicates that the Veteran's prescription for Famotidine was helping to alleviate his reflux but that pain still persisted.  See January 2021 MHV Dialog Note.  The Board finds that the Veteran's consistent treatment of his GERD symptomatology is highly probative in determining whether a medical nexus exists between his current diagnosis and the diagnoses rendered during his active-duty service.  

The Board acknowledges that the January 2024 VA examiner rendered a negative nexus opinion, however, it finds that this opinion merits no probative value.  Notably, the VA examiner opined that there was "no evidence" of esophageal involvement when, in fact, the record is replete with documentation of chronic reflux esophagitis.  As the January 2025 VA medical opinion was based, at least in part on an inaccurate factual premise, the Board finds that it is inadequate for adjudication purposes.  See Reonal v. Brown, 4 Vet. App. 458 (1993).  

Upon consideration of the foregoing, the Board finds that the persuasive weight of the probative evidence favors the finding of a medical nexus between the Veteran's current diagnosis of GERD and his in-service incurrence of the disease.  As such, the third and final element of service connection has been satisfied and the claim of entitlement to service connection for GERD is granted. 

3. Entitlement to service connection for anemia, as secondary to service-connected Crohn's disease, is granted.

The Veteran seeks service connection for anemia, to include as secondary to his service-connected Crohn's disease.  

Relevant Factual Background

In a September 2008 rating decision, the Veteran was granted service connection for Crohn's Disease/Irritable Bowel Syndrome.  See September 2008 Rating Decision.  In March 2010, the Veteran's effective date for Crohn's disease was amended to August 5, 2006.  See March 2010 Rating Decision.

In October 2014, the Veteran underwent a laparoscopic Roux-en-Y gastric bypass.  See October 2014 Bariatric Clinic BAMC Note.  

In July 2020, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination related to his gastric bypass.  See July 2020 Intestinal Surgery DBQ.  The VA examiner indicated that the Veteran underwent a gastric bypass as treatment for his Crohn's disease in 2014.  Id.  

In January 2024, a VA medical opinion was obtained for the Veteran's claim of entitlement to service connection for anemia.  See January 2024 Medical Opinion DBQ.  The examiner opined that the Veteran's anemia was not due to his service-connected Crohn's disease.  Id.  The examiner then went on to explain that there was "very clear documentation in [the Veteran's] record that [h]is anemia is due to gastric bypass surgery."  Id.

Analysis

As noted above, in order to prevail on the issue of secondary service connection, the record must show: (1) a current disability; (2) a service-connected disability; and (3) a medical nexus between the current disability and the service-connected disability.  See Wallin v. West, 11 Vet. App. 509 (1998); Allen v. Brown, supra.

Here, the Veteran's current diagnosis of anemia has been conceded by the AOJ.  See February 2024 Rating Decision.  The Board finds no evidence of error and notes that the diagnosis of anemia was confirmed during a November 2023 VA examination.  See November 2023 Hematologic and Lymphatic Conditions DBQ.  Accordingly, the first element of secondary service connection, a current disability, has been satisfied.

As previously discussed, the Veteran is service connected for Crohn's Disease/Irritable Bowel Syndrome.  See September 2008 Rating Decision.  Therefore, the second element of secondary service connection, a service-connected disability, has been satisfied.

The last remaining question is whether a medical nexus exists between the Veteran's Crohn's disease and his anemia.  Upon review, the Board finds that the evidence is at least in approximate balance as to whether the Veteran's anemia is proximately due to his Crohn's disease.

In October 2014, the Veteran underwent a gastric bypass to treat his Crohn's disease.  See October 2014 Bariatric Clinic BAMC Note; July 2020 Intestinal Surgery DBQ.  In January 2024, a VA examiner opined that there is very clear documentation indicating that the Veteran's anemia was caused by his gastric bypass surgery.  See January 2024 Medical Opinion DBQ.  The Board finds this evidence highly probative in determining whether the Veteran's anemia is proximately due to his service-connected Crohn's disease.  Ultimately, the Board has determined that had it not been for the Veteran's Crohn's disease, he would not have undergone gastric bypass surgery and subsequently developed anemia.

The Board notes that there are no countervailing opinions of record which suggest alternate etiologies of the Veteran's anemia.

In light of the foregoing, the Board finds that the evidence is at least in approximate balance as to whether a medical nexus exists between the Veteran's anemia and his Crohn's disease.  Accordingly, the benefit of the doubt is resolved in favor of the Veteran and the third element of secondary service connection, a medical nexus, has been satisfied.  As each element of secondary service connection has been met, the Veteran's claim of entitlement to service connection for anemia, as secondary to service-connected Crohn's disease, is granted.  

(Continued on next page)

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to service connection for gallbladder removal is remanded.

The Board regrets the delay associated with this remand; however, remand is required to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  Specifically, remand is required to obtain a VA medical opinion addressing the reasonably raised theories of direct service connection and obesity as an intermediate step.  See Robinson v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 545 (2008).

In January 2024, a VA medical opinion was obtained pertaining to the Veteran's gallbladder removal.  See January 2024 Medical Opinion DBQ.  The examiner explained that multiple factors likely contributed to the Veteran's development of gallstones and his subsequent gallbladder removal.  Id.  The factors identified by the examiner included obesity and rapid weight loss after gastric bypass surgery.  Id.  

While obesity is not recognized by VA as a disease or disability for compensation purposes, it may serve as an intermediate step when considering secondary service connection under 38 C.F.R. § 3.310.  See VAOPGCPREC 1-2017.  In Walsh v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 300, 307 (2020), the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) held that proper interpretation of G.C. Prec. Op. 1-2017 requires consideration of both proximate causation and aggravation in its analytical framework.  If the following questions are answered in the affirmative, then the current disability may be service connected on a secondary basis: (1) whether the service-connected disability caused the veteran to become obese or aggravated the veteran's obesity; (2) if so, whether obesity was a substantial factor in causing the current disability; and (3) whether the current disability would not have occurred but for obesity caused or aggravated by the service-connected disability.  Id. 

The Board finds that the opinion of the January 2024 VA examiner reasonably raised the theory of obesity as an intermediate step.  The Board further notes that there are no opinions of record which address the theory of direct service connection.  Accordingly, these theories must be developed prior to the adjudication of the claim.  See Robinson v. Mansfield, supra.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain a VA medical opinion from an appropriate medical provider regarding the nature and etiology of the Veteran's gallbladder removal.  The entire claims file must be provided to, and reviewed by, the physician.  If the physician determines it to be necessary, an examination should be scheduled and any indicated tests, studies, or evaluations should be performed.

The examiner is asked to: 

(a.) If an examination is conducted, obtain the Veteran's detailed lay history, including onset and progression of symptomatology.

(b.) Opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not (i.e. likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal) that the Veteran's gallbladder condition requiring removal was caused by his active-duty service.

(c.) Opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not (i.e. likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal) that the Veteran's obesity was caused by his service-connected conditions, to include medications utilized for the treatment thereof.

(d.) Opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not (i.e. likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal) that the Veteran's obesity underwent an incremental increase (was aggravated), regardless of permanence, due to his service-connected conditions, to include medications utilized for the treatment thereof.

If the examiner finds that the Veteran's obesity was caused or aggravated by a service-connected disability or disabilities, they should opine as to the following for each claimed condition:

i.	Is it at least as likely as not that the Veteran's obesity/aggravation of obesity/rapid weight loss after gastric bypass was a substantial factor in causing his claimed condition? Why or why not?

ii.	Is it at least as likely as not that the Veteran's gallbladder condition requiring removal would not have occurred but for this obesity or the rapid weight loss following gastric bypass surgery? Why or why not?

"	The term at least as likely as not does not mean within the realm of medical possibility.  Rather, it means that the weight of the medical evidence both for and against a conclusion is at least approximately balanced, or nearly equal, and therefore it is at least as medically sound to find in favor of the conclusion (e.g., etiology) as it is to find against the conclusion.

"	Any opinion expressed by the physician should be accompanied by a complete rationale.  If medical literature is relied upon in rendering a determination, the physician should identify and specifically cite each reference material utilized.  If the physician is unable to offer an opinion without resort to speculation, a thorough explanation as to why an opinion cannot be rendered should be provided.

"	The physician is advised that the Veteran is competent to report symptoms, treatment, and injuries, and that his reports must be taken into account in formulating the requested opinions.

"	For any opinion, the examiner should not rely solely on silence in the medical records unless it can be explained: (a) why the silence in the available records can be taken as proof that the symptom(s) did not occur, including why the fact would have normally been recorded if present, or (b) why the absence of medical records is medically significant.

2. The AOJ must review the claims file and ensure that the foregoing development actions have been completed in full.  If any development action is incomplete, the appropriate corrective action must be implemented.  If any report or opinion does not include adequate responses to the specific opinions requested, it must be returned to the providing examiner for corrective action.

 

YVETTE R. WHITE

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Zachary J. Ellis, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.