Citation Nr: A25034730
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 240608-446213
DATE:  April 15, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a bilateral foot disability, to include flat feet (pes planus), is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a right hip disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a left hip disability is remanded. 

Entitlement to service connection for a back disability is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran had active naval service from August 2009 to October 2009. 

This case comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal of a January 2024 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO). In June 2024, the Veteran filed a VA Form 10182 and elected direct review of the January 2024 rating decision by a Veterans Law Judge. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the January 2024 rating decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of entitlement to service connection for a bilateral foot disability, left and right hip disabilities, and a low back disability, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Service Connection - Bilateral Foot Disability

The Veteran asserts that her claimed bilateral foot disability is related to her service-connected knee disabilities. 

The Veteran's service treatment records (STRs) reveal that she had mild asymptomatic pes planus at the time of her enlistment. 

During a February 2015 VA examination, the Veteran reported that the onset of the symptoms of her bilateral foot condition were in 2012. At that time, the examiner assessed that the Veteran had diagnoses of bilateral flat foot (pes planus), bilateral hallux valgus, and degenerative joint disease (DJD) of the toes bilaterally. However, the examiner opined that the Veteran's foot disabilities were less likely than not proximately due to or the result of her service-connected condition. The examiner reasoned that there was no evidence of extra mechanical stress to the feet from the knee condition. 

During an October 2023 VA examination, the Veteran reported that onset of her foot condition was 2009. She also indicated that her feet slowly became flatter due to her gait as a result of her bilateral knee condition. At that time, the examiner reported that the Veteran had a diagnosis of bilateral flat feet (pes planus). However, the examiner opined that the Veteran's claimed foot condition was less likely than not incurred in or caused by her active service. The examiner reasoned that the Veteran's record was silent of foot conditions in service. 

The Board finds that the February 2015 and October 2023 medical opinions are inadequate for adjudication purposes. In this regard, neither of those opinions provided the correct legal standard, in regard to the Veteran's bilateral pes planus. Specifically, as the Veteran's bilateral pes planus was noted on her medical examination upon entry into active service, the examiners should have provided opinions as to whether pre-existing pes planus was aggravated by service, and if so, whether such aggravation was clearly and unmistakably due to the natural progression of the disability. Additionally, the Board finds that the February 2015 examiner failed to adequately address whether the Veteran's service-connected bilateral knee disabilities aggravated her any of her identified foot disabilities, to include pes planus. Specifically, the examiner seemingly based their negative conclusion on the premise that the Veteran's service-connected bilateral knee disabilities did not cause the Veteran's foot diagnoses. See El-Amin v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 136, 139 (2013) (holding that a VA examination does not adequately address aggravation unless it rules out the possibility of aggravation). 

Based on the above, the Board finds that the AOJs failure to obtain an adequate medical opinion constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error that warrants a remand for corrective action. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

Service Connection - Right and Left Hip Disabilities 

The Veteran asserts that her right and left hip disabilities are related to her service-connected knee disabilities. 

The Veteran's STRs document her report of progressively worsening hip pain in October 2009. Subsequently, in October 2009, another treatment note documented the Veteran's report of right knee and right hip pain that was exacerbated with running. 

During a June 2012 VA examination, the Veteran reported that the onset of her symptoms was 2009. She also reported that her symptoms were a result of her knee pain causing abnormal weight bearing. The VA examiner assessed that the Veteran had diagnoses of bilateral hip bursitis. However, no opinion was provided at that time. 

A March 2014 treatment note documented that the Veteran was involved in a motor vehicle accident (MVA) in December 2013. A January 2015 treatment note revealed that the Veteran was referred to rheumatology for a five-year history of polyarticular swelling and pain, and that it was suspected that her pain was due to hypermobility. 

During a February 2015 VA examination, the Veteran was assessed to have bilateral hip strains. However, the examiner opined that the Veteran's hip condition was less likely than not incurred in or caused by her active service or secondary to her knee disabilities. The examiner reasoned that, per the medical evidence of record (i.e., an orthopedic note from 2014 and a rheumatology note from 2015), the Veteran's hip pain began with her motor vehicle accident (MVA) or shortly after. The examiner also noted that the Veteran's gait was stable without evidence of chronic gait change that would lead to extra mechanical stress to other joints. 

During an October 2023 VA examination, the Veteran reported that she had constant hip pain and occasional dislocation. At that time, the examiner assessed that the Veteran had bilateral hip sprains. At that time, a VA examiner opined that the Veteran's claimed hip disabilities were less likely than not incurred in or caused by her service. The examiner reasoned that the record was silent for hip conditions during service. 

The Board finds that the February 2015 and October 2023 VA medical opinions are inadequate for adjudication purposes. In this regard, both examiners provided opinions that were based, in-part, on an inaccurate account of the evidence of record. See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295 (2008). Specifically, the February 2015 VA examiner failed to take account of the Veteran's report of hip pain and diagnosis of bilateral hip bursitis during the June 2012 VA examination, which was prior to her December 2013 MVA. Additionally, the February 2015 and October 2023 VA examiners failed to address the Veteran's in-service report of right hip pain, and her lay statements related to the onset and continuity of her hip pain after service. See Miller v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 249, 262 (2020) (determining that VA examinations were inadequate because the examiners failed to address lay statements and the Board did not find the lay statements not credible); see also Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295 (2008). 

Based on the above, the Board finds that the AOJs failure to obtain an adequate medical opinion constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error that warrants a remand for corrective action. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

Service Connection - Back Disability

The Veteran asserts that her claimed back condition is related to her service-connected knee disabilities. 

The Veteran's STRs reveal that she was diagnosed with an unspecified backache in August 2009. Additionally, the Veteran's treatment notes document her report of a backache in September 2009. Further, in September 2009, a treatment revealed that the Veteran weighed 110 pounds and that her body mass index (BMI) was approximately 21 percent. 

A March 2014 treatment note documented that the Veteran was involved in a MVA in December 2013. A November 2019 treatment note documented the Veteran's report of lower back pain. An April 2021 treatment note documented that the Veteran had a very significant trauma history and was willing to try trauma protocol for the body to help with her chronic back pain. A February 2023 radiology report of the Veteran's back revealed that she had mild disc bulging with annular fissures and mild facet arthritis at L4-5 with no significant central canal or foraminal stenosis. A June 2023 treatment note documented that the Veteran was assessed to have chronic low back pain with radiculopathy. 

During an October 2023 VA examination, the Veteran reported that the onset of her claimed back condition was 10 years prior to the examination and that she fell a lot due to her knees giving out. At that time, the examiner noted that the Veteran had a diagnosis of degenerative arthritis, lumbar radiculopathy of the right lower extremity, and lumbar disc bulging with annular fissures. At that time, no opinion was provided. 

In a December 2023 medical opinion, a VA examiner opined that it was less likely than not that the Veteran's back condition was proximately due to or the result of his service-connected condition. The VA examiner reasoned that the MRI findings in February 2023 were not deemed clinically relevant for the right lower extremity radiculopathy. The examiner also indicated that the corrected diagnosis should be mild disc bulge and facet arthritis. Additionally, the examiner assessed that the Veteran's diagnosed back conditions were most likely due to the documented MVA in December 2013 and her noted obesity. Further, the VA examiner noted that the Veteran's right knee patellofemoral pain syndrome was independent of the diagnosed conditions. 

The Board finds that the December 2023 VA opinion is inadequate for adjudication purposes. In this regard, the examiner failed to adequately address whether the Veteran's service-connected knee disabilities aggravated her diagnosed back disabilities. In fact, the Board finds that the examiner merely concluded that the Veteran's MVA and obesity were most likely the cause of her back disability and failed to address the evidence that the Veteran complained of a backache in service, prior to her MVA, at a time when her weight was 110pounds and her BMI was approximately 20 percent. See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295 (2008).

Based on the above, the Board finds that the AOJs failure to obtain an adequate medical opinion constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error that warrants a remand for corrective action. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

The matters are REMANDED for the following actions:

1. Schedule the Veteran for an examination by an examiner with appropriate expertise to determine the nature and etiology of the claimed right and left foot disabilities. The claims file must be made available to and reviewed by the examiner. Any indicated tests and studies must be performed. 

Based on the examination results and a review of the record, the examiner must first identify all right and left foot disabilities present during the pendency of the appeal, or proximate thereto. 

Then, for any identified pes planus, the examiner must provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's pes planus, which was noted on entry, increased in severity during active service. 

If so, the examiner must provide an opinion as to whether such increase in severity was clearly and unmistakably due to the natural progression of the disability. 

The examiner must also provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's pre-existing pes planus was aggravated by a service-connected disability, to include any altered gait and/or body mechanics resulting from such. 

Then, for all other identified foot disabilities, the examiner must provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that such disability was caused by, aggravated by, or would not have occurred but for a service-connected disability, to include any altered gait and/or body mechanics resulting from such. 

A complete and detailed rationale must be provided for all opinions expressed.

2. Schedule the Veteran for an examination by an examiner with appropriate expertise to determine the nature and etiology of the claimed right and left hip disabilities. The claims file must be made available to and reviewed by the examiner. Any indicated tests and studies must be performed. 

Based on the examination results and the review of the record, the examiner must provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the claimed right and/or left hip disability had its onset during the Veteran's active service or is otherwise etiologically related to such service. In forming the opinion, the examiner must consider the documented in-service complaints of hip pain and the Veteran's lay statements regarding the onset and continuity of her symptoms. 

The examiner must also provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the claimed right and/or left hip disability was caused by, aggravated by, or would not have occurred but for a service-connected disability, to include any altered gait and/or body mechanics caused by such. 

A complete and detailed rationale must be provided for all opinions expressed. 

3. Schedule the Veteran for an examination by an examiner with appropriate expertise to determine the nature and etiology of the claimed back disability. The claims file must be made available to and reviewed by the examiner. Any indicated tests and studies must be performed. Based on the examination results and the review of the record, the examiner must provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the claimed back disability had its onset during the Veteran's active service or is otherwise etiologically related to such service. In forming the opinion, the examiner must consider the documented in-service complaints of back pain and the Veteran's lay statements regarding the onset and continuity of her symptoms. 

The examiner must also provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the claimed back disability was caused by, aggravated by, or would not have occurred but for a service-connected disability, to include any altered gait and/or body mechanics caused by such. 

A complete and detailed rationale must be provided for all opinions expressed. 

 

 

Kristin Haddock

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Randall, Alexandria G.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.