Citation Nr: A25034263
Decision Date: 04/14/25	Archive Date: 04/14/25

DOCKET NO. 231013-386482
DATE: April 14, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for basal cell carcinoma, also claimed as reoccurring skin cancer, is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served in the United States Navy on active duty from January 1969 to January 1973, with service in the Republic of Vietnam.

The issue comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a May 2023 rating decision issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA).

In September 2022, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, and requested readjudication of entitlement to service connection for skin cancer most recently addressed in an April 2021 rating decision.  In March 2023, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the supplemental claim decision, which found that new and relevant evidence had been received and denied the claim based on the evidence of record at the time of that decision.

In May 2023, the AOJ issued the rating decision on appeal, to provide the Veteran with additional laws and regulations that are applicable to the decision on the above claim but were not included in the previous March 2023 rating decision.

In the October 13, 2023 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Evidence Submission docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the May 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or representative with, or within 90 days from receipt of, the VA Form 10182.  38 C.F.R. § 20.303.  If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal and prior to the date the Board received the VA Form 10182, or (2) more than 90 days following the date the Board received the VA Form 10182, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.303, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the Veteran's claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of this claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Entitlement to service connection for basal cell carcinoma, also claimed as reoccurring skin cancer, is remanded.

VA's duty to assist includes providing a medical examination when it is necessary to make a decision on a claim.  38 U.S.C. § 5103A(d); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(4).  Absent a reasoned medical explanation and without supporting data, a medical opinion is inadequate to adjudicate the Veteran's claim.  Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22?Vet. App.?295, 304 (2008).  A mere conclusory medical opinion is insufficient.  See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 312 (2007).

In an August 2022 statement, the Veteran reported that during his service in the Republic of Vietnam, he was assigned full-time duty dumping latrine barrels.  The Veteran reported that his duties included emptying latrine barrels twice a day into pits, burning human waste with diesel fuel, and standing guard over the burn pits until the waste was destroyed.  The Veteran contends that he suffers from skin cancers associated with exposure to dioxins and other chemicals associated with burn pits used during active service in the Republic of Vietnam.

The record contains the January 2023 VA Toxic Exposure Risk Activity (TERA) Memorandum.  The Board notes VA has established presumptive herbicide agent exposure through service in the Republic of Vietnam; as well as exposure to fuel due to the Veteran's MOS as engineman, and toxic exposures due to duties involving burning human waste using diesel fuel in burn pits.

In February 2023, the AOJ provided the Veteran a VA examination and medical opinion addressing his recurring basal cell carcinoma.  The VA examiner provided an opinion that the Veteran's claimed condition was less likely than not caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activity(ies), after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran.  The VA examiner noted that the Veteran did not complain of symptoms of a skin condition for almost 30 years after separation from service; thus, the examiner opined that the Veteran could have had numerous environmental exposures over the years, noted as prolonged sunlight, etc.

The February 2023 VA opinion is inadequate to adjudicate the Veteran's claim that his skin cancers are related to his in-service exposure to toxins from burn pits during his service in the Republic of Vietnam.  The February 2023 medical opinion does not address the Veteran's theory of entitlement, and the opinion lacks a reasoned medical explanation or supporting data as to why the Veteran's in-service toxic exposure to burn pits of human waste and diesel fuel did not cause the Veteran's skin cancer conditions.  Further, the examiner did not provide a reasoned medical explanation regarding the Veteran's basal cell carcinoma, and instead stated without application of the proper medical or evidentiary standard that the Veteran "could have had numerous environmental exposures over the years."  

Thus, the Veteran has not been provided an adequate medical opinion addressing the Veteran's claimed skin cancer conditions and his in-service toxic exposures.  Nieves-Rodriguez, 22 Vet. App. at 299-304; see Barr, 21?Vet. App. at 312; see also Reonal v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 458, 461 (1993) (noting a medical opinion is only as good and credible as the history on which it was based, and if based on an inaccurate factual premise it has no probative value).  Accordingly, a remand is required to address the pre-decisional duty-to-assist error and provide an adequate medical opinion addressing the Veteran's skin conditions associated with in-service toxic exposures to burn pits.  38 U.S.C. § 5103A(d); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159.

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

The AOJ should obtain an opinion from an appropriate clinician to determine the etiology of the Veteran's basal cell carcinoma.  The record and a copy of this Remand must be made available to the examiner.  The need for an additional examination is left to the discretion of the clinician.

Following a review of the evidence of record, the examiner must opine as to:

Whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's basal cell carcinoma, had its onset during or is otherwise etiologically related to active-duty service.

The examiner should also address:

Whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's diagnosed basal cell carcinoma is due to in-service associated toxic exposure.

In rendering his or her opinion, the examiner should consider the Veteran's total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments and the synergistic, combined effect of all TERAs.

The examiner must provide a comprehensive report including a clearly stated rationale for any opinions offered and conclusions reached, citing the objective medical findings leading to the conclusions.  Conclusions must not be based solely on the lack of records.  In this regard, the Board emphasizes that the Veteran is competent to report his symptoms and history, and such statements by the Veteran regarding symptomatology and medical history must be specifically acknowledged and considered in formulating any opinions concerning the onset and severity of his disability.  If such reports are rejected by the examiner, a reason for doing so must be provided.

 

 

J. SAIKH

Acting Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	A. V. Bona

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.