Citation Nr: A25034245
Decision Date: 04/14/25	Archive Date: 04/14/25

DOCKET NO. 241220-500976
DATE: April 14, 2025

ORDER

Service connection for prostate cancer is granted.

Service connection for erectile dysfunction as secondary to prostate cancer is granted.

Service connection for hypertension is granted.

Service connection for ischemic stroke as secondary to hypertension is granted.

REMANDED

Service connection for urge incontinence, to include as secondary to prostate cancer is remanded.

Service connection for right upper extremity neuropathy is remanded.

Service connection for left upper extremity neuropathy is remanded.

Service connection for right lower extremity neuropathy is remanded.

Service connection for left lower extremity neuropathy is remanded.

Service connection for a heart disability, claimed as congestive heart failure, is remanded. 

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The evidence is at least evenly balanced as to whether the Veteran was exposed to herbicide agents and other chemicals while stationed at Fort McClennan and that his prostate cancer was caused by those exposures.

2. The Veteran's erectile dysfunction is associated with his prostate cancer.

3. The evidence is at least evenly balanced as to whether the Veteran's hypertension is caused by his conceded exposure to herbicide agents at Fort McClennan.

4. The Veteran's ischemic stroke is associated with his hypertension.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for service connection for prostate cancer have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.307, 3.309.

2. The criteria for entitlement to service connection erectile dysfunction, as secondary to prostate cancer, have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.304, 3.310.

3. The criteria for service connection for hypertension have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.307, 3.309.

4. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for ischemic stroke, as secondary to hypertension, have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.304, 3.310.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from August 1966 to June 1968.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from August 14, 2024, August 29, 2024, and October 21, 2024, Appeals Modernization Act (AMA) rating decisions that considered the evidence of record on those dates.

In a December 2024 VA Form 10182, the Veteran requested Board review of the above-referenced rating decisions under the evidence review docket. Under evidence review, a Board decision is based on the evidence at the time of the prior decision, as well as evidence submitted by a claimant or their representative within 90 days of the election to appeal to the Board. 38 C.F.R. § 20.303. Accordingly, as it relates to the August 14, 2024, rating decision, the Board may only consider the evidence of record as of August 14, 2024, the date of the rating decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or his representative between December 20, 2024, and March 20, 2025. As it relates to the August 29, 2024, rating decision, the Board may only consider the evidence of record as of August 29, 2024, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or his representative between December 20, 2024, and March 20, 2025. Finally, as it relates to the October 2024 rating decision, the Board may only consider the evidence of record as of October 21, 2024, the date of the rating decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or his representative between December 20, 2024, and March 20, 2025. The Veteran submitted additional evidence in the open evidentiary window.

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim[s], considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

For the reasons explained below, as it relates to the issues of service connection for the bilateral upper and lower extremity neuropathy as well as service connection for urge incontinence and a heart disability, the Board finds that there has been pre-decisional duty to assist errors requiring further evidentiary development before these claims can be adjudicated. As the Board is remanding for further development, as it relates to those claims, the AOJ will consider the additional evidence which added to the claims file during the period of time when new evidence was not allowed.

Finally, the Board notes that, according to the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (the Court), when a claimant makes a claim, he is seeking service connection for symptoms regardless of how those symptoms are diagnosed or labeled. See Clemmons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1 (2009). While the Board notes that the Veteran has appealed the issue of entitlement to service connection for congestive heart failure, pursuant to Clemmons the Board will recharacterize the issue as entitlement to service connection for a heart disability, claimed as congestive heart failure. This issue so characterized is reflected on the title page.

Please note that the case has been advanced on the docket pursuant to 38 U.S.C. § 7107 (b).

1. Service connection for prostate cancer is granted. 

Service connection will be granted if the evidence demonstrates that current disability resulted from an injury or disease incurred in the active military, naval, air, or space service. 38 U.S.C. § 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a). Establishing service connection generally requires competent evidence of three things: (1) current disability; (2) in-service disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury. Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356, 1361 (Fed. Cir. 2018). Consistent with this framework, service connection is including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).

The Veteran contends that his prostate cancer is related to herbicide agents and other chemicals on active duty service while stationed at Fort McClennan from November 1966 to June 1968.

Fort McClellan was an Army installation in Alabama that opened in 1917 and closed in 1999 as part of the Army Base Closure and Realignment Committee (BRAC) program. VA recognizes that some members of the United States Army Chemical Corp School, Army Combat Development Command Chemical/Biological/Radiological Agency, Army Military Police School, and Women's Army Corps, among others, may have been exposed to one or more of several hazardous materials, likely at low levels, during their service at Fort McClellan. Potential exposures include but are not limited to: (a) radioactive compounds (cesium-137 and cobalt-60) used in decontamination training activities in isolated locations on base; (b) chemical warfare agents (mustard gas and nerve agents) used in decontamination testing activities in isolated locations on base; and (c) airborne polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) from the Monsanto plant in the neighboring town. Currently, VA does not presume that any adverse health conditions are associated with service at Fort McClellan; however, a Veteran not entitled to a presumption of exposure may still factually demonstrate that they were at least as likely as not exposed to an herbicide agent in a claim for benefits, with VA deciding claims by Veterans who are experiencing health issues that they believe are related to their service while at Fort McClellan on a case-by-case basis. See 38 U.S.C.A. § 1113(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d) (the availability of service connection on a presumptive basis does not preclude consideration of service connection on a direct basis).

In this case, a private treatment record, dated December 2017 confirms treatment for prostate cancer, including residuals. Therefore, a current disability has been demonstrated.

The next issue is whether the Veteran had in-service herbicide agent and chemical exposure. The Board recognizes that in a May 2020 statement in support of his claim, the Veteran wrote that he believed that he was exposed to herbicides including Agent Orange, polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), and hazardous chemicals while stationed at Fort McClellan. The Veteran asserts that he was sent to Fort McClellan, Alabama, to serve as a brigade mail supervisor for over one year while on active duty. He explained that he trained, drank, and showered in the water, and at times went into streams of still water, placing him in direct contact with soil and water supplies. He also wrote that he delivered mail all over base, including in the bivouac areas. He reported that when delivering mail to these areas he was exposed to areas without barrels present and not much vegetation around. 

Thr Board notes that the claim was referred to the Records Research Center (RRC). In March 2023, a professional researcher from the Veterans Benefits Administration (VBA) Office of Field Operations, Military Records Research Center, performed comprehensive research on the Veteran's claimed exposure event. The researcher requested records from the National Archives and Records Administration (NARA), the custodian of Army unit records from 1966 to 1968. NARA was unable to locate records for the Veteran's unit. Thus, the researcher concluded that there was no evidence to support documentation of the claimed exposure.

In contrast to the negative evidence proffered by VA regarding herbicide exposure at Fort McClellan, the Veteran, by and through his attorney, presented positive evidence. He has submitted several articles and reports demonstrating that herbicide agents were used at Fort McClellan from 1974 to 1976. Notably, one of the reports entitled "Likelihood of exposure to herbicide agents used in the Vietnam War by Veterans who served on Fort McClellan in Anniston, AL," is written by Hannah Mathers, Ph.D., an environmental scientist and former tenured, full professor in the Department of Agriculture and Crop Science at Ohio State University. In preparing her report, Dr. Mathers reviewed the Fort McClellan Environmental Baseline Survey and opined that "it is more likely than not; in fact, it is to a reasonable degree of certainty, that those serving and/or living near at FMTC (Fort McClellan) between 1974-1976 were exposed to the herbicide agents discussed herein the same ones used in Vietnam." She also stated that those exposed at Fort McClellan "more likely received a greater exposure to the contaminants" than even those with Vietnam service, especially "anyone undergoing any kind of military training conducted outdoors." As rationale for this opinion, Dr. Mathers noted that "when comparing the total amount of active ingredients used of the herbicides in question, to the land mass in question, there was approximately 13.23 times more herbicides used on Fort McClellan than in Vietnam." She explained how the herbicides were used at approximately "13 times their labelled rates." While the bulk of her opinion discussed a time frame after the Veteran's confirmed time in Fort McClellan, she noted that, "these same herbicide agents were likely used before 1974, but the historical record is incomplete as to the quantities in use."

Her statement regarding the likelihood of use of herbicide agents at Fort McClellan prior to 1974 is bolstered by an April 1996 affidavit from a man who worked as a forester there from 1960 to 1987. He reported that "[p]esticides were used on all of Main Post and Pelham Range, "[h]erbicides were sprayed to clear kudzu on Pelham Range fields and on Main Post," and the "[f]orestry staff used decontamination trucks to apply liquid pesticides and herbicides."

The Board thus finds that the evidence is at least in equipoise as to whether the Veteran was exposed to herbicide agents during active-duty service at Fort McClellan. Dr. Mathers' report contains a detailed and convincing opinion based on evidence of the amounts of commercial herbicides used at Fort McClellan over a significant period of time. Dr. Mathers' opinion regarding the use of herbicides at Fort McClellan supports the Veteran's statements regarding his in-service experiences. The Veteran is competent to report serving in areas of Fort McClellan during his active-duty service where herbicide agents had been sprayed. Also, there is no affirmative evidence to explicitly contradict these reports, and the reports appear to be consistent with the places, types, and circumstances of the Veteran's service. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a) (each disabling condition for which a veteran seeks service connection must be considered based on factors including the basis of places, types, and circumstances of service as shown by service record). Thus, this is sufficient to establish actual exposure to herbicide agents. Gust v. McDonough, No. 21-1317, 2023 U.S. Ap. Vet. Claims LEXIS 115, *10-11 (Jan. 26, 2023) (mem dec) (Toth, J.) (reversing a Board decision denying service connection due to direct exposure to herbicide agents at Fort McLellan based on the Board's failure to consider all of the evidence of herbicide agent exposure including competent lay statements and multiple studies); Bethea v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 252, 254 (1992) (single judge decisions may be relied upon for any persuasiveness or reasoning they contain). The in-service injury requirement has therefore been met.

In support of the claim, the Veteran's attorney submitted a report and supporting evidence from credible sources including private examiner Dr. V.C., an occupational/environmental physician, regarding the Veteran's reported environmental exposures (specifically including chemicals listed in 38 C.F.R. § 3.307 (a)(6) and other toxins) at Fort McClellan. See August 2020 Correspondence. Dr. V.C. explained that based on the Veteran's duties as a mail clerk of traveling to all areas of the base by truck and by foot, he more than exceeded the minimal exposure requirements which would qualify him for exposure to herbicides had he been stationed in Vietnam. The examiner explained that toxicants do not work differently based on geographic location, and as the Veteran was exposed to herbicides and dioxin-like PCPs at Fort McClellan, he was subject to the same risks as someone who was equally exposed in Vietnam or any location where herbicides were actively used. Thus, as prostate cancer is a medical condition which is presumptively associated with herbicides, Dr. V.C. opined that it was more likely than not the Veteran's prostate cancer was caused by his exposures to herbicides and PCBs while serving at Fort McClellan.

Notably, there are no negative opinions of record for consideration as to the question of service connection for prostate cancer. 

For the above reasons, the evidence is at least evenly balanced as to whether the Veteran's prostate cancer is related to in-service exposure to herbicide agents and other chemicals. As the reasonable doubt created by this relative equipoise in the evidence must be resolved in favor of the Veteran, entitlement to service connection for prostate cancer is warranted. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

2. Service connection for erectile dysfunction as secondary to prostate cancer is granted. 

The Veteran is claiming service connection for erectile dysfunction, claiming that this condition is related to his active-duty service, to include as secondary to his now service-connected prostate cancer. 

A disability can be service-connected on a secondary basis if proximately due to, or the result of, a service-connected condition. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a). In order to establish entitlement to service connection on a secondary basis, there must be (1) a current disability; (2) a service-connected disability; and (3) a nexus between the service-connected disability and the current disability. See Wallin v. West, 11 Vet. App. 509, 512 (1998). Additional disability resulting from the aggravation of a non-service-connected condition by a service-connected condition is also compensable. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310 (a) (2019); Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439, 448 (1995).

In this case, a private treatment record, dated December 2017 confirms treatment for erectile dysfunction. Therefore, a current disability has been demonstrated.

The Board also recognizes that in the December 2017 private treatment record, the examiner noted that the Veteran reported that he had previously been diagnosed with prostate cancer and had undergone radiation for it. The Veteran reported that he had experienced erectile dysfunction after the irradiation of his prostate. Further, in an August 2020 private opinion from Dr. V.C., the examiner opined that the Veteran's erectile dysfunction was at least as likely as not the direct result of his prostate cancer.  As explained above, the Board has granted service connection for prostate cancer in this decision. As the erectile dysfunction has been found to be a complication of his service-connected prostate cancer, a nexus has been established between the Veteran's claimed erectile dysfunction and his now service-connected prostate cancer.

Notably, there are no negative opinions of record for consideration as to the question of secondary service connection. However, there is probative evidence of record that is sufficient to find there is a nexus between the claimed erectile dysfunction and the now service-connected prostate cancer.

Therefore, the criteria for service connection, on a secondary basis, for erectile dysfunction have been met, and entitlement to service connection is warranted.

3. Service connection for hypertension is granted. 

The Veteran is claiming service connection for hypertension, claiming that this condition is related to environmental exposures at Fort McClellan.

Initially, the Board recognizes that in the August 2024 rating decision, the AOJ made the favorable finding that the Veteran has been diagnosed with hypertension. Thus, the Board is bound by this favorable finding, and the Veteran meets the current disability requirement. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).

The question before the Board is whether there is a causal relationship between the hypertension and his already conceded in-service environmental exposures at Fort McClellan. For the reasons explained below, the Board finds that service-connection for hypertension is warranted. 

At the outset the Board notes that the Veteran's service treatment records are silent for any complaints, treatment or diagnosis of hypertension.

In February 2021, a private medical opinion, dated October 2020, from Dr. V.C. was added to the claims file. The examiner explained that the Veteran had a long history of hypertension, dating back to at least 2009. The examiner explained that there was definitive epidemiologic evidence that exposure to Agent Orange was a major risk factor for the development of hypertension. The examiner cited to several studies, including a 2006 study covering a cohort of individuals accidently exposed to dioxin in Seveso, Italy and the Yucheng cohort in Taiwan, finding an increase in the incidence of hypertension in individuals who were exposed to high levels of dioxin and dioxin-like compounds. The examiner ultimately opined that it was at least as likely as not that the claimed hypertension was caused by exposures to herbicides and PCBs while serving at Fort McClellan.

The Board finds the private medical opinion of Dr. V.C. to be of great probative value. The examiner's opinion considered the Veteran's specific contentions, the claims file, and clinical medical evidence, before providing a positive opinion. See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008) (the probative value of a medical opinion is derived from a factually accurate, fully articulated, and soundly reasoned opinion). The examiner's positive etiological opinion was supported by a sufficiently clear and well-reasoned rationale and was consistent with the verifiable facts regarding the Veteran's contentions. See Bloom v. West, 12 Vet. App. 185, 187 (1999); Hernandez-Toyens v. West, 11 Vet. App. 379, 382 (1998); see also Claiborne v. Nicholson, 19 Vet. App. 181, 186 (2005). There is no evidence that Dr. V.C. was not competent or credible, and as the report was based on accurate facts and objective examinations, the Board finds that it is entitled to significant probative weight as to the etiology of the Veteran's hypertension. See Nieves-Rodriguez, Id.

Notably, there are no negative opinions of record for consideration as to the question of service connection for hypertension. 

Therefore, the criteria for service connection for hypertension have been met, and entitlement to service connection is warranted.

4. Service connection for ischemic stroke as secondary to hypertension is granted. 

The Veteran is claiming service connection for ischemic stroke, claiming that this condition is related to his active-duty service, to include his hypertension.

Initially, the Board recognizes that in the August 2024 rating decision the AOJ made the favorable finding that the Veteran's ischemic stroke was associated with his hypertension. Thus, the Board is bound by this favorable finding. Further, as explained above, the Board has granted service connection for hypertension in this decision. As the ischemic stroke has been found to be a complication of his service-connected now-service connected hypertension, a nexus has been established between the Veteran's claimed ischemic stroke and his now service-connected hypertension.

Therefore, the criteria for service connection, on a secondary basis, for ischemic stroke have been met, and entitlement to service connection is warranted.

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Service connection for urge incontinence, to include as secondary to prostate cancer is remanded. 

2. Service connection for right upper extremity neuropathy is remanded.

3. Service connection for left upper extremity neuropathy is remanded.

4. Service connection for right lower extremity neuropathy is remanded.

5. Service connection for left lower extremity neuropathy is remanded.

The Veteran is claiming service connection for bilateral lower and upper extremity neuropathy as well as bladder incontinence, claiming that these conditions are related to his active-duty service. 

The Board notes that in addition to the conceded in-service environmental exposures at Fort McClellan as discussed above, the Board notes that in a May 2020 statement, the Veteran wrote that while on AIT in-service, he was required to breathe in chlorine gas to "see how bad it was." Further, as it relates to the claimed bilateral upper and lower extremity neuropathy, the Board recognizes that in a December 2017 statement in support of the claim, the Veteran wrote that he began to experience the symptoms of twitching, numb and tingling extremities while still on active-duty service. 

When this matter was last before the Board in April 2022 it was remanded, in part, to provide the Veteran with VA medical opinions to determine if his claimed disabilities were related to exposure to chemical or biological agents while he was stationed at Fort McClellan. However, to date, no VA opinion has been obtained addresses the issue of etiology of the claimed disabilities. 

A Board remand confers on claimants, as a matter of law, the right to substantial compliance with the remand orders. Stegall v. West, 11 Vet. App. 268, 271 (1998); D'Aries v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 97 (2008). Failing to provide the Veteran with the Board-directed medical opinions is a pre-decisional duty to assist error. Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007). Accordingly, the additional development specified in the Board's prior remand must be substantially completed prior to adjudication.

Finally, the Board notes that on August 10, 2022, the Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxins Act of 2022 (PACT Act) was enacted. Section 303 of this law provides that, if a Veteran submits a claim for service connection with evidence of disability and evidence of participation in a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA), then VA shall obtain a medical opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not that there is a nexus between the disability and the TERA. 38U.S.C. §1168.

In this case, the Veteran has conceded in-service environmental exposures at Fort McClellan. Accordingly, he is a "covered veteran" for the purposes of applying the relevant portions of the PACT Act. As such, on remand the Board finds that a TERA opinion in accordance with 38 U.S.C. § 1168(a) is warranted.

6. Service connection for a heart disability, claimed as congestive heart failure, is remanded. 

The Veteran is claiming service connection a heart disability, to include congestive heart failure, claiming that it is related to his in-service environmental exposures at Fort McClellan. 

The Board recognizes that in an October 2020 private medical opinion, Dr. V.C. identifies diagnoses for left ventricular hypertrophy and diastolic dysfunction, which the examiner explains encompass hypertensive cardiomyopathy. While the examiner does not identify a diagnosis of congestive heart failure, the examiner did explain that hypertensive cardiomyopathy eventually leads to congestive heart failure (CHF). The examiner opines that the Veteran's hypertensive cardiovascular disease is at least as likely as not caused by exposures to herbicides and PCBs while on active duty in Fort McClellan. The supporting rationale however is insufficient, as the examiner addresses the relation of ischemic heart disease, rather than the Veteran's diagnosed disabilities, to the in-service toxic exposure. 

The Board recognizes that in the October 2024 rating decision on appeal, service connection for CHF was denied as the evidence of record at the time did not show a diagnosed disability. 

During an open evidentiary window, in February 2025, private treatment records were added to the claims file, showing a diagnosis of congestive heart failure in October 2023.

The Board recognizes that the Veteran submitted a claim for congestive heart failure in October 2024, and there was no evidence of this specific diagnosis at the time of the October 2024 rating decision denying the claim. However, at the time of the rating decision on appeal, there was competent evidence of record that the Veteran had a heart disability which may be related to his active-duty service. As stated above, when a claimant makes a claim, he is seeking service connection for symptoms regardless of how those symptoms are diagnosed or labeled. Clemmons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1 (2009).

The Board notes that the Veteran has not been provided a VA examination and medical opinion to address the nature and of etiology of his claimed heart disability. VA must provide a medical examination when there is (1) competent evidence of a current disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability, (2) evidence establishing that an event, injury, or disease occurred in service, or establishing certain diseases manifesting during an applicable presumptive period for which the claimant qualifies, and (3) an indication that the disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability may be associated with the veteran's service or with another service-connected disability, but (4) there is insufficient competent medical evidence on file for the Secretary to make a decision on the claim. McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006); see also 38 U.S.C. § 5103A (d)(2), 38 C.F.R. § 3.159 (c)(4)(i). The third prong, which requires that the evidence of record "indicate" that the claimed disability or symptoms "may be" associated with the established event, is a low threshold. McLendon, 20 Vet. App. at 83.

Here, the Board finds that the McLendon criteria have been satisfied. Specifically, there is competent evidence that the Veteran has a current diagnosis of a heart disability which may be related to his active-duty service, but there is insufficient competent medical evidence on file for the Board to make a decision on the claim.

The failure of the AOJ to provide the Veteran with a VA examination as to the etiology of his heart disability constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error, and a remand is necessary for an examination and TERA medical opinion to be issued

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain medical opinions from qualified examiner(s) to address the nature and etiology of the Veteran's bilateral lower and upper extremity neuropathy as well as bladder incontinence. The claims file, including a copy of this REMAND, must be made available to, and reviewed by the examiner(s). A note that it was reviewed should be included in the report. Based on the review of the entire record the examiner(s) should opine on the following:

A)	Whether it is approximately at least as likely as not that the left and/or right upper and/or left and/or right extremity neuropathy had its onset in, or is related to his active-duty service, to include his in-service environmental exposures while stationed at Fort McClellan. 

The examiner should specifically address the Veteran's lay reports that he began to experience the onset of twitching, numb and tingling extremities while still on active-duty service.

B)	Whether it is approximately at least as likely as not that the Veteran's bladder incontinence had its onset in, or is related to his active-duty service, to include his in-service environmental exposures while stationed at Fort McClellan.

The examiner(s) must consider the total potential exposure throughout all applicable military deployments, and the synergistic, combined effect of all TERA exposures from his MOS duties generally.

A complete rationale for all opinions expressed, must be set forth in the examination reports.

2. Obtain a VA medical opinion from an appropriate and qualified examiner with sufficient expertise to address the nature and etiology of the Veteran's claimed heart disability. The claims file, including a copy of this REMAND, must be made available to, and reviewed by the examiner(s). A note that it was reviewed should be included in the report. Based on the review of the entire record the examiner(s) should opine on the following:

3. Whether it is approximately at least as likely as not that any diagnosed heart disability during the period on appeal had its onset in or is related to the Veteran's active-duty service, to include his in-service environmental exposures while stationed at Fort McClellan.

The examiner is asked to specifically consider and discuss the findings of Dr. V.C. in the private October 2020 report. 

The examiner must consider the total potential exposure throughout all applicable military deployments, and the synergistic, combined effect of all TERA exposures from his MOS duties generally.

A complete rationale for all opinions expressed, must be set forth in the examination report.

 

 

Ardie A. Bland

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	T. Nettey, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.