Citation Nr: A25034312
Decision Date: 04/14/25	Archive Date: 04/14/25

DOCKET NO. 240104-407169
DATE: April 14, 2025

REMANDED

Service connection for atrial fibrillation is remanded.

Service connection for irritable bowel syndrome is remanded.

Service connection for migraines is remanded.

Service connection for sleep apnea is remanded.

Service connection for chronic back pain is remanded.

Service connection for chronic right hand pain is remanded.

Service connection for a bilateral knee condition is remanded.

Service connection for gastroesophageal reflux disease is remanded.

Service connection for deviated septum is remanded.

Service connection for a right shoulder condition is remanded.

Service connection for hypertension is remanded.

Service connection for a bilateral ankle condition is remanded.

Service connection for a left eye condition is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran had active duty service from September 1998 to August 2004.

The rating decision on appeal was issued in November 2023 and constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies. In the January 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the November 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. 

Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. However, because the Board is remanding the claims, any evidence it could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

The Veteran included two issues on the VA Form 10182 that were not previously claimed and were not adjudicated in the November 2023 rating decision on appeal. He is notified that a claim for benefits for anxiety and erectile dysfunction must be submitted on the application form prescribed by the Secretary. See 38 C.F.R. 3.1(p), 3.155, 3.160.

1. Service connection for atrial fibrillation is remanded.

2. Service connection for irritable bowel syndrome is remanded.

3. Service connection for migraines is remanded.

4. Service connection for sleep apnea is remanded.

5. Service connection for chronic back pain is remanded.

6. Service connection for chronic right hand pain is remanded.

7. Service connection for a bilateral knee condition is remanded.

8. Service connection for gastroesophageal reflux disease is remanded.

9. Service connection for deviated septum is remanded.

10. Service connection for a right shoulder condition is remanded.

11. Service connection for hypertension is remanded.

12. Service connection for a bilateral ankle condition is remanded.

13. Service connection for a left eye condition is remanded.

The November 2023 rating decision denied these 13 claims for service connection stating that the Veteran had failed to report for VA examinations; that there was no evidence of good cause for the failure to report; and that the claims were decided based on the evidence of record, to include service treatment records and VA treatment records. Since the reason for cancellation of the relevant examinations listed on the Exam Scheduling Request Contention Cancellation forms was that the claimant was unavailable, not that he did not report, a pre-decisional duty to assist error was committed by not scheduling the examinations for a time when the Veteran was available. This must be accomplished on remand.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Schedule the Veteran for appropriate VA examinations. The examiners must review the claims file.

If a diagnosis cannot be provided but the Veteran's condition manifests in symptoms that cause functional impairment, then the examiner should consider them a "disability" for the purpose of providing the requested opinion(s) below.

The examiner is asked to provide a response to whether the claimed disability is at least as likely as not related to service, with rationale to support the opinion.  

In providing the requested opinion, consider the Veteran's description of the in-service injury and symptoms as well as post-service symptoms. If there is any medical reason to accept or reject the proposition that the Veteran's reported injury and symptoms in service and thereafter represented the onset of the current disability, this should be noted. Stated another way, do the Veteran's reports about the symptoms align with how the currently diagnosed disability is known to develop or are the Veteran's reports generally inconsistent with medical knowledge or implausible?

The examiner is also asked to provide a response to whether the claimed disability is at least as likely as not related to the Veteran's conceded exposure to a TERA. In addressing the reported exposure, the clinician should consider the total potential exposure of the Veteran; and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran.  

 

M. C. WILSON

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	D. Van Wambeke, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.