Citation Nr: A25034947
Decision Date: 04/16/25	Archive Date: 04/16/25

DOCKET NO. 231226-402840
DATE:       April 16, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include generalized anxiety disorder, is granted, subject to the laws and regulations governing the award of monetary benefits.

Entitlement to service connection for a left finger condition is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a right foot condition is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for coronary artery disease (CAD) is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for hypertension is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for hypothyroidism is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The competent and probative evidence establishes that the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder began during his active duty service.

2. The evidence is persuasively against finding that the Veteran's left finger condition onset during or is otherwise related to an incident during his active duty service or a period of active duty for training (ADT).

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include generalized anxiety disorder, have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.309.

2. The criteria for service connection for a left finger condition have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.307, 3.309, 3.310.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from December 1965 to December 1970, with additional periods of Reserve service. 

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an October 2023 rating decision regarding the left finger condition, a right foot condition, CAD, and an acquired psychiatric disorder, and a November 2023 rating decision regarding hypertension and hypothyroidism, issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) regional office, which is the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).

In June 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, and requested readjudication of the service connection claims for an acquired psychiatric disorder and a right foot condition most recently addressed in a September 2014 rating decision; and service connection claims for a right foot condition and CAD, most recently addressed in a February 2018 rating decision. In October 2023, the AOJ issued the supplemental claim decision on appeal, which found that new and relevant evidence had been received and denied the claims based on the evidence of record at the time of that decision. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the decision on appeal and any evidence submitted during an applicable evidentiary window.

In the December 26, 2023, VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Hearing docket. A Board hearing was held on November 25, 2024. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the respective October 2023 and November 2023 AOJ decisions on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or representative at the hearing or within 90 days following the hearing. 38 C.F.R. § 20.302(a). If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal and prior to the Board hearing, or (2) more than 90 days following the hearing, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.302(a), 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the service connection claims for a right foot condition, CAD, hypertension, and hypothyroidism, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Service Connection

Service connection requires competent evidence showing: (1) the existence of a present disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

In the context of Reserve or National Guard service, service connection may only be granted for disability resulting from disease or injury incurred or aggravated while performing ADT, or an injury incurred or aggravated while performing inactive duty for training (IDT). 38 U.S.C. §§ 101 (24), 106, 1131; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.6, 3.303, 3.304. Service connection is generally not legally merited when a disability incurred on IDT results from a disease process. See Brooks v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 484, 487 (1993).

Service Connection - Acquired Psychiatric Disorder

The Veteran asserts that service connection is warranted for an acquired psychiatric disorder. His June 2023 Supplemental Claim included the service connection claim for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD). In Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1, 5-6 (2009) the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) held that, in determining the scope of a claim, the Board must consider the claimant's description of the claim, symptoms described, and the information submitted or developed in support of the claim. The October 2023 rating decision adjudicated service connection claim for PTSD. However, as will be discussed, the record also shows a diagnosis for generalized anxiety disorder. As such, the Board has recharacterized the issue on appeal as a single claim for an acquired psychiatric disorder, including but not limited to each of these diagnoses. Id. 

The Veteran's wife provided a written statement in May 2014, reporting that the Veteran never relaxed and always had to be doing something. She also reported that he could not sleep through the night. She noted that he had changed a lot since his military service. 

The Veteran provide testimony at the November 2024 Board hearing. He testified that when he was in Germany, he witnessed an incident where an APC carrier transporting a group of Soldiers attempted to cross a river, and when it fell into the river, everybody died. He noted that one of his favorite sergeants was in that vehicle. 

In the 90 days following the November 2024 Board hearing, the Veteran provided a private psychological examination report dated in January 2025. The examiner noted a review of the Veteran's claims file and a clinical interview that lasted an hour. Based on the review of the Veteran's claims file and an interview, the psychologist found that the Veteran had a diagnosis for generalized anxiety disorder under the DSM-5 criteria. The Veteran reported that he witnessed a personnel carrier fall into a river, where four service members died, some of which were his friends. He reported that he first began experiencing anxiety in service, and that he tended to spend considerable time thinking about things that he fears or that worry him. The psychologist noted that the Veteran had been perseverating over his military experiences, and that this was not PTSD or externally instigated involuntary memories, but rather volitional recollections and preoccupations with recalling further details. The psychologist noted that the Veteran's wife's written statements, in conjunction with the Veteran's reports over the years, showed that these preoccupations and perseverations have been cardinal features of the Veteran's daily life for quite a long time. Given such, it was at least as likely as not that his generalized anxiety disorder began during service. 

The Veteran was not afforded a VA examination for psychiatric disorders during the period on appeal. Thus, there is only one competent medical opinion of record, which was provided by the January 2025 private psychologist, who found that the Veteran's generalized anxiety disorder began during his active duty service. The Board affords these findings great probative weight because the psychologist conducted a thorough review of the Veteran's claims file and provided a robust and well-reasoned rationale in support of the findings provided. Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295 (2008). 

Based on the foregoing, the Board finds that service connection is warranted for the Veteran's generalized anxiety disorder. On this basis, the appeal is granted.

Service Connection - Left Finger Condition

The Veteran asserts that service connection is warranted for a left finger condition. Specifically, he asserts that he injured his finger in 1974 at Fort Benning during his period of Reserve service.

A review of the Veteran's service treatment records (STRs) does not show any complaints, treatment, or diagnosis for any left finger conditions. An August 1978 Report of Medical History, during the Veteran's Reserve service, showed that the Veteran had a fractured right thumb; no mention was made of his left fingers.

A review of the Veteran's military personnel records does not show any documentation of an injury to the Veteran's left finger, or line of duty determinations regarding the fingers, during his Reserve service. 

A review of the Veteran's post-service treatment records shows complaints for numbness and tingling in all of his fingertips and feet. However, there were no specific complaints or treatment for left finger conditions. 

The Veteran provided testimony at the November 2024 Board hearing. He testified that he injured his left finger during Reserve service at Fort Benning. He reported that his finger got caught on a D-ring from a gasmask, which cut the tip of his finger very badly. He noted that it had to be attached back on, and that he still had trouble with the finger. 

The Veteran provided a private examination report from February 2025. The private physician noted a review of the Veteran's claims file and an interview with the Veteran. The Veteran reported that he received a laceration on his left ring finger after it caught on a snap cover. He noted that he continued to have a sore, stiff finger. The physician noted that the Veteran's VA treatment records showed complaints for pain and numbness in his fingertips. The physician provided a positive nexus opinion. He explained that based on the medical documentation and the left ring finger pain and the need for medical treatment at that time and the need for continuing care, made it as likely as not that the Veteran had a service-connected disability of left ring finger arthritis. 

As discussed, the Board acknowledges that the Veteran had Reserve service. Under 38 C.F.R. § 3.6 (a), service connection may be granted only for an injury or disease incurred in or aggravated during ADT or for an injury incurred or aggravated during a period of IDT (including acute myocardial infarction, cardiac arrest, or cerebrovascular accident).

Here, Board points out that the physician reported that the Veteran's persistent pain and stiffness and the need for medical treatment at that time and the need for continuing episodic care meant it was as likely as not that he had a service-connected disability of left ring finger arthritis. The Board finds that the physician's opinion is afforded very little probative weight because it is based on an incorrect factual premise. In this regard, the Board notes that there is no clinical evidence of an injury to the Veteran's left ring finger during his Reserve service, because there is no line of duty determination, or any other documentation of a laceration injury to his left ring finger. Further, there is no clinical evidence that the Veteran has arthritis of the left ring finger, or any other left finger diagnoses. The report does not reflect that X-rays were conducted to confirm arthritis, and so even in the context of the Veteran's symptoms, it is unclear how the provider determined the Veteran had posttraumatic arthritis, as opposed to degenerative. The physician also did not explain how he came to the diagnosis of arthritis of the left ring finger. 

Given that the physician's opinion appears to be speculative, or at a minimum, without any sufficient rationale, the Board affords his opinion very little probative weight. Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295 (2008). To that end, the Board acknowledges that the Veteran was not afforded a VA examination for his left finger. However, given that his STRs, military personnel records, and post-service treatment records do not show any complaints, treatment, or diagnosis for any left finger lacerations, at the same time that they documented other illnesses, injuries, and residuals, the Board finds that VA's duty to provide a VA examination was not triggered. See McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 81 (2006); Fountain v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 258 (2015). To the extent that submission of the private opinion in the 90 days following the hearing met the "low" threshold to order an examination, this was not of record at the time of the rating decision on appeal, and VA does not have an obligation to develop in the absence of a pre-decisional duty to assist error. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

The Board is sympathetic to the Veteran's assertions and belief that service connection is warranted. However, the fact remains that there has been no line of duty determination, or medical documentation that his left ring finger was injured or aggravated during a period of ADT or IDT; there is also no evidence that the Veteran's left finger(s) were otherwise injured during a period of active duty service. Should the Veteran wish to provide objective medical evidence that his left ring finger was injured or aggravated during a training event, he is invited to work with his representative to accomplish such and to submit a Supplemental Claim, and if filed within one year, will preserve his original date of claim. However, at the present time, absent a currently diagnosed condition, service connection for a left finger condition must be denied.

In reaching the conclusion stated above, the Board has considered the applicability of the benefit of the doubt doctrine. As the evidence persuasively favors one side or the other, the doctrine is not for application. See Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc); 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 4.3.

REASONS FOR REMAND

Service Connection - Right Foot Condition

The Veteran asserts that service connection is warranted for a right foot condition. Specifically, he asserts that he injured his right foot when he stepped onto a spike that was on a track path. A review of the Veteran's STRs shows that bilateral pes planus was noted upon entry, at the December 1965 entrance examination. There were three notations regarding calluses of the right foot: March 1968, July 1968, and then again during Reserve service in July 1976. 

A review of the Veteran's VA treatment records shows that he is being followed for foot pain. However, there are no complaints, treatment, or diagnosis specifically regarding the right foot. 

The Veteran provided testimony at the November 2024 Board hearing. He testified that when stationed in Germany, he injured his right foot on a track pad, which had spikes on them. He reported that he stepped on one of the spikes. He reported that his injury was a puncture wound and that his condition involved the skin because when the skin would grow back, it was not smooth and that every time it was cut off, it would come right back. 

The Veteran provided a private examination report from February 2025. The private physician noted a review of the Veteran's claims file and an interview with the Veteran. The Veteran reported that when he was in Germany, he jumped on a track pad of a tank, that had something sharp. He noted that he had been placed on light duty for two weeks and had problems with that foot ever since. He noted that he had decreased ability to walk because of the pain in his foot. The physician provided a positive nexus opinion. He explained that based on the medical documentation and the injury to his right foot, with the need for medical treatment at that time and the need for continuing care, made it as likely as not that the Veteran had a service-connected disability of right foot arthritis. 

Here, the Board affords the physician's opinion very little probative weight because it is based on an incorrect factual premise. In this regard, the Veteran reported that his right foot condition in service was related to the skin. However, the physician found that the Veteran had arthritis of the right foot. Here, there is no clinical evidence that the Veteran has arthritis of the right foot, and the physician did not explain how he came to the diagnosis of arthritis of the fight foot. As such, the Board finds that service connection cannot be awarded based on the nexus opinion of the private physician. 

However, the Board does find that remand is necessary to obtain a medical opinion regarding the etiology of the Veteran's right foot condition. His STRs show numerous treatments for callus skin on the right foot. Further, a December 2017 written statement provided by the Veteran provides an indication that he received a puncture wound to his right foot, because he reported that when he jumped and landed on the track of a tank, he landed on something sharp. The Board finds that the AOJ's failure to obtain an opinion regarding the Veteran's puncture wound to the right foot, when his STRs showed numerous treatments for callus skin on the right foot is a pre-decisional duty to assist error, such that remand is warranted. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

Service Connection - CAD

Service Connection - Hypertension

Service Connection - Hypothyroidism

The Veteran asserts that service connection is warranted for CAD, hypertension, and hypothyroidism. Specifically, he asserts that he was exposed to herbicide agents, when his duties took him to the Korean demilitarized zone (DMZ).

The Veteran's military personnel records show that he was stationed in Korea, with the 304th Signal Battalion, in January 1969, and the 82nd Signal Detachment in July 1969 to February 1970. 

The Veteran testified at the November 2024 Board hearing that he was deployed to Seoul, Korea, and that he was sent to a place called Camp Red Cloud. He believed that this was in the DMZ. He noted that his duties included guard duty, and he was sent in every two weeks out of every two months. 

A July 2023 VA Memorandum shows that a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA) review was conducted. The memo concluded that the Veteran did not qualify for a presumption of exposure to herbicide agents. The memo noted that were no entries for an individual longitudinal exposure report (ILER) for an activity carried out by the Veteran while on active duty involving toxic exposure to occupational or environmental hazards. 

The Veteran's claims file also contains what appears to be a screenshot of a search of an ILER database, with no entries. 

The Board acknowledges that the AOJ attempted to corroborate whether the Veteran was exposed to herbicide agents. However, neither the VA memo nor the ILER search appears to acknowledge the Veteran's attachment to the 304th Signal Battalion, in January 1969, and the 82nd Signal Detachment in July 1969 to February 1970, when he was deployed to Korea. The Board finds that the AOJ must request all available unit records from the 304th Signal Battalion from January 1969 to July 1969, and the 82nd Signal Detachment from July 1969 to February 1970. The failure to do this prior to the issuance of the November 2023 rating decision is a pre-decisional duty to assist error, such that remand is warranted.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for a VA right foot examination. A copy of this remand and the claims file should be provided to the examiner. After physical examination of the Veteran, and completion of any necessary studies, the examiner should state any current right foot diagnoses. Thereafter, the examiner should opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that any diagnosed right foot condition is related to his active military service, to include the reports of an injury jumping onto a spike of a track pad.

The examiner should also consider and discuss the Veteran's STRs showing treatment for calluses of the right foot, in March 1968, July 1968, and July 1976. 

The Board notes that evidence of pain alone that causes functional impairment, even without a specific diagnosis or identifiable disease, may constitute a disability for VA purposes.

2. All available unit records from the Veteran's unit, 304th Signal Battalion from January 1969 to July 1969, and the 82nd Signal Detachment from July 1969 to February 1970 should be associated with the claims file. Any negative response must be fully documented for the claims file. Based on the records obtained, determine whether the Veteran's duties with the 82nd Signal Detachment and the 82nd Signal Detachment entailed performing guard duty in or near the DMZ in Korea. Pertinent daily logs, unit records, or any other relevant information should be reviewed in order to verify the Veteran's reports of Agent Orange exposure. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

 

 

J. Kirby

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	E. Fu, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.