Citation Nr: A25034051
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 240403-428384
DATE: April 11, 2025

ORDER

A compensable rating for pseudofolliculitis barbae (PFB) is denied.

REMANDED

The issue of entitlement to service connection for high blood pressure is remanded.

The issue of entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran's PFB is manifested by rash of the chin and neck covering less than 5 percent of total body and exposed area with no more than topical therapy required over the past 12-month period.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for a compensable rating for PFB have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.118, Diagnostic Code 7813.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served in the Gulf War era. The Veteran served on active duty from November 1998 to November 2001.

This matter is before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from May 2023 and August 2023 rating decisions by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ). In the May 2023 rating decision, the AOJ denied a compensable rating for PFB. In the August 2023 rating decision, the AOJ denied service connection for high blood pressure and sleep apnea. 

In this appeal, the Veteran filed an April 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) and elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the May 2023 decision on appeal, which denied a compensable rating for PFB. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. Because the Board is remanding the claims for service connection for high blood pressure and sleep apnea, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider with respect to the PFB claim, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

Further clarification is needed concerning the evidentiary record for the high blood pressure and sleep apnea claims. Following the August 2023 denial, the Veteran filed a supplemental claim with additional evidence. The AOJ then obtained additional medical opinions in October 2023. The supplemental claim was denied in a December 2023 rating decision. However, when the Veteran submitted his appeal in April 2024, he expressly chose to appeal the August 2023 rating decision on the Direct Review docket. As a result, the Board's review is limited to the evidence of record at the time of the August 2023 rating decision, and none of the evidence he submitted with his supplemental claim or the subsequent VA opinions can be considered. 

1. The issue of entitlement to a compensable rating for PFB.

The Veteran contends that a compensable rating for his PFB is warranted.

Disability ratings are determined by the application of a schedule of ratings, which is based on the average impairment of earning capacity. Individual disabilities are assigned separate diagnostic codes. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1. Where entitlement to compensation has already been established and an increase in the assigned rating is at issue, it is the present level of disability that is of primary concern. Although the recorded history of a particular disability should be reviewed to make an accurate assessment under the applicable criteria, the regulations do not give past medical reports precedence over current findings. Francisco v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 55 (1994). Staged ratings are appropriate for an increased rating claim when the factual findings show distinct time periods where the service-connected disability exhibits symptoms that would warrant different ratings. Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119 (1999); Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007). Where there is a question as to which of two ratings shall be applied, the higher rating will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating. Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7.

Separate diagnostic codes identify the various disabilities and the criteria for specific ratings. If two disability evaluations are potentially applicable, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating. Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7. Any reasonable doubt regarding the degree of disability will be resolved in favor of the veteran. 38 C.F.R. § 4.3.

The Veteran's entire history is reviewed when making a disability determination. 38 C.F.R. § 4.1. Where the veteran timely appealed the rating initially assigned for the service-connected disability within one year of the notice of the establishment of service connection for it, VA must consider whether the veteran is entitled to "staged" ratings to compensate him for times since filing his claim when his disability may have been more severe than at other times during the course of his appeal. See Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119 (1999).

The evaluation of the same disability under various diagnoses, known as pyramiding, is generally to be avoided. 38 C.F.R. § 4.14. The critical element in permitting the assignment of several ratings under various diagnostic codes is that none of the symptomatology for any one of the disabilities is duplicative or overlapping with the symptomatology of the other disability. See Esteban v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 259, 261-62 (1994).

The Veteran's PFB is rated under DC 7813 and evaluated under 38 C.F.R. § 4.118, Schedule of Ratings - Skin. PFB is a skin condition not specifically listed in the Rating Schedule. 

Under the General Rating Formula for the Skin, a noncompensable rating is assigned for no more than topical therapy required over the past 12-month period and at least one of the following: characteristic lesions involving less than 5 percent of the entire body affected; or characteristic lesions involving less than 5 percent of exposed areas affected. 

A 10 percent rating is assigned for at least one of the following: characteristic lesions involving at least 5 percent, but less than 20 percent, of the entire body affected; or at least 5 percent, but less than 20 percent, of exposed areas affected; or intermittent systemic therapy including, but not limited to, corticosteroids, phototherapy, retinoids, biologics, photochemotherapy, PUVA, or other immunosuppressive drugs required for a total duration of less than six weeks over the past 12- month period. 

A 30 percent rating is assigned for at least one of the following: characteristic lesions involving more than 20 to 40 percent of the entire body or 20 to 40 percent of exposed areas affected; or systemic therapy including, but not limited to, corticosteroids, phototherapy, retinoids, biologics, photochemotherapy, PUVA, or other immunosuppressive drugs required for a total duration of 6 weeks or more, but not constantly, over the past 12-month period. 

A 60 percent rating is assigned for at least one of the following: characteristic lesions involving more than 40 percent of the entire body or more than 40 percent of exposed areas affected; or constant or near-constant systemic therapy including, but not limited to, corticosteroids, phototherapy, retinoids, biologics, photochemotherapy, PUVA, or other immunosuppressive drugs required over the past 12-month period. 38 C.F.R. § 4.118.

The Veteran had a March 2023 VA examination for his skin condition.  The examiner noted a diagnosis of pseudofolliculitis barbae, and no other skin condition. The Veteran reported that he had skin rashes after shaving and that the condition has remained the same since its onset in 1999. The examiner noted that the Veteran had not been treated with medication in the prior twelve months for any skin condition, and that he had not had any treatments or procedures in the prior twelve months for any skin condition. The examiner opined that the Veteran's skin condition had visible characteristic lesions involving approximately less than 5 percent of the total body area and less than 5 percent of the total exposed body area. The examiner described the Veteran's PFB as pruritic papules and pustules of the chin and neck. The examiner stated that the Veteran did not have a benign or malignant neoplasm or metastases related to his PFB, and that his skin condition did not cause scarring or disfigurement of the head, face or neck. The examiner stated that the Veteran did not have any other pertinent physical findings, complications, conditions, signs and/or symptoms related to his PFB.

The Veteran asserts that his PFB warrants a compensable evaluation. A lay person, such as the Veteran, is competent to report observable symptomatology of an injury or illness but is not competent to render expert opinions or diagnoses of complex medical conditions such as the severity of his disabilities. See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 307-08 (2007).

After reviewing the record, the Board finds that a compensable rating for PFB is not warranted. The VA examination in March 2023 showed the Veteran's condition was not treated with systemic or topical medication in the prior 12 months and his condition did not require medical treatments or procedures. The visible characteristic lesions due to the skin condition of the chin and neck approximated less than 5 percent of his total body area, including exposed areas, and the examiner reported no scars.

The Board finds that the evidence of record persuasively weighs against the assignment of a compensable evaluation under the rating criteria because the Veteran's PFB does not more nearly approximate characteristic lesions involving at least 5 percent, but less than 20 percent, of the entire body affected; or at least 5 percent, but less than 20 percent, of exposed areas affected; or intermittent systemic therapy including, but not limited to, corticosteroids, phototherapy, retinoids, biologics, photochemotherapy, PUVA, or other immunosuppressive drugs required for a total duration of less than 6 weeks over the past 12-month period.

A compensable rating for PFB is denied. The evidence is not in approximate balance and not 'nearly equal'; therefore, the benefit of the doubt rule has no application. Ortiz v. Principi, 274 F.3d 1361, 1364 (Fed. Cir. 2001); Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

REASONS FOR REMAND

Remand by the Board in the AMA is proper for correction of duty to assist errors occurring prior to the date of the AOJ decision on appeal if correction of such error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the appellant's claim. 38?C.F.R. §?20.802(a).

This is a remand under VA's duty to assist to provide medical examinations and/or opinions under 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(4) and McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 81 (2006). A duty to assist error occurred prior to the date of the AOJ decision on appeal in failing to obtain examinations with fully explained medical opinions.

2. The issue of entitlement to service connection for high blood pressure is remanded.

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in March 2023, wherein the examiner opined that the Veteran's high blood pressure was not incurred in service or caused by an in-service injury, event or illness, as well as a July 2023 VA opinion, wherein the examiner opined that the Veteran's high blood pressure was not related to any toxic exposures during service. However, no opinion was solicited as to secondary service connection. This theory was raised by the Veteran in a January 2023 statement, wherein he suggested there was a relationship between his stress from the military and his hypertension.  The March 2023 mental disorders examiner states that the Veteran's diagnosis of major depressive disorder (MDD) subsumes and explains the Veteran's issues related to stress, and the Veteran was subsequently granted service connection for MDD. Therefore, as the Veteran believes that his stress and hypertension are related, and the VA examiner opined that his MDD and stress are related, a theory of secondary service connection was raised by the record sufficiently that an opinion is needed. 

3. The issue of entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea is remanded.

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in March 2023, but the examiner did not provide an opinion as to whether the Veteran's sleep apnea was caused by an in-service injury, event or illness.  A July 2023 VA opinion concluded the Veteran's sleep apnea is not related to any toxic exposures during service. However, no opinion has been provided on direct service connection that is responsive to the Veteran's contentions. In a May 2023 statement, he discussed working different shifts during service and the difficulties he had sleeping during service. An opinion is needed addressing these contentions. The Board is not finding his lay statements are sufficient to establish the in-service element of a claim for service connection, as the probative weight to be attached to those statements will be considered if and when the Board adjudicates the merits of the claim at a later time (if it remains denied by the RO and the Veteran appeals that denial to the Board), but only that his statements must be addressed by a medical professional.  

These matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain a VA examination and medical opinion regarding the Veteran's hypertension.

The examiner must provide fully explained responses to the following medical question:

QUESTION: Was the Veteran's hypertension caused or aggravated by his service-connected major depressive disorder symptoms, including but not limited to anxiety and/or emotional and psychological stress? Why or why not? 

The examiner must consider and discuss all pertinent medical evidence and all lay assertions. If lay assertions in any regard are discounted, the examiner should clearly so state and explain why. 

If the examiner cannot provide the requested opinion without resorting to speculation, s/he should expressly indicate this and fully explain why the opinion cannot be made without resorting to speculation.

2. Obtain a VA examination and medical opinion regarding the Veteran's sleep apnea.

The examiner must provide fully explained responses to the following medical question:

QUESTION:  Did the Veteran have sleep apnea that was incurred in service? Why or why not? Please see Veteran's January and May 2023 statements concerning sleep issues during service.

The examiner is advised that the lack of medical evidence in the Veteran's medical records is not fatal to the claim and cannot be relied upon alone as a rationale for a negative medical opinion.

The examiner must consider and discuss all pertinent medical evidence and all lay assertions. If lay assertions in any regard are discounted, the examiner should clearly so state and explain why. 

If the examiner cannot provide the requested opinion without resorting to speculation, s/he should expressly indicate this and fully explain why the opinion cannot be made without resorting to speculation.

 

 

MICHELLE L. KANE

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Lawrence Hubert

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.