Citation Nr: A25034363
Decision Date: 04/14/25	Archive Date: 04/14/25

DOCKET NO. 221205-301543
DATE: April 14, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an initial rating of 20 percent, but no higher, for left upper extremity neuropathy (all radicular groups) prior to June 20, 2018, is granted.

Entitlement to an initial rating of 20 percent, but no higher, for right upper extremity neuropathy (all radicular groups) prior to June 20, 2018, is granted.

Entitlement to an increased rating of 40 percent, but no higher, for left upper extremity neuropathy (all radicular groups) since June 20, 2018, is granted.

Entitlement to an increased rating of 30 percent, but no higher, for right upper extremity neuropathy (all radicular groups) since June 20, 2018, is granted.

Entitlement to an initial rating higher than 10 percent for left lower extremity neuropathy (sciatic nerve) prior to June 20, 2018, is denied.

Entitlement to an initial disability rating higher than 10 percent for right lower extremity neuropathy (sciatic nerve) prior to June 20, 2018, is denied.

Entitlement to an increased rating of 40 percent, but no higher, for left lower extremity neuropathy (sciatic nerve) from June 20, 2018, is granted.

Entitlement to an increased rating of 40 percent, but no higher, for right lower extremity neuropathy (sciatic nerve) from June 20, 2018, is granted.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. Prior to June 20, 2018, the Veteran's left upper extremity neuropathy (all radicular groups) has been manifested by symptoms that more nearly approximate mild incomplete paralysis.

2. Prior to June 20, 2018, the Veteran's right upper extremity neuropathy (all radicular groups) has been manifested by symptoms that more nearly approximate mild incomplete paralysis.

3. Since June 20, 2018, the Veteran's left upper extremity neuropathy (all radicular groups) has been manifested by symptoms that more nearly approximate moderate incomplete paralysis.

4. Since June 20, 2018, the Veteran's right upper extremity neuropathy (all radicular groups) has been manifested by symptoms that more nearly approximate moderate incomplete paralysis.

5. Prior to June 20, 2018, the Veteran's left lower extremity neuropathy (sciatic nerve) has been manifested by no more than mild incomplete paralysis.

6. Prior to June 20, 2018, the Veteran's right lower extremity neuropathy (sciatic nerve) has been manifested by no more than mild incomplete paralysis.

7. Since June 20, 2018, the Veteran's left lower extremity neuropathy (sciatic nerve) has been manifested by symptoms that more nearly approximate moderately severe incomplete paralysis.

8. Since June 20, 2018, the Veteran's right lower extremity neuropathy (sciatic nerve) has been manifested by symptoms that more nearly approximate moderately severe incomplete paralysis.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. Prior to June 20, 2018, the criteria for a 20 percent rating, but no higher, for left upper extremity neuropathy have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.120, 4.124a, Diagnostic Code (DC) 8513.

2. Prior to June 20, 2018, the criteria for a 20 percent rating, but no higher, for right upper extremity neuropathy have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.120, 4.124a, DC 8513.

3. Since June 20, 2018, the criteria for a 40 percent rating, but no higher, for left upper extremity neuropathy have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.120, 4.124a, DC 8513.

4. Since June 20, 2018, the criteria for a 30 percent rating, but no higher, for right upper extremity neuropathy have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.120, 4.124a, DC 8513.

5. Prior to June 20, 2018, the criteria for a rating higher than 10 percent for left lower extremity neuropathy have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.120, 4.124a, DC 8520.

6. Prior to June 20, 2018, the criteria for a rating higher than 10 percent for right lower extremity neuropathy have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.120, 4.124a, DC 8520.

7. Since June 20, 2018, the criteria for a 40 percent rating, but no higher, for left lower extremity neuropathy have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.120, 4.124a, DC 8520.

8. Since June 20, 2018, the criteria for a 40 percent rating, but no higher, for right lower extremity neuropathy have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.120, 4.124a, DC 8520.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served honorably in the United States Army from March 1971 to August 1979, with service in the Republic of Vietnam. For his meritorious service, the Veteran was awarded (among other decorations) the Vietnam Service Medal and the Vietnam Campaign Medal. The Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) thanks the Veteran for his service to our country.

This matter is before the Board on appeal from an August 2022 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office.

Procedural History

This matter has a long procedural history, initially coming to the Board on appeal from an April 2013 rating decision which denied service connection for right upper extremity neuropathy, left upper extremity neuropathy, right lower extremity neuropathy, and left lower extremity neuropathy.

Most recently, in the January 2022 decision, the Board granted entitlement to service connection for right upper extremity peripheral neuropathy, right lower extremity peripheral neuropathy, left upper extremity peripheral neuropathy, and left lower extremity peripheral neuropathy.

In a February 2022 rating decision, the Regional Office granted (i) service connection for right upper extremity neuropathy with an evaluation of 10 percent effective September 4, 2012, and an evaluation of 20 percent effective June 20, 2018; (ii) service connection for left upper extremity neuropathy with an evaluation of 10 percent effective September 4, 2012, and an evaluation of 20 percent effective June 20, 2018; (iii) service connection for right lower extremity neuropathy with an evaluation of 10 percent effective September 4, 2012; an evaluation of 20 percent effective June 20, 2018; and an evaluation of 10 percent effective January 24, 2020; and (iv) service connection for left lower extremity neuropathy with an evaluation of 10 percent effective September 4, 2012.

In July 2022, the Veteran submitted VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review, seeking review of the February 2022 rating decision.

In August 2022, the Regional Office issued the higher-level review rating decision on appeal, which continued the disability ratings granted in the February 2022 rating decision.

In the December 2022 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the February 2022 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

The Veteran's attorney in a December 2022 statement has raised general boilerplate arguments regarding VA's duty to assist. However, these arguments do not raise any specific argument of a duty to assist error with the claim on appeal. Therefore, the Board will not address such boilerplate arguments further.

The December 2022 statement contains boilerplate explaining TDIU law. However, no specific argument is made or evidence presented that specifically applies to the facts of this case. The Board may infer a claim for TDIU as part and parcel of an increased rating claim. See Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447 (2011). However, in this case, based on the lack of any clearly asserted claim or argument, the Board does not accept the boilerplate paragraph as a claim and concludes that a claim for TDIU has not been raised by the record or the Veteran.

The Veteran's attorney has raised a boilerplate allegation of a constitutional due process deficiency. The Board finds this generalized argument to be vague and conclusory because it fails to specify any particular procedural due process issue. The Board also finds that VA satisfied all relevant due process requirements as to the claim.

Increased Initial Ratings

Disability ratings are determined by applying the criteria set forth in VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities (Rating Schedule), which is based on the average impairment in earning capacity. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1. The basis of disability ratings is the ability of the body as a whole or of the psyche, or of a system or organ of the body, to function under the ordinary conditions of daily life, including employment. 38 C.F.R. § 4.10.

The determination of whether an increased rating is warranted is based on review of the entire evidence of record and the application of all pertinent regulations. Schafrath v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 589 (1991). Where there is a question as to which of two ratings shall be applied, the higher rating will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria for that rating. Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7.

When the appeal arises from an initially assigned rating, consideration must be given to whether "staged" rating should be assigned to reflect entitlement to a higher rating at any point during the pendency of the claim. Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119 (1999). Staged ratings are appropriate in any increased rating claim in which distinct time periods with different ratable symptoms can be identified. Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007).

When there is a question as to which of two evaluations will be assigned, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating. Otherwise, the lower rating is assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7. Reasonable doubt regarding the degree of disability is to be resolved in favor of the claimant. 38 C.F.R. § 4.3.

VA shall consider all information, lay and medical evidence of record, in a case before it with respect to benefits under the law administered by the VA. When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, the VA shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant. See 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc).

Neuropathy: Upper and Lower Extremities

In applying the schedular criteria for rating peripheral nerve disabilities, the term "incomplete paralysis" indicates a degree of lost or impaired functions substantially less than the type pictured for complete paralysis given with each nerve, whether due to varied level of the nerve lesions or to partial regeneration. When the involvement is wholly sensory, the rating should be for the mild, or at most, moderate degree. 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a.

In rating peripheral nerve injuries and their residuals, attention should be given to the site and character of the injury, the relative impairment in motor function, trophic changes, or sensory disturbances. 38 C.F.R. § 4.120. Consideration is also given for loss of reflexes, pain, and muscle atrophy. 38 C.F.R. § 4.123.

The words "mild", "moderate", and "severe" are not defined in the Rating Schedule.

VA's Adjudication and Procedures Manual (M21-1) provides guidance in the assignment and definition of the terms mild, moderate, moderately severe, and severe peripheral nerve conditions. Although the Board is not bound by the M21-1, it is required to discuss any relevant provisions contained in the M21-1 and conduct its own analysis before determining whether the M21-1 provisions may be relied upon to support its decision, thereby fulfilling part of its duty to provide adequate reasons or bases for its decision. See Overton v. Wilkie, 30 Vet. App. 257, 263-64 (2018).

Under the M21-1, "mild" is described as the lowest level of evaluation for each nerve. This is the default [degree] assigned based on the symptoms, however slight, as long as they were sufficient to support a diagnosis of the peripheral nerve impairment for service connection purposes. In general, look for a disability limited to sensory deficits that are lower graded, less persistent, or affecting a small area. A very minimal reflex or motor abnormality potentially could also be consistent with mild incomplete paralysis.

M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, Chapter 12, Section A.2.c.

"Moderate" is the maximum evaluation reserved for the most significant cases of sensory-only impairment (38 C.F.R. § 4.124a). Symptoms will likely be described by the claimants and medically graded as significantly disabling. In such cases a larger area in the nerve distribution may be affected by sensory symptoms. Other sign/symptom combinations that may fall into the moderate category include combinations of significant sensory changes and reflex or motor changes of a lower degree, or motor and/or reflex impairment such as weakness or diminished or hyperactive reflexes (with or without sensory impairment) graded as medically moderate. Moderate is also the maximum evaluation that can be assigned by neuritis not characterized by organic changes referred to in 38 C.F.R. § 4.123, or neuralgia characterized usually by a dull and intermittent pain in the distribution of a nerve (38 C.F.R. § 4.124). Id.

The "moderately severe" evaluation level is only applicable for involvement of the sciatic nerve. This is the maximum rating for sciatic nerve neuritis not characterized by the organic changes specified in 38 C.F.R. § 4.123. Motor and/or reflex impairment (for example, weakness or diminished or hyperactive reflexes) at a grade reflecting a high level of limitation or disability is expected. Atrophy may be present. However, for marked muscular atrophy see the criteria for a severe evaluation under 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, DC 8520. Id.

In general, "severe" is expected to include motor and/or reflex impairment (for example), atrophy, weakness, or diminished or hyperactive reflexes) at a grade reflecting a very high level of limitation or disability. Trophic changes may be seen in severe longstanding neuropathy cases. For the sciatic nerve (38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, DC 8520), marked muscular atrophy is expected. Even though severe incomplete paralysis cases should show findings substantially less than representative findings for complete impairment of the nerve, the disability picture for severe incomplete paralysis may contain signs/symptoms resembling some of those expected in cases of complete paralysis of the nerve. Neuritis characterized by loss of reflexes, muscle atrophy, sensory disturbances, and constant pain should be rated as high as severe incomplete paralysis of the nerve (38 C.F.R. § 4.123). Id.

The Board recognizes the holding in Banschbach v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 422 (2024), where the Court found that 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a does not necessarily prohibit the assignment of separate compensable ratings for paralysis, neuritis, and neuralgia. In the present appeal, the record before the Board does not specifically note findings of neuritis or neuralgia, only references to nerve impairment. Accordingly, no further consideration of separate ratings under Diagnostic Code 8620 for neuritis, or Diagnostic Code 8720 for neuralgia, is required.

Factual Background

In February 2010, the Veteran presented to the Des Moines VA Medical Center for neurology consultation. He stated for the last five to six years he noticed intermittent burning in his arms and legs. The problem was gradually getting worse. The burning was more frequent. He also felt a vibration sensation in his limbs. He had some ulnar distribution numbness. Motor exam demonstrated there was no drift. Tone was normal throughout. Strength was full throughout. Reflexes were 2+, except for 1+ at the right knee. Sensory exam was notable for a patch of decreased pinprick sensitivity, but not loss of touch over the left anterolateral thigh. Sensory modalities were all intact in the distal extremities. Regular gait and tandem gait were steady. The impression of the neurologist was burning and vibratory sensations in the limbs of unclear etiology but were possibly related to emerging small fiber neuropathy.

In an April 2012 treatment note, the Veteran reported pain in his shoulders and arms. The Veteran stated his pain was getting worse, it was down both arms, right worse than left. His fingers were numb and tingly. He was having trouble working and was unable to drive. On examination, he moved all four extremities without difficulty. Push/pull was normal. Grip was normal. Sensation was dull, but intact. The physician assessed peripheral sensory neuropathy.

In a September 2012 treatment note, the Veteran reported ongoing upper extremity numbness and tingling and lower extremity intermittent tingling and numbness.

In an April 2013 treatment note, the Veteran reported a private in-patient hospitalization for sharp, pressured chest pain that radiated into the arms and back. His pain radiated into the shoulders, arms, and his back, worsened with touch, and felt like a bruise. He was positive for neuropathy, numbness and tingling in his upper extremities, and numbness in his fingertips. The physician assessed peripheral neuropathy, questionable flare due to patient's description and rule out for reflux, irritable bowel, gallbladder, pancreatitis, and pulmonary embolus.

A June 2013 VA Agent Orange treatment note reports a history of peripheral sensory neuropathy and indicates that the upper and lower extremities had full strength, with no cyanosis or pedal edema, stable gait, and grossly intact sensory with normal deep tendon reflexes in the upper and lower extremities except for right knee jerk.

In a September 2013 treatment note, the examining physician noted the Veteran's neuropathy, shoulders and arms. The Veteran rated the pain as 4/10. He stated the pain was better when it was warm, and it was worse when it was cold. He had some numbness and tingling into his fingers.

In an October 2013 treatment note, the Veteran indicated in 2010 he had hand numbness; he added for about the past one to two years, when the temperature gets below 50 degrees, his hands are entirely numb.

In a February 2016 treatment note, the Veteran reported continued numbness in both feet/lower legs associated with his neuropathy. In November 2016, the Veteran requested medication for his neuropathy.

The Veteran submitted to a VA Peripheral Nerves Conditions examination in April 2017. He reported a burning sensation and vibrating sensation in his forearms to fingertips, and the feet, toes and lower legs. He was prescribed Gabapentin. The examiner diagnosed small fiber peripheral neuropathy.

On examination, the Veteran had symptoms attributable to peripheral nerve conditions including upper extremity paresthesias and/or dysesthesias to a mild level of severity; lower extremity paresthesias and/or dysesthesias to a mild level of severity. Muscle strength testing was normal. There was no evidence of muscle atrophy. Reflex exam (deep tendon reflexes) for biceps, triceps, and brachioradialis was normal; reflex exam for right knee was hypoactive; reflex exam for left knee and ankles was normal. Sensory exam was normal. There were no trophic changes. His gait was normal. For the upper extremities, the examiner indicated there was mild incomplete paralysis of the median nerve. For the lower extremities, the examiner indicated mild incomplete paralysis of the sciatic nerve. Regarding functional impact, the examiner remarked the Veteran's peripheral neuropathy did not impact his ability to perform occupational tasks.

The Veteran submitted to a VA Peripheral Nerves Conditions examination on June 20, 2018. The examiner noted the initial medical evidence dated back to a VA neurology consultation in February 2010, when the Veteran presented with upper extremity paresthesias that began five to six years prior to the visit. The examiner diagnosed upper and lower extremity peripheral neuropathy.

On examination, the Veteran had symptoms attributable to peripheral nerve conditions including upper extremity constant pain to a mild level of severity, and paresthesias and/or dysesthesias and numbness to a moderate level of severity; lower extremity intermittent pain to a moderate level of severity, and paresthesias and/or dysesthesias and numbness to a severe level of severity. Muscle strength testing for elbow flexion and extension, wrist flexion and extension, and left grip was normal; muscle strength testing for right grip and bilateral pinch (thumb to index finger) was reduced; muscle strength testing for knee extension, ankle plantar flexion, and ankle dorsiflexion was normal. There was no evidence of muscle atrophy. Reflex exam (deep tendon reflexes) for biceps, triceps, and brachioradialis was normal; reflex exam for right knee was absent; and reflex exam for left knee and bilateral ankles was normal. Sensory exam for shoulder, and right inner/outer forearm was normal; sensory exam for left inner/outer forearm and bilateral hand/fingers was decreased; sensory exam for upper anterior thigh, thigh/knee, and lower leg/ankle was normal; sensory exam for foot/toes was decreased. Position sense testing was normal. Monofilament testing was absent for right foot and diminished for left foot. Vibration testing was absent for right toe and decreased for right ankle; and decreased for left toe and ankle. There were trophic changes, described as "absent hair on his legs." His gait was normal. For the upper extremities, the examiner indicated there was mild incomplete paralysis of the radial nerve (musculospiral nerve), median nerve, ulnar nerve, and lower radicular group. For the lower extremities, the examiner indicated mild incomplete paralysis of the sciatic nerve, external popliteal nerve (common peroneal), musculocutaneous nerve (superficial peroneal), anterior tibial nerve (deep peroneal), internal popliteal nerve (tibial), and posterior tibial nerve.

In a December 2018 treatment note, the examining physician noted a "long history" of intermittent burning and pain in the chest extending to the arms and the legs.

The Veteran submitted to a VA Peripheral Nerves Conditions examination on January 24, 2020. The Veteran stated that since his condition started it had gotten progressively worse. His current treatment included rest, elevation, Tylenol and ibuprofen. The examiner diagnosed upper and lower extremity peripheral neuropathy.

On examination, the Veteran had symptoms attributable to peripheral nerve conditions including upper extremity intermittent pain, paresthesias and/or dysesthesias and numbness to a mild level of severity; lower extremity intermittent pain, paresthesias and/or dysesthesias and numbness to a moderate level of severity. Muscle strength testing for elbow flexion and extension, wrist flexion and extension, and grip was normal; muscle strength testing for pinch (thumb to index finger) was reduced; muscle strength testing for knee extension and ankle plantar flexion was normal; and muscle strength testing for ankle dorsiflexion was reduced. There was no evidence of muscle atrophy. Reflex exam (deep tendon reflexes) was normal. Sensory exam for shoulder area was normal; sensory exam for inner/outer forearm and hand/fingers was decreased; sensory exam for upper anterior thigh was normal; sensory exam for thigh/knee, lower leg/ankle, and foot/toes was decreased. There were no trophic changes. His gait was normal. For the upper extremities, the examiner indicated there was mild incomplete paralysis of the radial nerve (musculospiral nerve), median nerve, and ulnar nerve. For the lower extremities, the examiner indicated moderate incomplete paralysis of the sciatic nerve. Regarding functional impact, the examiner remarked the Veteran's peripheral neuropathy impacted his ability to perform occupational tasks. The Veteran has pain in his hands and at times has trouble holding onto cups due to peripheral neuropathy. He has pain in his feet which makes it hard for him to stand and walk for periods of time due to lower extremity neuropathy.

1. Entitlement to an initial rating of 20 percent, but no higher, for left upper extremity neuropathy (all radicular groups), prior to June 20, 2018, is granted.

2. Entitlement to an initial rating of 20 percent, but no higher, for right upper extremity neuropathy (all radicular groups), prior to June 20, 2018, is granted.

3. Entitlement to an increased rating of 40 percent, but no higher, for left upper extremity neuropathy (all radicular groups) since June 20, 2018, is granted.

4. Entitlement to an increased rating of 30 percent, but no higher, for right upper extremity neuropathy (all radicular groups) since June 20, 2018, is granted.

The Veteran's left upper extremity neuropathy was previously rated as 10 percent disabling from September 4, 2012 to June 20, 2018, under Diagnostic Code (DC) 8615 (median nerve), and currently as 20 percent disabling from June 20, 2018 under DC 8613 (all radicular groups).

The Veteran's right upper extremity neuropathy was previously rated as 10 percent disabling from September 4, 2012 to June 20, 2018 under DC 8615 (median nerve), and currently as 20 percent disabling from June 20, 2018 under DC 8613 (all radicular groups).

Paralysis of the radial nerve (musculospiral nerve), median nerve, and ulnar nerve (all radicular groups) are evaluated in accordance with the criteria set forth in 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, DC 8513. (Neuritis and neuralgia of that group are evaluated under DCs 8613 and 8713). A distinction is made between major (dominant) and minor (non-dominant) extremity. 38 C.F.R. § 4.69. In this case, the record clearly indicates that the Veteran is left hand dominant.

Under these criteria, a 20 percent rating is assigned for mild incomplete paralysis of the major upper extremity. A 40 percent rating is assigned for moderate incomplete paralysis of the major upper extremity. A 70 percent rating is assigned for severe incomplete paralysis of the major upper extremity. A maximum 90 percent rating is assigned for complete paralysis of the major upper extremity. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, DC 8513.

Under these criteria, a 20 percent rating is assigned for mild incomplete paralysis of the minor upper extremity. A 30 percent rating is assigned for moderate incomplete paralysis of the minor upper extremity. A 60 percent rating is assigned for severe incomplete paralysis of the minor upper extremity. A maximum 80 percent rating is assigned for complete paralysis of the minor upper extremity. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, DC 8513.

Left and Right Upper Extremity Neuropathy (All Radicular Groups): Period prior to June 20, 2018 

After review of the evidence, lay and medical, the Board finds that the criteria for a rating of 20 percent, but no higher, is warranted for mild incomplete paralysis of the left and right upper extremity neuropathy (all radicular groups).

During the February 2010 neurology consultation, he reported burning and a vibration sensation in his limbs, He had some ulnar distribution numbness. Sensory exam was notable for a patch of decreased pinprick sensitivity. In April 2012, he reported pain in his shoulders and arms, his fingers were numb and tingly, and sensation was dull, but intact.

In April 2013, he was positive for neuropathy, numbness and tingling upper extremities, and numbness in his fingertips. In September 2013, he was positive for neuropathy shoulders and arms. He rated the pain as 4/10, and he had some numbness and tingling into his fingers. In October 2013, he indicated when the temperature gets below 50 degrees, his hands are entirely numb. In November 2016, he requested medication for his neuropathy.

During the April 2017 VA Peripheral Nerves Condition examination, the Veteran had symptoms attributable to peripheral nerve conditions including upper extremity paresthesias and/or dysesthesias to a mild level of severity. Muscle strength testing was normal. Reflex exam (deep tendon reflexes) was normal. Sensory exam was normal.

These reports are consistent with the M21-1 guidelines and support a finding of mild incomplete paralysis of all radicular groups. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, DC 8513.

The Board, however, finds a rating higher than 20 percent for left and right upper extremity neuropathy (all radicular groups) is not warranted. Specifically, the medical and lay evidence does not support evidence of moderate incomplete paralysis of all radicular groups. The evidence weighs against combinations of significant sensory changes and reflex or motor changes of a lower degree, or motor and/or reflex impairment such as weakness or diminished or hyperactive reflexes (with or without sensory impairment) graded as medically moderate. Accordingly, a rating higher than 20 percent is not warranted.

For the foregoing reasons, after affording the Veteran the benefit of the doubt, a rating of 20 percent, but no higher, for the service connected left upper extremity neuropathy (all radicular groups), and right upper extremity neuropathy (all radicular groups), prior to June 20, 2018, is warranted.

Left Upper Extremity Neuropathy (All Radicular Groups): Period from June 20, 2018

After review of the evidence, lay and medical, the Board finds that the criteria for a rating of 40 percent, but no higher, is warranted for moderate incomplete paralysis of the left upper extremity neuropathy (all radicular groups).

During the June 20, 2018, VA Peripheral Nerves Conditions examination, the Veteran had symptoms attributable to peripheral nerve conditions including left upper extremity constant pain to a mild level of severity, and paresthesias and/or dysesthesias and numbness to a moderate level of severity. Muscle strength testing for pinch (thumb to index fingers) was reduced. Reflex exam (deep tendon reflexes) was normal. Sensory exam for inner/outer forearm and hand/fingers was decreased. For the left upper extremity, the examiner indicated there was mild incomplete paralysis of the radial nerve (musculospiral nerve), median nerve, ulnar nerve, and lower radicular group. Regarding functional impact, the examiner remarked the Veteran's upper extremity peripheral neuropathy impacted his ability to perform occupational tasks.

During the January 24, 2020, VA Peripheral Nerves Conditions examination, the Veteran had symptoms attributable to peripheral nerve conditions including left upper extremity intermittent pain, paresthesias and/or dysesthesias and numbness to a mild level of severity. Muscle strength testing for pinch (thumb to index finger) was reduced. Reflex exam (deep tendon reflexes) was normal. Sensory exam for inner/outer forearm and hand/fingers was decreased. For the left upper extremity, the examiner indicated there was mild incomplete paralysis of the radial nerve (musculospiral nerve), median nerve, and ulnar nerve. Regarding functional impact, the examiner remarked the Veteran's upper extremity peripheral neuropathy impacted his ability to perform occupational tasks. The Veteran has pain in his hands and at times has trouble holding onto cups due to peripheral neuropathy.

These reports are consistent with the M21-1 guidelines and support a finding of moderate incomplete paralysis of all radicular groups.

The Board, however, finds a rating higher than 40 percent for left upper extremity neuropathy (all radicular groups) is not warranted. Specifically, the medical and lay evidence does not support evidence of severe incomplete paralysis of all radicular groups. The evidence weighs against the presence of motor and/or reflex impairment (for example, atrophy, weakness, or diminished or hyperactive reflexes) at a grade reflecting a very high level of limitation or disability, that is required for a 70 percent rating. Accordingly, a rating higher than 40 percent is not warranted.

For the foregoing reasons, after affording the Veteran the benefit of the doubt, a rating of 40 percent, but no higher, for the service connected left upper extremity neuropathy (all radicular groups) from June 20, 2018, is warranted.

Right Upper Extremity Neuropathy (All Radicular Groups): Period from June 20, 2018

After review of the evidence, lay and medical, the Board finds that the criteria for a rating of 30 percent, but no higher, is warranted for moderate incomplete paralysis of the right upper extremity neuropathy (all radicular groups).

During the June 20, 2018, VA Peripheral Nerves Conditions examination, the Veteran had symptoms attributable to peripheral nerve conditions including right upper extremity constant pain to a mild level of severity, and paresthesias and/or dysesthesias and numbness to a moderate level of severity. Muscle strength testing for grip and pinch (thumb to index fingers) was reduced. Reflex exam (deep tendon reflexes) was normal. Sensory exam for hand/fingers was decreased. For the right upper extremity, the examiner indicated there was mild incomplete paralysis of the radial nerve (musculospiral nerve), median nerve, ulnar nerve, and lower radicular group. Regarding functional impact, the examiner remarked the Veteran's upper extremity peripheral neuropathy impacted his ability to perform occupational tasks.

During the January 24, 2020, VA Peripheral Nerves Conditions examination, the Veteran had symptoms attributable to peripheral nerve conditions including right upper extremity intermittent pain, paresthesias and/or dysesthesias and numbness to a mild level of severity. Muscle strength testing for pinch (thumb to index finger) was reduced. Reflex exam (deep tendon reflexes) was normal. Sensory exam for inner/outer forearm and hand/fingers was decreased. For the right upper extremity, the examiner indicated there was mild incomplete paralysis of the radial nerve (musculospiral nerve), median nerve, and ulnar nerve. Regarding functional impact, the examiner remarked the Veteran's upper extremity peripheral neuropathy impacted his ability to perform occupational tasks. The Veteran has pain in his hands and at times has trouble holding onto cups due to peripheral neuropathy.

These reports are consistent with the M21-1 guidelines and support a finding of moderate incomplete paralysis of all radicular groups.

The Board, however, finds a rating higher than 30 percent for right upper extremity neuropathy (all radicular groups) is not warranted. Specifically, the medical and lay evidence does not support evidence of severe incomplete paralysis of all radicular groups. The evidence weighs against the presence of motor and/or reflex impairment (for example, atrophy, weakness, or diminished or hyperactive reflexes) at a grade reflecting a very high level of limitation or disability, that is required for a 60 percent rating. Accordingly, a rating higher than 30 percent is not warranted.

For the foregoing reasons, after affording the Veteran the benefit of the doubt, a rating of 30 percent, but no higher, for the service connected right upper extremity neuropathy (all radicular groups) from June 20, 2018, is warranted.

5. Entitlement to an initial rating higher than 10 percent for left lower extremity neuropathy (sciatic nerve) prior to June 20, 2018, is denied.

6. Entitlement to an initial rating higher than 10 percent for right lower extremity neuropathy (sciatic nerve) prior to June 20, 2018, is denied.

7. Entitlement to an increased rating of 40 percent for left lower extremity neuropathy (sciatic nerve) from June 20, 2018, is granted.

8. Entitlement to an increased rating of 40 percent for right lower extremity neuropathy (sciatic nerve) from June 20, 2018, is granted.

The Veteran's left lower extremity neuropathy (sciatic nerve) is currently rated as 10 percent disabling from September 4, 2012, under Diagnostic Code (DC) 8620.

The Veteran's right lower extremity neuropathy (sciatic nerve) was previously rated as 10 percent disabling from September 4, 2012 to June 20, 2018, as 20 percent disabling from June 20, 2018 to January 24, 2020, and currently as 10 percent disabling from January 24, 2020, under DC 8620.

Paralysis of the sciatic nerve is evaluated in accordance with the criteria set forth in 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, DC 8520 (Neuritis and neuralgia of that group are evaluated under DCs 8620 and 8720). Under these criteria a 10 percent rating is assigned for mild incomplete paralysis. A 20 percent rating is assigned for moderate incomplete paralysis. A 40 percent rating is assigned for moderately severe incomplete paralysis. A 60 percent rating is assigned for severe, with marked muscular atrophy, incomplete paralysis. An 80 percent rating is assigned for complete paralysis (complete; the foot dangles and drops, no active movement possible of muscles below the knee, flexion of the knee weakened or (very rarely) lost). See 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, DC 8520.

Left and Right Lower Extremity Neuropathy (Sciatic Nerve): Period prior to June 20, 2018

After review of the evidence, lay and medical, the Board finds that the criteria for a rating higher than 10 percent for left and right lower extremity neuropathy (sciatic nerve) has not been met or more nearly approximated; his left and right lower extremity neuropathy has been manifested, at worst, by mild incomplete paralysis.

During the February 2010 neurology consultation, he reported burning and a vibration sensation in his legs. The problem was gradually getting worse. The burning was more frequent. Motor exam demonstrated there was no drift. Strength was full throughout. There was no atrophy. Sensory modalities were all intact in the distal extremities. Regular gait and tandem gait were steady.

In September 2012, the Veteran reported ongoing lower extremity intermittent tingling and numbness. A June 2013 VA Agent Orange treatment note reports a history of peripheral sensory neuropathy and indicates that the lower extremities had full strength, with no cyanosis or pedal edema, stable gait, and grossly intact sensory with normal deep tendon reflexes in the lower extremities except for right knee jerk.

In February 2016, he reported continued numbness in both feet/lower legs associated with his neuropathy. In November 2016, he requested medication for his neuropathy.

During the April 2017 VA Peripheral Nerves Condition examination, the Veteran had symptoms attributable to peripheral nerve conditions including lower extremity paresthesias and/or dysesthesias to a mild level of severity. Muscle strength testing was normal. There was no evidence of muscle atrophy. Reflex exam (deep tendon reflexes) for right knee was hypoactive. Sensory exam was normal. There were no trophic changes. His gait was normal. For the lower extremities, the examiner indicated mild incomplete paralysis of the sciatic nerve.

Having considered the above findings, as well as the M21-1, the Board finds that the Veteran is not entitled to an increased evaluation for his service-connected left and right lower extremity neuropathy during this time period.

The record does not support evidence of moderate incomplete paralysis of the sciatic nerve. The evidence weighs against combinations of significant sensory changes and reflex or motor changes of a lower degree, or motor and/or reflex impairment such as weakness or diminished or hyperactive reflexes (with or without sensory impairment) graded as medically moderate, that is required for a 20 percent rating. Accordingly, a rating higher than 10 percent is not warranted.

The Board acknowledges the Veteran's statements that his left and right lower extremity neuropathy is more severe than currently evaluated. The Veteran is competent to report his symptoms. Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465 (1994). However, the Veteran is not competent to provide probative medical evidence regarding the severity of his left and right lower extremity neuropathy in accordance with the rating criteria. See Woehlaert v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 456 (2007).

In sum, the most probative evidence of record persuasively weighs against the claim of entitlement to a rating higher than 10 percent for left and right lower extremity neuropathy prior to June 20, 2018. See 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.120, 4.124a; Lynch, 21 F.4th 776. Therefore, the claim for a rating higher than 10 percent for left lower extremity neuropathy (sciatic nerve) and right lower extremity neuropathy (sciatic nerve) is denied.

Left and Right Lower Extremity Neuropathy (Sciatic Nerve): Period from June 20, 2018 

After review of the evidence, lay and medical, the Board finds that the criteria for a rating of 40 percent, but no higher, is warranted for moderately severe incomplete paralysis of the left and right lower extremity neuropathy (sciatic nerve).

During the June 20, 2018, VA Peripheral Nerves Conditions examination, the Veteran had symptoms attributable to peripheral nerve conditions including lower extremity intermittent pain to a moderate level of severity, and paresthesias and/or dysesthesias and numbness to a severe level of severity. Reflex exam (deep tendon reflexes) for right knee was absent. Sensory exam for foot/toes was decreased. Monofilament testing was absent for right foot and diminished for left foot. Vibration testing was absent for right toe and decreased for right ankle; and decreased for left toe and ankle. There were trophic changes. For the lower extremities, the examiner indicated mild incomplete paralysis of the sciatic nerve, external popliteal nerve (common peroneal), musculocutaneous nerve (superficial peroneal), anterior tibial nerve (deep peroneal), internal popliteal nerve (tibial), and posterior tibial nerve.

During the January 24, 2020, VA Peripheral Nerves Conditions examination, the Veteran had symptoms attributable to peripheral nerve conditions including lower extremity intermittent pain, paresthesias and/or dysesthesias and numbness to a moderate level of severity. Muscle strength testing for ankle dorsiflexion was reduced. Sensory exam for thigh/knee, lower leg/ankle, and foot/toes was decreased. For the lower extremities, the examiner indicated moderate incomplete paralysis of the sciatic nerve. Regarding functional impact, the examiner remarked the Veteran's lower peripheral neuropathy impacted his ability to perform occupational tasks. He has pain in his feet which makes it hard for him to stand and walk for periods of time.

These reports are consistent with the M21-1 guidelines and support a finding of moderately severe incomplete paralysis of all radicular groups.

The Board, however, finds a rating higher than 40 percent for left and right lower extremity neuropathy (sciatic nerve) is not warranted. Specifically, the medical and lay evidence does not support evidence of severe incomplete paralysis of the sciatic nerve. The evidence weighs against the presence of motor and/or reflex impairment (for example, atrophy, weakness, or diminished or hyperactive reflexes) at a grade reflecting a very high level of limitation or disability, that is required for a 60 percent rating. Accordingly, a rating higher than 40 percent is not warranted.

While the June 20, 2018, VA nerve conditions examiner identified involvement of the sciatic nerve, external popliteal nerve (common peroneal), musculocutaneous nerve (superficial peroneal), anterior tibial nerve (deep peroneal), internal popliteal nerve (tibial), and posterior tibial nerve, these nerves make up the lower extremity sciatic nerve branch. Thus, assigning separate evaluations for the Veteran's symptoms from the nerves identified is not warranted, as these nerves are part of the sciatic nerve branch, and therefore the functions associated with these nerves are not separate and distinct. Separate ratings for these symptoms would constitute pyramiding. 38 C.F.R. § 4.14.

For the foregoing reasons, after affording the Veteran the benefit of the doubt, a rating of 40 percent, but no higher, for the service connected left lower extremity (sciatic nerve) and right lower extremity (sciatic nerve) from June 20, 2018, is warranted. 

 

Rebecca N. Poulson

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Grace A. Johnk, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.