Citation Nr: A25034579
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 230516-346974
DATE: April 15, 2025

ORDER

Service connection for gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) is granted as secondary to right and left knee tendonitis with degenerative arthritis (hereafter "bilateral knee disabilities").

Service connection for erectile dysfunction is granted as secondary to bilateral knee disabilities. 

Service connection for right hip strain is granted as secondary to bilateral knee disabilities.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran has a current diagnosis of GERD; it is at least as likely as not that the condition is secondary to his service-connected bilateral knee disabilities.

2. The Veteran has a current diagnosis of erectile dysfunction; it is at least as likely as not that the condition is secondary to his service-connected bilateral knee disabilities.

3. The Veteran has a current diagnosis of right hip strain; it is at least as likely as not that the condition is secondary to his service-connected bilateral knee disabilities.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. Resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the criteria for an award of secondary service connection for GERD have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.310.

2. Resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the criteria for an award of secondary service connection for erectile dysfunction have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.310.

3. Resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the criteria for an award of secondary service connection for right hip strain have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.310.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the U.S. Army from November 1985 to November 1988, and from November 1989 to May 1992. His decorations include the National Defense Service Medal.

The rating decision underlying the present appeal was issued in January 2022 by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office. Following a denial on Higher-Level Review in March 2023, the Veteran timely appealed to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) by submitting a VA Form 10182 (Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement (NOD))) in May 2023. He requested direct review of the evidence considered by the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ). 38 C.F.R. § 20.202(b)(1).

Under the Direct Review option, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of issuance of the January 2022 AOJ decision. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. The Board cannot consider evidence submitted after that decision was promulgated.

As a final introductory matter, the Board notes that the Veteran's claims for service connection for GERD, erectile dysfunction, and the right hip were previously denied in April 2020, April 2021, and May 2021 rating decisions. In the January 2022 decision underlying this appeal, the AOJ found that new and relevant evidence had not been received to warrant readjudication of the claims. In the subsequent decision on Higher-Level Review, however, the AOJ appears to have made an implicit favorable finding that new and relevant evidence was, in fact, presented or secured to warrant readjudication of the previously denied claims, inasmuch as it denied the claims on the merits. The Board is bound by that implicit favorable finding. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).

Service Connection

Service connection is warranted where the evidence of record establishes that a particular injury or disease resulting in disability was incurred in the line of duty in the active military service or, if pre-existing such service, was aggravated thereby. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a).

Generally, in order to prove service connection, there must be competent, credible evidence of (1) a current disability, (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of an injury or disease, and (3) a nexus, or link, between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury. See, e.g., Davidson v. Shinseki, 581 F.3d 1313 (Fed. Cir. 2009); Pond v. West, 12 Vet. App. 341 (1999)

Under applicable law, disability which is due to or the result of a service-connected disease or injury shall also be service connected. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a). Establishing service connection on a secondary basis requires evidence sufficient to show: (1) that a current disability exists; and (2) that the current disability was either (a) caused or (b) aggravated by a service-connected disability. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310; Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439 (1995).

Aggravation for purposes of 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(b) does not require that there be "permanent worsening" of a non-service-connected disability. Instead, secondary service connection is warranted for "any incremental increase in disability-any additional impairment of earning capacity-in nonservice-connected disabilities resulting from service-connected conditions, above the degree of disability existing before the increase-regardless of its permanence." Ward v. Wilkie, 31 Vet. App. 233, 239 (2019).

In Spicer v. McDonough, 61 F.4th 1360 (Fed. Cir. 2023), the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit (Federal Circuit) held that 38 U.S.C. § 1110 employs only "but-for" (rather than proximate) causation in direct and secondary service connection claims. In that regard, the Federal Circuit held that 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(b) is unlawful because it requires proximate causation to establish aggravation of a disability, rather than but-for causation. The but-for causation standard is not limited to a single cause and effect, but rather contemplates multi-causal links, including action and inaction. The Federal Circuit explained that secondary service connection is warranted where a non-service-connected disability would have been less severe but-for a service-connected disability, either because there is an etiological link (to include worsening of functionality) between the two, or because the service-connected disability resulted in the inability to treat the non-service-connected disability. Stated another way, but-for causation is broad and undisputedly broader than proximate cause. Thus, a service-connected disability need only be a contributing cause, not the contributing cause, to establish secondary service connection.

When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, the Secretary shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102. An approximate balance of the evidence includes, but is not limited to, equipoise. Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

1. Service connection for GERD is granted on a secondary basis.

The Veteran seeks to establish service connection for GERD. He claims, in essence, that the disability is secondary to his service-connected bilateral knee disabilities.

In the present case, the AOJ made favorable findings in the March 2023 rating decision that the Veteran had a current diagnosis of GERD and that he was service connected for bilateral knee disabilities. Those favorable findings are binding on the Board. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c). The remaining question for the Board is whether the claimed disability was caused or has been aggravated by his service-connected bilateral knee disabilities.

Post-service records dated in April 2018 show that the Veteran was noted at that time to suffer from bilateral knee joint degenerative joint disease, and that he was advised to continue to take non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) for the treatment of pain. Elsewhere in the record, the Veteran was prescribed diclofenac, an NSAID, for the treatment of pain as needed. He reported taking Advil on a routine basis for the treatment of his bilateral knee disabilities, and developing symptoms of GERD thereafter. See February 2020 Statement in Support of Claim. 

As to the nexus, or link, between the Veteran's GERD and his service-connected bilateral knee disabilities, the record contains multiple medical opinions. In March 2020, the Veteran was afforded an in-person VA examination. After examining the Veteran and reviewing the record, the examiner opined that the claimed condition was less likely than not proximately due to or the result of the Veteran's bilateral knee disabilities. The examiner noted that the use of ibuprofen may decrease production of protective mucous lining of gastrointestinal tract, but it does not cause lower esophageal dysfunction responsible for allowing the reflux of stomach acids into the esophagus. No clear opinion was offered with respect to secondary aggravation.

In February 2021, the Veteran obtained a supportive nexus opinion from a private medical provider. Following review of the Veteran's medical history, the private provider concluded that on a more likely than not basis, the Veteran's GERD was caused by chronic NSAID use for his service-connected bilateral knee disabilities. The provider further opined that the Veteran's GERD appeared to have been aggravated by the use of NSAID and cited to medical literature in support of her conclusions.

In June 2021, the Veteran obtained a second supportive nexus opinion from a private medical provider. The provider reiterated the position of the February 2021 provider, and found that it was more likely than not that the Veteran's current GERD condition was secondary to, related to, and/or aggravated by his service-connected bilateral knee disabilities and chronic NSAID usage. 

In January 2022, a second VA examiner rendered a negative nexus opinion. After reviewing the record, the examiner opined that the claimed condition was less likely than not proximately due to or the result of the Veteran's bilateral knee disabilities. The examiner found that the two conditions were not medically related and that the claimed disorder was a separate entity entirely from the service-connected condition. The examiner did not address the contention that the Veteran's GERD was the result of chronic use of NSAIDs for the treatment of his bilateral knee disabilities. 

On review, the Board finds that the February 2021 and June 2021 nexus opinions from the private medical providers are at least as probative as the two VA medical opinions of record. See D'Aries v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 97, 107 (2008) (it is within the purview of the Board to evaluate the medical evidence and favor one medical opinion over another). The January 2022 VA medical opinion concluded that there was no connection between the bilateral knee disabilities and GERD but did not comment on the matter of chronic use of NSAIDs as an intermediate step. Similarly, the March 2020 VA medical opinion concluded that there was no causal association between GERD and the use of NSAIDs but did not comment on the question of aggravation. The Board may reject a medical opinion that is conclusory or lacks supporting analysis. See Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 124-25 (2007).

Because the evidence in favor of the Veteran's claim is at least as probative as the evidence against it, the Board is satisfied that the requirements for an award of service connection for the Veteran's GERD have been met. The evidence, at a minimum, gives rise to a reasonable doubt on the matter. 38 C.F.R. § 3.102. The appeal of this issue is granted.

2. Service connection for erectile dysfunction is granted on a secondary basis. 

The Veteran seeks to establish service connection for erectile dysfunction. He claims, in essence, that the disability is secondary to his service-connected bilateral knee disabilities.

The AOJ made favorable findings in the March 2023 rating decision that the Veteran had a current diagnosis of erectile dysfunction and that he was service connected for bilateral knee disabilities. Those favorable findings are binding on the Board. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c). The remaining question for the Board is whether the claimed disability was caused or has been aggravated by his service-connected bilateral knee disabilities.

Post-service records dated in April 2018 show that the Veteran was noted at that time to suffer from bilateral knee joint degenerative joint disease, and that he was advised to continue to take non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) for the treatment of pain. Elsewhere in the record, the Veteran was prescribed diclofenac, an NSAID, for the treatment of pain as needed. He reported taking Advil on a routine basis for the treatment of his bilateral knee disabilities, and developing erectile dysfunction thereafter. See February 2020 Statement in Support of Claim. 

As to the nexus, or link, between the Veteran's erectile dysfunction and his service-connected bilateral knee disabilities, the record contains multiple medical opinions. In March 2020, the Veteran was afforded an in-person VA examination. After examining the Veteran and reviewing the record, the examiner opined that the claimed condition was less likely than not proximately due to or the result of the Veteran's bilateral knee disabilities. The examiner noted that there was no credible medical evidence that ibuprofen use to treatment the Veteran's bilateral knee conditions causes erectile dysfunction. No clear opinion was offered with respect to secondary aggravation.

In February 2021, the Veteran obtained a supportive nexus opinion from a private medical provider. Following review of the Veteran's medical history, the private provider concluded that on a more likely than not basis, the Veteran's erectile dysfunction was caused by chronic NSAID use for his service-connected bilateral knee disabilities. The provider further opined that the Veteran's erectile dysfunction could be attributed to chronic musculoskeletal pain, which is associated with loss in sexual interest.

In June 2021, the Veteran obtained a second supportive nexus opinion from a private medical provider. The provider reiterated the position of the February 2021 provider, and found that it was more likely than not that the Veteran's current erectile dysfunction condition was secondary to, related to, and/or aggravated by his service-connected bilateral knee disabilities and chronic NSAID usage, and she cited to medical literature in support of her conclusions.

In October 2021, the Veteran attended another VA examination. After reviewing the record, the examiner found a history of erectile dysfunction, but found that the Veteran did not have erectile dysfunction at that time, and did not offer an opinion, favorable or unfavorable, as to the etiology of the condition. 

On review, the Board finds that the February 2021 and June 2021 nexus opinions from the private medical providers are at least as probative as the two VA medical opinions of record. See D'Aries v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 97, 107 (2008) (it is within the purview of the Board to evaluate the medical evidence and favor one medical opinion over another). The March 2020 VA medical opinion concluded that there was no causal association between erectile dysfunction and the use of NSAIDs but did not comment on the question of aggravation. The Board may reject a medical opinion that is conclusory or lacks supporting analysis. See Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 124-25 (2007).

Because the evidence in favor of the Veteran's claim is at least as probative as the evidence against it, the Board is satisfied that the requirements for an award of service connection for the Veteran's erectile dysfunction have been met. The evidence, at a minimum, gives rise to a reasonable doubt on the matter. 38 C.F.R. § 3.102. The appeal of this issue is granted.

3. Service connection for right hip strain is granted on a secondary basis.

The Veteran seeks to establish service connection for a disability of the right hip. He claims, in essence, that the disability is secondary to his service-connected bilateral knee disabilities.

In the present case, the AOJ made favorable findings in the March 2023 rating decision that the Veteran had a current diagnosis of right hip strain and that he was service connected for bilateral knee disabilities. Those favorable findings are binding on the Board. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c). The remaining question for the Board is whether the claimed disability was caused or has been aggravated by his service-connected bilateral knee disabilities.

As to the nexus, or link, between the Veteran's right hip strain and his service-connected bilateral knee disabilities, the record contains multiple medical opinions. In March 2020, the Veteran was afforded an in-person VA examination. After examining the Veteran and reviewing the record, the examiner opined that the claimed condition was less likely than not proximately due to or the result of the Veteran's bilateral knee disabilities. The examiner noted that the Veteran had a steady gait on physical examination. It was also noted that there did not appear to be any shift in weight bearing balance that would cause undue stress on one lower extremity to the other that would lead to hip pain related to veteran's knee condition. No clear opinion was offered with respect to secondary aggravation.

In June 2021, the Veteran obtained a supportive nexus opinion from a private medical provider. Following review of the Veteran's medical history, the private provider concluded that on a more likely than not basis, the Veteran's right hip strain was secondary to, related to, and/or aggravated by his service-connected bilateral knee disabilities, with associated compensatory posture and movement with biomechanical and kinematic changes. She cited to relevant medical literature in support of her conclusion. 

In October 2021, the Veteran attended another VA examination. After reviewing the record, the examiner found noted a diagnosis of right hip strain, but did not offer an opinion, favorable or unfavorable, as to the etiology of the condition. 

On review, the Board finds that the June 2021 nexus opinion from the private medical provider is at least as probative as the VA medical opinion of record. See D'Aries v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 97, 107 (2008) (it is within the purview of the Board to evaluate the medical evidence and favor one medical opinion over another). The March 2020 VA medical opinion concluded that there was no causal association between right hip strain and bilateral knee disabilities but did not comment on the question of aggravation. The Board may reject a medical opinion that is conclusory or lacks supporting analysis. See Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 124-25 (2007).

Because the evidence in favor of the Veteran's claim is at least as probative as the evidence against it, the Board is satisfied that the requirements for an award of service connection for the Veteran's right hip strain have been met. The evidence, at a minimum, gives rise to a reasonable doubt on the matter. 38 C.F.R. § 3.102. The appeal of this issue is granted.

 

 

DAVID A. BRENNINGMEYER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Joseph T. Leonard, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.