Citation Nr: A25034715
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 240401-430299
DATE: April 15, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for headaches, as secondary to service-connected disabilities, is granted.

Entitlement to service connection for a back disability is granted.

Entitlement to service connection for a left foot disability, diagnosed as peripheral neuropathy, is granted.

Entitlement to service connection for a right foot disability, diagnosed as peripheral neuropathy, is granted.

Entitlement to service connection for a left ankle disability is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for a right ankle disability is denied.

Entitlement to an increased rating in excess of 50 percent for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is denied.

Entitlement to an increased rating in excess of 20 percent for a left shoulder disability is denied.

Entitlement to an earlier effective date prior to August 12, 2021, for grant of service connection for a left shoulder disability is denied.

Entitlement to an earlier effective date of January 16, 2020, but not earlier, for grant a total disability rating based on individual unemployability (TDIU) is granted.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran's migraine headaches are proximately due to her service-connected PTSD.

2. The competent medical evidence demonstrates that the Veteran's back disability is etiological related to her active service.

3.  The competent medical evidence demonstrates that the Veteran's bilateral foot disability is etiological related to her service-connected fibromyalgia.

4. The competent and probative evidence of record does not demonstrate that the Veteran has a diagnosed bilateral ankle disability and/or a left foot disability.

5. The Veteran's PTSD was productive of occupational and social impairment with reduction in reliability and productivity, but not occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas or total impairment.

6. The Veteran's left shoulder disability is not manifested by additional functional loss resulting in limitation of flexion and/or abduction to 25 percent or less from the side.

7. The Veteran was initially denied service connection for a left shoulder disability in a January 2020 Rating Decision, which became final. The Veteran's filed an Intent to File on August 12, 2021, and subsequently, a Supplemental claim (VA Form 20-0995), requesting to readjudicate the previously denied claim for service connection for a left shoulder disability, in September 2021.

8. The Veteran's claim for a TDIU is part and parcel to the Veteran's ongoing increased rating claim for PTSD, which was initially filed on January 16, 2020.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for service connection for migraine headaches have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.310.

2. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for a back disability have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1154; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.310.

3. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for a left foot disability have been met.  38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.

4. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for a right foot disability have been met.  38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.

5. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for a left ankle disability have not been met.  38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.

6. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for a right ankle disability have not been met.  38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.

7. The criteria for an increased rating in excess of 50 percent for PTSD have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5103, 5103A, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.159, 4.1, 4.3, 4.21, 4.130, Diagnostic Code (DC) 9411.

8. The criteria for an increased rating greater than 20 percent for left shoulder disability have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.71a, DC 5201.

9.  The criteria for an effective date prior to August 12, 2021, for the grant of service connection for a left shoulder disability, have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 5110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.400.

10. The criteria for an earlier effective date of January 16, 2020, for TDIU are met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.340, 3.341, 4.16.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from September 2010 to June 2011.

This case comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from April 2023 and February 2024 Rating Decisions issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO), the Agency of Original Jurisdiction.  In April 2024, the Veteran submitted a Notice of Disagreement (VA Form 10182), requesting Direct Review of the case.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the rating decisions on appeal.

Service Connection

Service connection may be granted for disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303. The three-element test for service connection requires evidence of: (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury. See Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166 -67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

To meet the criteria for secondary service connection, a veteran must prove that there is (1) a current disability that is not already service-connected; and (2) at least one service-connected disability; and (3) evidence that the non-service connected disability is either proximately due to or the result of a service-connected disability, or aggravated (increased in severity) beyond its natural progress by a service connected disability. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.310; Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439 (1995).

1. Entitlement to service connection for headaches 

The Veteran contends that her migraines/headaches are directly related to her military service.  Alternatively, she contends her migraines/headaches are caused or aggravated by her service-connected PTSD.  The Board finds that the probative medical evidence of record demonstrates that the Veteran's migraines/headaches are etiologically related to her service-connected PTSD and fibromyalgia, and as such service connection is warranted. 

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination to assess the nature and etiology of her claimed migraines/headaches condition in December 2021.  Upon examination of the Veteran and a noted review of her claims file and medical history, the VA examiner diagnosed the Veteran with migraines, to include migraine variants.  Upon consideration of her medical history, to include service treatment records (STRs), the VA examiner concluded against any etiological nexus of such diagnosed migraines and any aspect of her active service.  In reaching such a conclusion, the VA examiner noted no explicit findings in the Veteran's STRs regarding any ongoing complaints, treatment, and/or diagnosis of chronic headaches or migraines, to include upon separation from active service.  While the examiner noted a complaint in 2011 of headaches, the examiner noted such isolated complaint was acute and due to the Veteran's reparatory condition at the time.  As such, the examiner found that it was less likely than not that the Veteran's current migraines/headaches are etiologically related to her active service. 

In providing the rationale, the examiner indicated that post-service treatment records do indicate findings that related such migraines with the Veteran's service-connected fibromyalgia.  The examiner found that such records "suggest" that fibromyalgia, with widespread pain, "could be consistent with migraines."  The examiner, however, provided an addendum opinion in December 2021, finding that it was less likely than not, that the pain caused by the Veteran's fibromyalgia resulted in her currently diagnosed migraines/headaches. 

A close review, however, of the contemporaneous VA/private treatment records, show evidence that the Veteran's migraines/headaches are the result of, or at least aggravated, by her service-connected PTSD.  In a July 2022 neurology treatment note, the Veteran's VA treating physician, a neurologist, explicitly found that the Veteran's longstanding migraines were "aggravated" by her PTSD and depression, to include any acute psychiatric stressors.  The treating physician noted the recent "uptick" in the Veteran's headache frequency and noted that there is correlation between such aggravation and symptoms of her PTSD/psychiatric conditions. 

Here, the Board finds that the VA treating physician's opinion linking the Veteran's service-connected PTSD and her claimed migraines/headaches to be highly probative.  The Board does not find the nexus opinion to be in contradiction of the December 2021 VA examination, as such opinion does not speak to a secondary nexus to PTSD.  Therefore, as such positive nexus opinion is not contradicted by other medical record, and considering that such opinion was provided by the Veteran's treating neurologist, the Board must find that such opinion to be dispositive of the claim. 

For these reasons, as the weight of the weight of the probative evidence is in favor of the Veteran's claim, entitlement to service connection for headaches secondary to PTSD is warranted, and the claim must be granted.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102, Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 781-82 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc).

2. Entitlement to service connection for a back disability 

The Veteran contends that her currently back disability was incurred during her active service.  The Board finds that the competent medical evidence of record, to include a VA examination, establishes that the Veteran's back disability was incurred during her active service, due to her training.  Therefore, giving the Veteran the benefit of the doubt, the claim for service connection must be granted.

Here, the Board finds that the competent medical evidence that speaks to the claimed nexus between the Veteran's back disability are in favor of the Veteran's claim.  

During the pendency of the claim, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination to assess the nature and etiology of her claimed back disability in October 2021.  Upon examination of the Veteran and a review of the Veteran's medical records, the VA examiner concluded that the Veteran's diagnosed lumbar strain was as likely as not related to her active service.  The VA examiner noted consideration of the Veteran's STRs, and lack of any explicit notation during her actives service of any complaint or diagnosis of a back disability.  The examiner highlighted, however, consideration of the Veteran's lay assertions of incurring back pain during service and found such to be persuasive.  Therefore, considering the short period of time in which the Veteran's back condition was documented after service, and the Veteran's lay assertions of an inservice incurrence, due to training, the VA examiner found that the Veteran's current back disability was etiologically related to her active service.   

The Board notes that, as is true with any piece of evidence, the credibility and weight to be attached to these opinions are within the province of the adjudicator.  Guerrieri v. Brown, 4 Vet. App. 467, 470-71 (1993).  The Board finds the VA positive opinion to be of significant probative value in determining the etiology of the Veteran's back disability.  The Board notes that, here, the probative value of medical opinion is not only based on the noted review of the Veteran's medical history, to include her STRs, but also consideration of the Veteran's lay assertions of when and how such back condition arose/incurred.  As such, the VA opinion is not only based her professional medical experience and expertise, but also a comprehensive consideration of both lay and medical evidence of record. 

As such, the Board finds that despite the Veteran's STRs not showing any inservice injury to the back, the competent medical evidence of record, to include the October 2021 VA examination, is in favor of establishing an etiological nexus to service.  Accordingly, the Board concludes that service connection for a back disability is warranted, and the claim must be granted.  See Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49 (1990); Ortiz v. Principi, 274 F.3d 1361 (Fed Cir. 2001).

3. Entitlement to service connection for a left foot disability 

4. Entitlement to service connection for a right foot disability

Similarly, the Veteran contends that her currently diagnosed bilateral foot disability was incurred during her active service, or secondary to a service-connected disability. The Board finds that the competent medical evidence of record, to include a VA examination, establishes that the Veteran's foot disability, diagnosed as peripheral neuropathy, is secondary to her service-connected fibromyalgia. Therefore, giving the Veteran the benefit of the doubt, the claims for service connection must be granted.

Here, the Board finds that the competent medical evidence that speaks to the claimed nexus between the Veteran's bilateral foot disability is in favor of the Veteran's claims.  During the pendency of the claim, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination to assess the nature and etiology of her claimed bilateral foot disability in October 2021.  Upon examination of the Veteran and a review of her medical records, the VA examiner concluded that her diagnosed peripheral neuropathy of the bilateral lower extremity, to include her bilateral foot, was as likely as not related to her service-connected fibromyalgia.  The VA examiner noted consideration of the Veteran's STRs, and lack of any explicit notation during her actives service of any complaint or diagnosis of a foot disability; and as such, the Veteran's condition was less likely than not due to any aspect of her active service, to include training.  However, the examiner did note to that the "wear and tear" the Veteran had to endure during her active "may" have contributed to her currently diagnosed bilateral peripheral neuropathy.  However, the examiner did find that such diagnosed condition was "more likely" related to her fibromyalgia, which is service connected. 

The Board notes that, as is true with any piece of evidence, the credibility and weight to be attached to these opinions are within the province of the adjudicator.  Guerrieri v. Brown, 4 Vet. App. 467, 470-71 (1993).  The Board finds the VA positive opinion to be of significant probative value in determining the etiology of the Veteran's foot disabilities.  The Board notes that, here, the probative value of medical opinion is not only based on the noted review of the Veteran's medical history, to include her STRs.  As such, the VA opinion is not only based on the examiner's professional medical experience and expertise, but also a comprehensive consideration of both lay and medical evidence of record. 

As such, the Board finds that despite the Veteran's STRs not showing any inservice injury to the foot, the competent medical evidence of record, to include the October 2021 VA examination, is in favor of establishing an etiological nexus secondary to her already service-connected fibromyalgia.  Accordingly, the Board concludes that service connection for a bilateral foot disability, diagnosed bilateral peripheral neuropathy, is warranted, and the claims must be granted.  See Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49 (1990); Ortiz v. Principi, 274 F.3d 1361 (Fed Cir. 2001)

5. Entitlement to service connection for a left ankle disability 

6. Entitlement to service connection for a right ankle disability 

The Veteran claims that she suffers from a disability of the bilateral ankle and left foot, due to her active service.  Specifically, the Veteran asserts that these conditions were incurred during her active service, to include during her basic training.  The Board finds, however, a close review of the claims file, and evidence of record, to include the Veteran's lay statements, shows no evidence of a disability related to her ankles or left foot.  Therefore, without a current disability service connection is not warranted, and the claims for service connection must be denied.

The threshold question that must be addressed is whether there is evidence, lay or medical, of a current disability, or contemporaneous with the claims period, of the disabilities claimed by the Veteran.  In the absence of proof of a present disability, there is no valid claim for service connection.  Brammer v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 223 (1992).

To this extent, the Board finds that the weight of the probative evidence is against any finding that the Veteran currently has, or has had contemporaneous to the claimed period, disabilities related to her bilateral ankles, or a left foot disability.  Here, as a preliminary matter, the close review of the Veteran's STRs reveals no evidence of any diagnosis, treatment, or even complaint for any of her claimed conditions; to include any notation upon separation from service.  In this regard, the claims file also contains no post-service medical treatment records, VA or private, demonstrating care, treatment, diagnosis, and/or complaint regarding these claimed disabilities.

Furthermore, a close review of the Veteran's claims also reveals no submissions of subjective/lay reports of explicit symptoms of her ankles or left foot.  Here, the only time the Veteran explicitly speaks to these claimed disabilities was by listing them in his initial claim submission.  However, she has not demonstrated or even asserted a specific disability or even an array of symptoms relating to a potential diagnosable disability relating to the ankles or left foot, much less presented medical evidence of a competent clinical diagnosis.  The Board finds that the vast majority of all the Veteran's lay complaints have not specifically identified any ailments regarding these conditions.  The Board does not find such is sufficient to elicit a current disability for entitlement purposes.

As noted above, in the absence of proof of a current disability, there can be no valid claim for service connection.  Brammer v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 223, 225 (1992).  Consequently, as no competent evidence of record demonstrates the Veteran does not have a currently diagnosed disability; therefore, service connection must be denied.  Brammer, 3 Vet. App. at 225.

The Board recognizes the recent decision from the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit (Federal Circuit) in Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356, 1361 (Fed. Cir. 2018) that "pain alone can serve as a functional impairment and therefore qualify as a disability."  However, here, even the lay statement presented by the Veteran has provided no specific allegations of pain, or any functional limitation as it related to either ankle or her left foot; and as such Saunders is not applicable.

The Board has considered the benefit of the doubt doctrine; however, as the weight of the probative evidence is against the Veteran's claims, it does not apply.  Here, as the evidence of record does not demonstrate any current disability related to her ankles or her left foot, these claims must be denied.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); see also Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49, 56 (1990).

Increased Rating

Disability ratings are determined by the application of the VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities.  38 C.F.R. Part 4.  The percentage ratings contained in the Rating Schedule represent, as far as can be practicably determined, the average impairment in earning capacity resulting from diseases and injuries incurred or aggravated during service and their residual conditions in civil occupations.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.321 (a), 4.1.

7. Entitlement to an increased rating in excess of 50 percent for PTSD 

The Veteran contends that her PTSD symptoms warrant a rating in excess of 50 percent.  After extensive review of the Veteran's claim file and medical history, the Board concludes that the Veteran's symptoms did not cause the level of impairment required for a disability rating in excess of what is currently assigned for this period.  As such, the Veteran's claim for increased rating is not warranted, and the claim must be denied.

Under the General Formula for Mental Disorders (General Formula), the Board must conduct a "holistic analysis" that considers all associated symptoms, regardless of whether they are listed as criteria.  Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 10, 22 (2017); 38 C.F.R. § 4.130.  The Board must determine whether unlisted symptoms are similar in severity, frequency, and duration to the listed symptoms associated with specific disability percentages.  Then, the Board must determine whether the associated symptoms, both listed and unlisted, caused the level of impairment required for a higher disability rating.  Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 114-118 (Fed. Cir. 2013).

Under this Diagnostic Code, a 50 percent rating is warranted for occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to such symptoms as: flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short- and long-term memory (e.g. retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships.  Id.

A 70 percent rating is warranted for occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a work-like setting); inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.  Id.

A maximum 100 percent rating is warranted for total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name.  Id.

The Board notes that the criteria listed in the General Rating Formula are neither individually dispositive nor collectively exhaustive. "[Any] suggestion that the Board [is] required to find the presence of all, most, or even some, of the enumerated symptoms is unsupported by a reading of the plain language of the regulation."  Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436, 442 (2002). Instead, the Board must "assign an evaluation based on all the evidence of record that bears on occupational and social impairment[.]"  38 C.F.R. § 4.126.

During the pendency of the claim period, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination in June 2021.  At that examination, the Veteran was found to have an Axis I diagnosis for PTSD.  The Veteran was noted to be twice divorced, reported some issues with various drug use, and has been unemployed since 2019 due to her inability to trust people, to include her co-workers.  The examiner, upon review of the Veteran's medical history, noted the Veteran endorsed symptoms of depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, and panic attacks.  The Veteran was also noted to have chronic sleep impairment, disturbances in motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, and difficulty to adapt of stressful circumstance.  During the examination/interview, the Veteran was noted to be clean and casually dressed, oriented, and goal oriented, with normal speech, and "fair" insight and judgment.  No hallucination/delusions were noted, and the Veteran reported no current suicidal or homicidal ideations.  The examiner ultimately concluded that the Veteran's condition was productive of occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.

In order to warrant a rating in excess of 50 percent, the Veteran's PTSD must be manifested by occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most area, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or work like setting); inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.

The Board notes that the relevant medical evidence of record, to include the VA examinations, shows that the Veteran's PTSD, during the relevant period, had not manifested with symptoms of such severity, frequency, or duration as to warrant a higher 70 percent rating.  While there are some reports of social issues and loss of motivation, the Board finds that such does not rise to the level which would warrant a finding that she is deficient in most aspects such as thinking, judgement, work, family, and mood.  During the most recent examination, the Veteran did not show any symptoms suggestive of the severity contemplated by a 70 percent rating.  Specifically, there has been no evidence of disorientation, neglect of person appearance or hygiene, frequent panic attacks, suicidal ideation, or impulse control. 

Furthermore, the evidence also does not show any evidence of symptoms such as frequent panic attacks, disorientation, or any inability to take care of his own personal hygiene.  Nor has there been any evidence or even indication of suicidal thoughts or ideations; there has been no evidence, to include during her VA examination, that would indicate that the Veteran is a danger to herself, or to others.  In this regard, a close review of the contemporaneous medical treatment records has also revealed no instances in which the Veteran reported having intentions or thoughts of suicide or homicide.

The Board finds that the Veteran endorsed few, if any, of the symptoms enumerated under the criteria for a 70 percent rating, and that his overall disability picture did not more nearly approximate deficiencies in most areas.  While the Veteran was noted to divorced and she notes being untrusting to co-workers, there is no actual reports from the Veteran, or otherwise, of an inability to maintain social relationships, or relationships with her family.  The Board acknowledges that the crux of the Veteran's contention is that her PTSD affects relationships and work. However, despite her symptoms, the evidence shows explicit incidents and/or unwillingness to keep social relationship, to include with her family and friends.

Similarly, the Board finds the criteria for a 100 percent schedular evaluation are not met at any time during the appeal period.  For instance, symptoms typically associated with a 100 percent evaluation for PTSD are not demonstrated.  For example, there was no evidence of gross impairment in thought processes or communication, persistent delusions or hallucinations, intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living, or disorientation to time or place.  The Veteran has consistently been noted to be able to care for herself and tend to her activities of daily living. 

Further, as stated above, the criteria for a 100 percent schedular evaluation are PTSD symptoms resulting in total occupational and social impairment.  See Melson v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 334 (1991) (use of the conjunctive "and' in statutory provision meant that all the conditions listed in the provision must be met); Cf. Johnson v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 95 (1994) (only one disjunction "or" requirement must be met for an increase rating to be assigned).

In concluding the criteria for a rating of 70 percent or greater for a psychiatric disability are not met, the applicable rating criteria have not been considered as an exhaustive list of symptoms, but rather as examples of the type and degree of symptoms or effects that would justify a particular rating.  The Board has not required the presence of a specified quantity of symptoms in the rating schedule to warrant a higher rating.

Therefore, the Board finds that his disability is most appropriately rated at 50 percent, and that the weight of the probative evidence is against the assignment of any higher rating for this relevant period.  As such, the claim for a rating in excess of 50 percent for PTSD, for the relevant period must be denied.  Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49 (1990).

8. Entitlement to an increased rating in excess of 20 percent for a left shoulder disability 

The Veteran's left shoulder disability is rated under 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5201, for limitation of motion of the arm.  Under DC 5201, limitation of motion of the arm at shoulder level warrants a 20 percent rating for both the major and minor extremity.  Limitation of motion of the arm midway between side and shoulder warrants a 20 percent rating for the minor extremity and a 30 percent rating for the major extremity.  Limitation of motion of the arm to 25 degrees from side warrants a maximum 30 percent schedular rating for the minor joint and a maximum 40 percent schedular rating for the major joint.  38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, DC 5201.

Diagnostic Code 5201 "does not provide separate ratings for limitation of motion in the flexion and abduction planes, but rather is addressed generically to limitation of motion of the arm." Yonek v. Shinseki, 722 F.3d 1355, 1358 (Fed. Cir. 2013).

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination for her claimed left shoulder disability in October 2021.  During the examination, the Veteran's reported left shoulder condition is manifested by pain, lack of mobility, flexibility pain, discomfort, tingling, and numbness; with claimed of increased pain during flare-ups.  Her left shoulder is non-dominant.  Upon examination, the Veteran's left shoulder range of motion was limited to 140 degrees of flexion, abduction to 100 degrees, internal rotation to 60 degrees, and external rotation to 70 degrees; repeat testing reveals no additional loss of range of motion.  However, consideration for repeat use over time and flare-ups, the Veteran's flexion was estimated to 50 degrees, abduction to 30 degrees, internal rotation to 15 degrees, and external to 15 degrees. 

The examiner noted positive empty can test for a rotator cuff condition bilaterally. However, no additional functional limitation, muscle atrophy, ankylosis, or instability were noted.  Likewise, no clavicle, scapula, acromioclavicular (ac) joint and sternoclavicular joint conditions were found, or conditions/impairment to humerus.  The examiner noted functional impact to include unable to weight bear or left arms above her head. 

The medical treatment records reflect complaints of painful motion of the shoulders, however, contained no additional objective range of motion measurements throughout the appeal period. 

The evidence does not reflect entitlement to a rating higher than 20 degrees for either shoulder disability.  The objective evidence of record does not show motion limited for the left (minor) arm to 25 degrees from side; or flexion and/or abduction limited to 25 degrees.  At most, the Veteran's ROM was limited to 50 degrees of flexion and 30 degrees of abduction, for the left (minor) side; such does not meet the criteria for a higher rating under the current Diagnostic Code.

There are no other DCs the Veteran could be rated under; there is no evidence of ankylosis of the scapulohumeral articulation, nor impairment of the humerus.

As the criteria for a higher rating are not met, the Veteran's increased rating claim for her left shoulder disability must be denied.  The Board has considered whether any other Diagnostic Codes related to disabilities of the shoulder would provide for a higher disability rating.  However, the evidence does not reflect that the symptoms would warrant a higher rating under a different Diagnostic Code.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a.  No other separate ratings are warranted.

Thus, an increased rating greater than 20 percent for a left shoulder disability is not warranted.  As the evidence of record persuasively weighs against a rating greater than 20 percent, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (2021).

Earlier Effective Date

Generally, the effective date of compensation based on an original claim, a claim reopened after final disallowance, or a claim for increase will be on the date of receipt of the claim or the date entitlement arose, whichever is the later.  38 U.S.C. § 5110(a); 38 C.F.R. § 3.400.  The effective date based upon a grant of direct service connection will be the day following service from active service or date entitlement arose if claim is received within 1 year after separation from service; or the date entitlement arose, whichever is later.  38 C.F.R. § 3.400(b)(2).

Prior to March 24, 2015, when VA amended its rules as to what constitutes a claim, a claim was a formal or informal communication in writing requesting a determination of entitlement or evidencing a belief in entitlement to a benefit.  38 U.S.C. § 101(30); 38 C.F.R. § 3.1(p).  The date of receipt shall be the date on which a claim, information or evidence was received by VA.  38 U.S.C. § 101(30); 38 C.F.R. § 3.1(r).  Any communication or action, indicating intent to apply for one or more benefits under the laws administered by VA, from a claimant, his or her duly authorized representative, a Member of Congress, or some person acting as next friend of a claimant who is not sui juris may be considered an informal claim. Such informal claims must identify the benefit sought.  38 C.F.R. § 3.155.

9. Entitlement to an earlier effective date prior to August 12, 2021, for grant of service connection for a left shoulder disability 

The Veteran claims that an earlier effective date should be assigned for his grant of service connection for a left shoulder disability.  Having carefully reviewed the evidence of record, the Board finds no basis upon which to assign an effective date earlier than August 12, 2021, for the grant of service connection for a left shoulder disability.

By way of procedural history, the Veteran initially filed a claim for service connection for a left shoulder disability in March 2015; that claim was ultimately denied in an April 2015 Rating Decision.  The Veteran file a Supplemental Claim, requesting readjudication of the issue, in January 2020, which was also denied in a January 2020 Rating Decision.  Subsequent to the denial, the Veteran did not file a timely Notice of Disagreement (NOD), formal or informal, or any additional evidence to support her claim.  Indeed, a close review of the claims file and record shows no correspondence from the Veteran, or her representative, until August 12, 2021, when the Veteran filed an Intent to File.  Therefore, the January 2020 denial is final.

Thereafter, and as noted above, the Veteran's filed an Intent to File on August 12, 2021, and subsequently, a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) to readjudicate her previously denied claim for service connection for a left shoulder disability in September 2021.  That claim was ultimately granted by RO in an October 2021 Rating Decision, and assigned an effective August 12, 2021, the date of the Veteran's Intent to File.

Therefore, the period in question for an earlier effective date for the Veteran's claim of service connection is prior to August 12, 2021.

A close review of the record reveals no communication between the January 2020 Rating Decision and the August 12, 2021 Intent to File, regarding the issue of service connection for a left shoulder disability, that could be reasonably construed as a claim of entitlement to benefits, or, even, an informal notice of disagreement for the previous denial.  To this end, the VA is not required to anticipate any potential claim for a particular benefit where no intention to raise it was expressed and the mere presence of medical evidence that a Veteran suffers from a disability does not establish intent on the part of the Veteran to seek connection for that disability.  See Brannon v. West, 12 Vet. App. 32, 34-35 (1998); see also Brokowski v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 79, 86-87 (2009).  Although the Board accepts that the Veteran may have suffered from a left shoulder disability prior to the date of receipt of her application for VA compensation in August 2021.  However, the law dictates that the effective date of entitlement is the date of the receipt of the claim, or the date entitlement arose, whichever is later.  38 U.S.C. § 5110(a); 38 C.F.R. § 3.400; [emphasis added].  Therefore, the effective date for the grant of service connection for a left shoulder disability is appropriately August 12, 2021, and not earlier.

Accordingly, the claim for an earlier effective date is denied.  There is no doubt to resolve.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b).

10. Entitlement to an earlier effective date of January 16, 2020, for grant a TDIU 

The claim of entitlement to a TDIU stem from a January 16, 2020 claim of entitlement to an increased rating for PTSD, which was not final, when the Veteran filed her TDIU claim in March 2020. As such, an earlier effective date of January 16, 2020, is warranted, to this extent, the Veteran's claim must be granted. 

By way of procedural history, the Veteran filed a claim, inter alia, for increased rating for PTSD on January 16, 2020.  After development, the RO denied the claim for increased rating for PTSD in a March 2020 Rating Decision.  That same month (a day after) on March 6, 2020, the Veteran filed an application for a TDIU (VA Form 21-8940), citing that she has been rendered unemployable due to, in part, her service-connected PTSD.  In an August 2020 Rating Decision, the RO denied the claim for a TDIU, and also addressed increased rating for PTSD, again denying the claims. 

The Veteran filed a Supplemental Claim for both increased rating for PTSD and a TDIU in May 2021 (within a year from the August 2020 denial) and a July 2022 Rating Decision ultimately granted a TDIU.  The RO assigned a March 6, 2020, the date of the initial TDIU claim, as an effective date.  The Veteran's subsequent NOD (VA Form 10182) explicitly contested the assigned effective date.      

It is the established policy of VA that all veterans who are unable to secure and follow a substantially gainful occupation by reason of service-connected disability shall be rated totally disabled.  38 C.F.R. § 4.16.  A finding of total disability is appropriate "when there is present any impairment of mind or body which is sufficient to render it impossible for the average person to follow a substantially gainful occupation."  38 C.F.R. §§ 3.340(a)(1), 4.15.

Total disability ratings for compensation may be assigned where the schedular rating is less than total when the Veteran is unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation as a result of service-connected disability, provided that if there is only one such disability, such disability shall be ratable as 60 percent or more and if there are two or more disabilities, there shall be at least one disability ratable at 40 percent or more and sufficient additional disability to bring the combined rating to 70 percent or more.  38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a).

A TDIU claim is "part and parcel" of an underlying increased rating claim when raised by the record.  See Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447 (2009).

The Board finds that, on a procedural basis, the Veteran's March 2020 TDIU claim, is part and parcel to the Veteran's claim of increased rating for PTSD.  Id.  Here, as the Veteran filed a claim for a TDIU concurrently, or with the March 2020 determination for her claim for increased rating for PTSD, the Board finds that such claim for a TDIU is a continuation of such claim; and that the March 2020 Rating Decision was not final, with regards to the Veteran's increased rating claim. Therefore, as the Veteran's TDIU claim is a continuation of her increased rating claim, the Board must find that the appropriate effective date must be January 16, 2020, the date of the Veteran's initial claim for increased rating for PTSD. 

Here, substantively, between January 16, 2020, and March 6, 2020, the Veteran was service connected for PTSD (50 percent), fibromyalgia (40 percent), a left knee strain (10 percent), and tinnitus (10 percent) for a combined disability rating of 80 percent.  As such, the schedular requirements for the assignment of a TDIU were met prior to March 6, 2020.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.16.

The Board notes that there is also no evidence that the Veteran was employed at any time during this period.  Indeed, during medical treatment and VA examinations, the Veteran consistently noted reporting that she had not worked since January 2019, when she worked briefly at a mental hospital.  She has repeatedly noted that she stayed at home with her infant daughter. 

The Board also notes that during this short period there is no evidence that the Veteran's various service-connected conditions had changed.  To this end, the Board notes that the July 2022 Rating Decision granted a TDIU based on the effects of the Veteran's PTSD and fibromyalgia.  Here, neither the medical or lay evidence of record shows a material change in either condition, and their effects on the Veteran's ability to obtain or sustain employment during this two-month period between January and March 2020.  A close review of VA examining during this period, namely conducted in February 2020, show that the Veteran's physical and psychiatric disabilities prevent both physical and sedentary work. 

Here, VA examinations and treatment records show, due to her fibromyalgia and knee disorder, she would be unable to do any physical labor.  A February 2020 PTSD examination reveals issues with anxiety, depression hypervigilance, and difficulty forming relationships, and developing self-esteem to protect herself from harmful situations, prevent her from working.  The examiner also noted bipolar disorder symptoms, to include illicit drug use and ongoing trauma.  The Board finds that such are sufficient to prevent her from obtaining or sustaining gainful employment.  See Van Hoose v. Brown, 4 Vet. App. 361 (1993). 

The evidence demonstrates that the assignment of a TDIU to an earlier effective date of January 16, 2020, is warranted.  Affording the Veteran, the benefit-of-the-doubt, the claim of entitlement to an earlier effective date of January 16, 2020, for a TDIU must be granted.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 4.3.

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to service connection for GERD is remanded.

2. Entitlement to service connection for IBS is remanded.

The issues of entitlement to service connection for GERD and IBS are remanded to correct a duty to assist error that occurred prior to the rating decision on appeal.  The Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) has not obtained medical opinions prior to the rating decision on appeal.  However, the based on the evidence associated with the claims file prior to the last determination, the Board finds that VA examinations and medical opinions are required to determine whether the claimed GERD and IBS are caused or aggravated by a service-connected disability, or incurred in service.

With specific regards to the Veteran's claims for service connection for GERD and IBS, binding favorable findings by the RO, in its rating decisions on appeal, conceded current diagnoses for both disabilities.  The Board notes, however, that the Veteran has not been afforded a VA examination.  To this end, a close review of treatment records reveals potential secondary etiology between pain medication/treatment and the Veteran's GERD and IBS.  Here, notations from general treatment notes show complaints of stomach issues due to medication.  As such, the Board find that the VA's duty to assist and afford the Veteran a VA examination to assess the nature and etiology of these claimed disabilities is required.  

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination, with an appropriately qualified examiner.  The examiner must review the claims file and should note that review in the report.  Provide an examination for the Veteran's claimed gastrointestinal conditions; if no examination is provided, the examiner must explicitly note in the opinion that no examination is necessary to provide an adequate opinion regarding etiology.  All opinions must be supported by a rationale.  The examiner should provide the following opinions: (a) Is it at least as likely as not that any diagnosed gastrointestinal condition, to include GERD and IBS, is etiologically related to service or any incident of service? (b) Is it at least as likely as not that any diagnosed gastrointestinal condition manifested within one year following separation from service? Cite to any evidence to support a finding of the condition within one year following service. (c) Is it at least as likely as not that any diagnosed gastrointestinal condition was caused by a service-connected disabilities, to expressly include treatment and medication thereof? (d) Is it at least as likely as not that any diagnosed gastrointestinal condition has been aggravated by a service-connected disabilities, to expressly include treatment and medication therefor?  In providing the requested opinions, the examiner must consider and discuss the Veteran's lay statements regarding the onset and progression of the claimed disorder(s).

Signature on the next page 

 

DELYVONNE M. WHITEHEAD

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Ziheng Zhu, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.