Citation Nr: A25034575
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 240413-434086
DATE: April 15, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for erectile dysfunction (ED), to include as secondary to service-connected adenocarcinoma of the prostate and/or service-connected unspecified trauma and other stressor related disorder with unspecified depressive disorder, is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The appellant served on active duty in the United States Army from June 1969 to December 1970.  He is the recipient of the National Defense Service Medal, the Vietnam Campaign Medal, and the Vietnam Service Medal.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an April 2024 rating decision by Department of Veterans Affairs' (VA) Veterans Benefits Administration (VBA), the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ), under the modernized review system.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.2400.  VA received a timely April 2024 notice of disagreement (NOD) to the April 2024 rating decision, selecting the Direct Review Docket.

Applicable Evidentiary Windows

As the appellant has selected the Direct Review Docket, only the evidence of record before the AOJ at the time of its decision on the issue on appeal may be considered.  See 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300(a), 301.  Evidence received after the AOJ decision will not be considered unless the claimant files a timely request for a Board hearing or an opportunity to submit additional evidence on the NOD (VA Form 10182).  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  The appellant has not filed such a request.  If additional evidence was submitted after the AOJ decision, it will not be considered.  If the appellant would like VA to consider any evidence that was added to the claims file that could not be considered, the appellant may file a supplemental claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  See also Cook v. McDonough, 36 Vet. App. 175 (2023).  However, because the Board is remanding the claim of entitlement to service connection for ED, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Entitlement to service connection for ED, to include as secondary to adenocarcinoma of the prostate, is remanded.

An appellant's claims must be remanded to the AOJ to correct pre-decisional duty to assist errors, including when the AOJ fails to make reasonable efforts to obtain VA treatment records, relevant federal or private treatment records; fails to obtain a VA examination; or provides an inadequate VA examination or opinion.? 38?C.F.R. §?20.802(a).

The United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit clarified the standard for establishing secondary service connection in Spicer v. McDonough, 61 F.4th 1360, 1365 (Fed. Cir. 2023).  Spicer held that establishing service connection on a secondary basis requires evidence sufficient to show (1) that a current disability exists and (2) that the current disability was either (a) caused by or (b) aggravated by a service-connected disability. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a)-(b).  Id.  Secondary causation exists when, but for the service-connected disability, the non-service-connected was caused by a service-connected disability either in a direct, etiological way or via multiple steps in a causal chain.  Id.  Secondary aggravation exists when the non-service-connected disability not caused by a service-connected disability would be less severe were it not for a service-connected disability.  Id. at 1364.

In August 2022, the Specialist First Class Heath Robinson Honoring Our PACT Act, Pub. L. 117-168, 136 Stat. 1759 ("PACT Act")) was passed.  Under the PACT Act, VA is required to provide a disability examination and medical nexus opinion when a veteran submits a compensation claim and has evidence of a disability and participation in a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA), but the evidence is not sufficient to establish service connection for the disability.  See 38 U.S.C. § 1168 (a) (see PACT Act, Sec. 303).

The appellant was afforded a VA examination of his ED in January 2024.  See VA Treatment Record, C&P Examination Note, January 18, 2024.  The clinician found the appellant's ED was less likely than not due to or caused by his service-connected adenocarcinoma of the prostate in remission because the appellant stated in a September 2019 VA examination that his ED began three years prior to his prostate surgery.  However, no opinion addressed whether the appellant's ED was aggravated by his service-connected adenocarcinoma of the prostate in remission, consistent with the holding in Spicer above.  Furthermore, the appellant's April 2023 claim included the contention that his ED was secondary to his service-connected unspecified trauma and other stressor related disorder with unspecified depressive disorder.  No opinion addressing this contention was generated.  Additionally, the appellant's exposure to herbicide agents has been conceded but no TERA examination was afforded.  See TERA Memorandum, February 3, 2024.  As such, a remand to obtain new VA medical opinions is warranted.

Following direction from the?United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit in Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021), the proper standard of review for service connection claims is whether the factors of the case are in an "approximate balance."? Lynch?held that the appellant is entitled to the benefit of the doubt when the evidence is in an approximate balance - i.e., nearly equal - and does not require the evidence to be in exact equipoise.? See Id.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain an addendum medical opinion from an appropriate clinician to determine the nature and etiology of the appellant's ED, to include as due to the appellant's service-connected adenocarcinoma of the prostate in remission and unspecified trauma and other stressor related disorder with unspecified depressive disorder.  The claims file should be made available for the clinician to review, and the report should reflect that such review was accomplished.  The clinician should review the entire claims file and if necessary, order an in-person examination.  Thereafter, the clinician should address the following:

(a.) State whether, but for the appellant's service-connected adenocarcinoma of the prostate in remission and/or unspecified trauma and other stressor related disorder with unspecified depressive disorder, he would not have a diagnosis of ED.

(b.) State whether the appellant's ED would have been less severe and result in less functional impairment but for the appellant's service-connected adenocarcinoma of the prostate in remission and/or unspecified trauma and other stressor related disorder with unspecified depressive disorder.

(c.) If the clinician opines the appellant's ED would have resulted in less functional impairment but for his service-connected adenocarcinoma of the prostate in remission and/or unspecified trauma and other stressor related disorder with unspecified depressive disorder, the clinician must attempt to establish a baseline level of severity of the diagnosed ED prior to aggravation by the appellant's service-connected adenocarcinoma of the prostate in remission and/or unspecified trauma and other stressor related disorder with unspecified depressive disorder.

(d.) State whether it is likely, (an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence) the appellant's ED was incurred in service or is otherwise related to an in-service injury, event, or disease.

1.	In providing an opinion, the clinician should consider the total potential exposures through the appellant's military deployments and the synergistic, combined effect of all TERAs of the appellant.

The?mere absence of evidence of contemporaneous treatment in the service treatment records cannot, standing alone, serve as the sole basis for an unfavorable opinion.? However, it is permissible to consider this as one factor in the determination regarding the origins of the claimed disability, providing there is also sufficient explanation as to why it is reasonable to have expectation of treatment in the circumstance presented.?

All opinions?must be supported by a clear rationale.? The clinician should explain in detail the underlying reasoning?for his or her opinion, to include citing to relevant evidence, supporting factual data, prior medical opinions, and medical literature, as appropriate.? In so doing, the clinician must address the appellant's lay statements. The Board makes no determination as to the credibility of any lay statements at this time.

If any requested opinion cannot be provided without resorting to mere speculation, the clinician must explain why a more definitive response is not possible or feasible.? In other words, merely saying he or she cannot respond will not suffice.

 

 

K.A. KENNERLY

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Lee Feldman, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.