Citation Nr: A25034540
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 240809-463243
DATE: April 15, 2025

ORDER

The Board, having determined that new and relevant evidence has been received, concludes that readjudication of the claim of entitlement to service connection for bilateral hearing loss, is warranted. 

The Board, having determined that new and relevant evidence has been received, concludes that readjudication of the claim of entitlement to service connection for hypertension, is warranted. 

The Board, having determined that new and relevant evidence has been received, concludes that readjudication of the claim of entitlement to service connection for diabetes mellitus type II, is warranted. 

The appeal as to the claim of entitlement to service connection for bilateral hearing loss, to include as due to environmental hazard at Camp Lejeune, is denied. 

REMANDED

The appeal as to the claim of entitlement to service connection for diabetes mellitus type II, to include as due to environmental hazard at Camp Lejeune, is remanded. 

The appeal as to the claim of entitlement to service connection for hypertension to include as due to environmental hazard at Camp Lejeune, to include as secondary to diabetes mellitus type II, is remanded. 

The appeal as to the claim of entitlement to service connection for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is remanded. 

The appeal as to the claim of entitlement to service connection for a liver disorder, to include as secondary to PTSD, is remanded.

The appeal as to the claim of entitlement to service connection for pancreatitis, to include as secondary to PTSD, is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1.  In a May 2021 rating decision, the RO continued the denial of the Veteran's claim of entitlement to service connection for bilateral hearing loss; the Veteran did not appeal the decision, and it is final.

2.  In a May 2021 rating decision, the RO continued the denial of the Veteran's claim of entitlement to service connection for hypertension; the Veteran did not appeal the decision, and it is final.

3.  In a May 2021 rating decision, the RO continued the denial of the Veteran's claim of entitlement to service connection for diabetes mellitus type II; the Veteran did not appeal the decision, and it is final.

4.  The Veteran's current bilateral hearing loss disorder did not manifest during, or as a result of, active service, to include in-service acoustic noise trauma and exposure to toxics at Camp Lejeune. 

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1.  The criteria for readjudicating the claim of entitlement to service connection for bilateral hearing loss have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 5103, 5108 (2012); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.156 (d), 3.303 (2021).

2.  The criteria for readjudicating the claim of entitlement to service connection for hypertension have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 5103, 5108 (2012); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.156 (d), 3.303 (2021).

3.  The criteria for readjudicating the claim of entitlement to service connection for diabetes mellitus type II have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 5103, 5108 (2012); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.156 (d), 3.303 (2021).

4.  The criteria for establishing entitlement to service connection for bilateral hearing loss have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1131, 5103, 5103A, 5107 (2012); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.159, 3.303, 3.304, 3.307, 3.309, 3.385 (2021). 

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran had active service in the United States Marine Corps from August 1976 to December 1980.  His service was under honorable conditions. 

The matter is on appeal from November 2023 and December 2023 rating decisions issued by a VA Regional Office (RO). 

The Veteran chose to participate in VA's test program "RAMP", the Rapid Appeals Modernization Program.  This decision has been written consistent with the new AMA framework.  The Veteran opted into RAMP on August 9, 2024, and selected the Direct Review Lane.  As explained on the RAMP Opt-In Election Form, the review is based on evidence submitted to VA as of the date of the election, and the Veteran may not submit additional evidence. Thereafter, in subsequent correspondence, the Board accepted the Veteran's appeal and placed it on the Direct Review docket.  Under Direct Review, the Board will consider all evidence of record up to August 9, 2024.  The Board has not considered any evidence received or submitted after the August 2024 RAMP Opt-In Election. 

The Board has limited the discussion below to the relevant evidence required to support its findings of fact and conclusions of law, as well as to the specific contentions regarding the case as raised directly by the Veteran and those reasonably raised by the record.  See Scott v. McDonald, 789 F.3d 1375, 1381 (Fed. Cir. 2015); Robinson v. Peake, 21 Vet. App. 545, 552 (2008); Dickens v. McDonald, 814 F.3d 1359, 1361 (Fed. Cir. 2016).

New and Relevant Evidence 

VA will readjudicate a claim if new and relevant evidence is presented or secured.  38 C.F.R. § 3.156 (d). "Relevant evidence" is evidence that tends to prove or disprove a matter in issue.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501 (a)(1).  As the statutory definition of "relevant" does not require that the evidence relate to an unestablished fact necessary to substantiate the claim or raise a reasonable possibility of substantiating the claim; "new and relevant" evidence is a lower standard than the "new and material" evidence standard. 

1.  Whether new and relevant evidence has been received to readjudicate the claim of entitlement to service connection for bilateral hearing loss. 

In the present matter, the Veteran asserts that his current bilateral hearing loss disorder is related to his active service, to include as due to environmental hazard at Camp Lejeune.  In this regard, the record demonstrates current diagnoses of bilateral hearing loss in July 2017 and October 2023, on VA examination.  Moreover, the Veteran asserts that his symptoms of bilateral hearing loss began during active service and have progressively worsened to the present.  

Accordingly, as evidence has been submitted that is relevant to the matter at issue, the claim of entitlement to service connection for bilateral hearing loss is reopened.

2.  Whether new and relevant evidence has been received to readjudicate the claim of entitlement to service connection for hypertension. 

In the present matter, the Veteran asserts that his current hypertension disorder is related to his active service, to include as due to environmental hazard at Camp Lejeune.  In this regard, the record demonstrates current diagnoses of hypertension during the course of VA and private treatment dated from March 2016 through July 2024, and in October 2023 on VA examination.  Moreover, the Veteran asserts that his symptoms of hypertension began during active service and have progressively worsened to the present.  

Accordingly, as evidence has been submitted that is relevant to the matter at issue, the claim of entitlement to service connection for hypertension is reopened. 

3.  Whether new and relevant evidence has been received to readjudicate the claim of entitlement to service connection for diabetes mellitus type II.

In the present matter, the Veteran asserts that his current diabetes mellitus type II disorder is related to his active service, to include as due to environmental hazard at Camp Lejeune.  In this regard, the record demonstrates current diagnoses of diabetes mellitus type II during the course of VA and private treatment dated from March 2016 through July 2024, and in October 2023 on VA examination.  Moreover, the Veteran asserts that his symptoms of diabetes mellitus type II began during active service and have progressively worsened to the present.  

Accordingly, as evidence has been submitted that is relevant to the matter at issue, the claim of entitlement to service connection for diabetes mellitus type II is reopened. 

Service Connection - Legal Criteria

Generally, service connection will be granted for a disability resulting from an injury or disease caused or aggravated by service.  38 U.S.C. § 1131.  A grant of service connection for a disability requires: (1) a present disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability; (2) an in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship ("nexus") between the present disability and the in-service event, injury, or disease.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303; see Walker v. Shinseki, 708 F.3d 1331 (Fed. Cir. 2013).

Some chronic diseases are subject to presumptive service connection, although, not otherwise established as incurred or aggravated by service if manifest to a compensable degree, within an applicable time limit, provided that the rebuttable presumptive provisions of § 3.307 are also satisfied.  See also 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.309.   

Hearing loss is considered a chronic disease under 38 C.F.R. § 3.309 (a) because this condition is an organic disorder of the nervous system.  For this chronic disease to be presumed service-connected, under this provision, it must manifest to a degree of 10 percent within one year from the date of termination of such service.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.307 (a)(3).

Lay evidence is competent to establish the presence of observable symptomatology and "may provide sufficient support for a claim of service connection."  Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 469 (1994).  When a condition is capable of lay observation and may be diagnosed by its unique and readily identifiable features, the presence of the disorder is not a determination "medical in nature."

Also, 38 U.S.C. § 1154 (a) requires that VA give 'due consideration' to 'all pertinent medical and lay evidence' in evaluating a claim for disability.  Davidson v. Shinseki, 581 F.3d 1313 (Fed. Cir. 2009).  Specifically, '[l]ay evidence can be competent and sufficient to establish a diagnosis of a condition when (1) a layperson is competent to identify the medical condition, (2) the layperson is reporting a contemporaneous medical diagnosis, or (3) lay testimony describing symptoms at the time supports a later diagnosis by a medical professional.' Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 (Fed. Cir. 2007); see also Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331, 1337 (Fed. Cir. 2006).  

In addition to the regulations cited above, if a veteran, or former reservist or member of the National Guard, had no less than 30 days of service at Camp Lejeune during the period between August 1, 1953, and December 31, 1987, then the veteran is presumed to have been exposed to contaminants in the water supply at Camp Lejeune during military service, subject to the requirements of 38 C.F.R. § 3.307 (a)(7).  If the veteran has such service, then the following diseases will be service-connected even though there is no record of such disease during service, subject to the rebuttable presumption provisions of § 3.307(d): (1) kidney cancer; (2) liver cancer; (3) Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma; (4) adult leukemia; (5) multiple myeloma; (6) Parkinson's disease; (7) aplastic anemia and other myelodysplastic syndromes; and (8) bladder cancer.  38 C.F.R. § 3.309 (f).  

Except as otherwise provided by law, a claimant has the responsibility to present and support a claim for benefits under laws administered by the Secretary.  The Secretary shall consider all information and lay and medical evidence of record in a case before the Secretary with respect to benefits under laws administered by the Secretary.  When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, the Secretary shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant.  38 U.S.C. § 5107 (2012); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.3 (2021); see also Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49, 53 (1990). 

4.  Entitlement to service connection for bilateral hearing loss, to include as due to environmental hazard at Camp Lejeune. 

In the present matter, the Veteran asserts that his current bilateral hearing loss disorder is related to his active service, to include as due to environmental hazard at Camp Lejeune.  Specifically, he reports that he was exposed to acoustic trauma during service, as a result of his Military Occupational Specialty (MOS), as a mechanic.  In this regard, he reported that he was exposed to loud engine noise, power tools, and generators for more than three years. 

For the purposes of applying the laws administered by VA, hearing impairment is considered a disability when the auditory threshold level in any of the frequencies 500, 1000, 2000, 3000, 4000 Hertz is 40 decibels or greater; or when the auditory thresholds for at least three of the frequencies 500, 1000, 2000, 3000, or 4000 Hertz are 26 decibels or greater; or when speech recognition scores using the Maryland CNC Test are less than 94 percent.  38 C.F.R. § 3.385.

Service treatment records are negative for complaints of, treatment for, or a diagnosis of a right or left ear hearing loss disorder.  

The December 1975 induction examination notes the following puretone thresholds in decibels: 

			HERTZ		

	500	1000	2000	3000	4000

RIGHT	       15	        15	       15	      	       10

LEFT	       20	        20	       20	     	        5

The September 1977 audiometric testing notes the following puretone thresholds in decibels: 

			HERTZ		

	500	1000	2000	3000	4000

RIGHT	       15	        15	       15	      	       10

LEFT	       20	        20	       20	     	        5

The July 1980 separation examination notes the following puretone thresholds in decibels: 

			HERTZ		

	500	1000	2000	3000	4000

RIGHT	       15	        10	       15	      5 	       5

LEFT	       15	         5	       15	      5	       15

Post-service records include a June 2016 audiology VA outpatient treatment record that shows the Veteran was fitted for hearing aids. 

The Veteran underwent a VA audiological examination in July 2017.  At the time, the Veteran reported that he was exposed to acoustic trauma during service.  The audiological examination report notes the following puretone thresholds in decibels: 

			HERTZ		

	500	1000	2000	3000	4000

RIGHT	       30	        45	       55	      65 	       65

LEFT	       25	        40	       55	      60	       70

The examiner stated that the Veteran's speech audiometry revealed a speech recognition score of 94 percent in the right ear and 96 percent in the left ear.  Upon review of the claims file, the examiner diagnosed bilateral sensorineural hearing loss.  The examiner opined that the Veteran's current bilateral hearing loss disorder was not related to his active service.  In providing the opinion, the examiner indicated that although the Veteran's MOS of a mechanic has a moderate probability of hazardous noise exposure, his current bilateral hearing loss disorder is not due to service due to a lack of objective evidence of injury and/or diagnosis during service.  The examiner indicated that the presence of a noise injury is supported by significant threshold shifts.  He indicated that the induction examination shows normal hearing bilaterally, and the separation examination shows normal hearing, bilaterally.  Specifically, he indicated that the separation examination does not show any significant threshold shifts.  

The Veteran underwent a VA audiological examination in October 2023.  At the time, the Veteran reported that he was exposed to acoustic trauma during service.  Upon review of the claims file, the examiner diagnosed bilateral sensorineural hearing loss.  The examiner opined that the Veteran's current bilateral hearing loss disorder was not related to his active service.  In providing the opinion, the examiner indicated that there were no significant threshold shifts upon induction, compared to separation from service. 

In a November 2023 VA opinion, a VA examiner reviewed the record and found that the Veteran's current bilateral hearing loss disorder was not caused by the Veteran's toxic exposure, to include his daily exposure to contaminated water at Camp Lejeune.  The examiner noted that while exposure to Perchloroethylene (PCE), trichloroethylene (TCE), vinyl chloride, and benzene has the potential to lead to hearing loss, this would typically occur from high concentrations of exposure in an industrial setting.  Given that the Veteran's hearing loss was within normal limits at separation, his current bilateral hearing loss disorder is less likely than not due to toxic exposure (water contamination).  The examiner found that risk factors outside of the Veteran's service are likely the cause for his current bilateral hearing loss disorder, including his age, placing him at a high risk for presbycusis. 

In a December 2023 VA addendum opinion, a VA examiner reviewed the record and found that the Veteran's current bilateral hearing loss disorder was not related to his active service.  In providing the opinion, the examiner concurs with the July 2017 VA examination, noting the Veteran's high probability for noise exposure during service as a mechanic; however, the examiner found that there were no significant threshold shifts during the Veteran's active service.  Specifically, the examiner noted that the induction examination demonstrates normal hearing, bilaterally, and the separation examination demonstrates normal hearing, bilaterally, with no significant threshold shifts. 

Upon review of the evidence of record, the Board finds that the Veteran does have a current bilateral hearing loss disorder for VA purposes, as demonstrated on VA examination in July 2017 and October 2023.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.385.  Although noise exposure during service has been conceded by the aforementioned VA examiners due to the Veteran's MOS as a mechanic, the Board notes the negative nexus opinions provided by the July 2017, October 2023, and December 2023 VA examiners.  In this regard, the examiners found that the Veteran's current bilateral hearing loss disorder was not due to service, as there was no objective evidence of a permanent threshold shift from the Veteran's entrance into service to separation.  The Board further notes that the Veteran's medical records do not indicate complaints for hearing loss until June 2016, more than 35 years after separation from service.  Significantly, hearing loss was not diagnosed until July 2017.  Therefore, there is no evidence of record of right or left hearing loss as a chronic condition that began in service and continued since service. 

Additionally, the Board finds that consideration for service connection should not be limited only to permanent threshold shifts; the Veteran's ongoing sensorineural hearing loss must be taken into consideration.  Pursuant to Hensley v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 155 (1993), the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) held that even though a hearing disorder may not have been demonstrated at separation, a veteran may still establish service connection for a current hearing disorder by showing he now has a hearing disorder and by submitting evidence that his current hearing disability is related to his active service.  See also Ledford v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 87, 89 (1992).  Here, the Board finds that the Veteran has not submitted any additional evidence that establishes that his current bilateral hearing loss disorder is related to his active service or was otherwise caused by acoustic trauma in service.   

Finally, the Board finds that the Veteran's current bilateral hearing loss disorder is not related to his conceded toxic exposure, to include daily exposure to contaminated water while serving at Camp Lejeune.  In this regard, the Board notes the December 2023 VA opinion, in which a VA examiner noted that while PCE, TCE, vinyl chloride, and benzene has the potential to lead to hearing loss, this would typically occur from high concentrations of exposure in an industrial setting.  The examiner found that given that the Veteran's hearing loss was within normal limits at separation, his current bilateral hearing loss disorder was less likely than not due to toxic exposure (water contamination).  The examiner concluded that risk factors outside of the Veteran's service were likely the cause for his current bilateral hearing loss disorder, including his age. 

The Board has carefully and sympathetically reviewed the evidence of record.  The Board acknowledges that the Veteran does have a current bilateral sensorineural hearing loss disability.  The Board further notes that acoustic trauma during service has been conceded.  However, there has been no nexus established between the Veteran's current disorder and his active service, as the Veteran's complaints of hearing loss and diagnosis, did not occur until more than 35 years after separation from active service. 

Accordingly, the Board must conclude that service connection is not warranted for the bilateral hearing loss disability.  

REASONS FOR REMAND

1.  Entitlement to service connection for diabetes mellitus type II, to include as due to environmental hazard at Camp Lejeune.

The Veteran asserts that his current diabetes mellitus type II disorder is related to his active service, to include as due to environmental hazard at Camp Lejeune.  In this regard, he asserts that his symptoms began during service, to include fatigue and weight gain of 35 pounds from induction to separation from service. 

Service treatment records include a December 1975 induction examination report that demonstrates a weight of 120 pounds.  A July 1980 separation examination report demonstrates a weight of 155 pounds.

Post-service records VA outpatient treatment records dated from March 2016 to July 2024, which demonstrate diagnosed of diabetes mellitus type II. 

The Veteran underwent a VA examination in October 2023, during which the examiner diagnosed diabetes mellitus type II.  The examiner found that the Veteran's current diabetes mellitus type II disorder was not related to his toxic exposure at Camp Lejeune; however, the examiner failed to address the Veteran's assertions of fatigue during service and 35 weight gain between induction and separation from service, and whether the Veteran's current diabetes mellitus type II is directly related to his active service. 

Accordingly, the Board finds the aforementioned VA opinion inadequate to adjudicate the claim.  Thus, the issue is remanded for an adequate VA medical opinion.  Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007).

2.  Entitlement to service connection for hypertension, to include as due to environmental hazard at Camp Lejeune, to include as secondary to diabetes mellitus type II.

The Veteran asserts that his current hypertension disorder is related to his active service, to include as due to environmental hazard at Camp Lejeune, and alternative, it is due to his diabetes mellitus type II disorder.  

Service treatment records include a December 1975 induction examination report that demonstrates a blood pressure reading of 120/80.  A July 1980 separation examination report demonstrates a blood pressure reading of 180/80.

Post-service records include VA outpatient treatment records dated from March 2016 through July 2024, which demonstrate diagnoses of hypertension.  

The Veteran underwent a VA examination in October 2023, during which the examiner diagnosed hypertension.  The examiner found that the Veteran's current hypertension was not related to his toxic exposure at Camp Lejeune; however, the examiner failed to address the Veteran's blood pressure reading of 180/80 in July 1980, on his separation from service, and whether the Veteran's current hypertension is directly related to his active service. 

Accordingly, the Board finds the aforementioned VA opinion inadequate to adjudicate the claim.  Thus, the issue is remanded for an adequate VA medical opinion.  Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007).

In addition, the issue of entitlement to service connection for hypertension cannot be addressed until the above development for the issue of entitlement of service connection for diabetes mellitus type II, has been completed.  See Harris v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 180, 183 (1991) (two issues are "inextricably intertwined" when they are so closely ties together that a final Board decision cannot be rendered unless both are adjudicated).

3.  Entitlement to service connection for PTSD.

The Veteran asserts that his current PTSD is related to his active service.  In this regard, in an August 2023 statement, he asserted that between September 8, 1978, and December 4, 1980, he participated in night exercises at Fort Bragg, when he was in a field firing guns with the 5th Battalion, 10th Marines, and a soldier was killed when a five ton vehicle backed over him.  The Veteran indicated that he experienced symptoms of depression since service. 

Service treatment records are negative for complaints of, treatment for, or a diagnosis of PTSD. 

Post-service records include VA outpatient treatment records dated from April 2019 to December 2022, which demonstrate positive screenings for PTSD. 

Given the Veteran's assertion regarding the aforementioned in-service incident, current diagnoses of PTSD, as well as his assertion of ongoing symptoms since service, the Board must remand this issue for a VA examination and medical opinion concerning the matter.  See McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006); 38 U.S.C. § 5103A (d); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159 (c)(4).

4.  Entitlement to service connection for a liver disorder, to include as secondary to PTSD.

See argument Below at 5

5.  Entitlement to service connection for pancreatitis, to include as secondary to PTSD.

The Veteran asserts that his current liver and pancreatitis disorders are due to his PTSD. 

In this regard, the issues of entitlement to service connection for liver and pancreatitis disorders cannot be addressed until the above development for the issue of entitlement of service connection for PTSD, has been completed.  See Harris v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 180, 183 (1991) (two issues are "inextricably intertwined" when they are so closely ties together that a final Board decision cannot be rendered unless both are adjudicated).

The matters are REMANDED for the following actions:

1.  DIABETES MELLITUS TYPE II - All pertinent evidence of record must be made available to and reviewed by an appropriate VA physician who has not provided a prior opinion in this case.  The Veteran need not appear for an examination unless deemed necessary by the physician assigned to offer an opinion.

Following a review of the record, the physician should state a medical opinion with respect to the diabetes mellitus type II disorder present during the period of the claim.  The examiner must address the following:

Is it at least as likely as not (i.e., likelihood is at least approximately balanced or near equal, if not higher) that the current diabetes mellitus type II disorder manifested during, or as a result of, active military service.

In providing the opinion, the examiner must address the following service treatment records: 

"	December 1975 induction examination that demonstrates a weight of 120 pounds; and

"	July 1980 separation examination that demonstrates a weight of 155 pounds.

The examiner must also discuss the Veteran's assertions, that he has experienced the symptom of fatigue since active service, which has progressively worsened to the present. 

For purposes of the opinion, the examiner should assume that the Veteran is a credible historian. 

A complete rationale for all opinions offered must be provided.  If the examiner is unable to provide any required opinion, the examiner should fully explain why this is the case.  Likewise, if the examiner cannot provide an opinion without resorting to mere speculation, the examiner shall provide a complete explanation as to why this is so.  If the inability to provide a more definitive opinion is the result of a need for additional information, the examiner should identify the additional information that is needed.

2.  HYPERTENSION - All pertinent evidence of record must be made available to and reviewed by an appropriate VA physician who has not provided a prior opinion in this case.  The Veteran need not appear for an examination unless deemed necessary by the physician assigned to offer an opinion.

Following a review of the record, the physician should state a medical opinion with respect to the hypertension disorder present during the period of the claim.  The examiner must address the following:

Is it at least as likely as not (i.e., likelihood is at least approximately balanced or near equal, if not higher) that the current hypertension disorder manifested during, or as a result of, active military service.

In providing the opinion, the examiner must address the following service treatment records: 

"	December 1975 induction examination that 

demonstrates a blood pressure reading of 120/80; and

"	July 1980 separation examination that demonstrates a 

blood pressure reading of 180/80.

For purposes of the opinion, the examiner should assume that 

the Veteran is a credible historian. 

A complete rationale for all opinions offered must be provided.  If the examiner is unable to provide any required opinion, the examiner should fully explain why this is the case.  Likewise, if the examiner cannot provide an opinion without resorting to mere speculation, the examiner shall provide a complete explanation as to why this is so.  If the inability to provide a more definitive opinion is the result of a need for additional information, the examiner should identify the additional information that is needed.

3.  PTSD - Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination before an appropriate medical professional to determine the etiology of any acquired psychiatric disorder.  The examiner must review the record, to include service treatment records, VA and private treatment records, and the Veteran's assertions.  The examiner must also consideration the Veteran's documented medical history, assertions, and reported symptoms.  All necessary tests and studies should be completed, and all clinical findings reported in detail.

The examiner must provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (i.e., likelihood is at least approximately balanced or near equal, if not higher) that any identified acquired psychiatric disorder(s), to include PTSD, manifested during, or as a result of, active military service.

The examiner must also comment on the Veteran's assertions indicating that he experienced the following stressor during service:  Between September 8, 1978, and December 4, 1980, the Veteran participated in night exercises at Fort Bragg, and while in a field firing guns with the 5th Battalion, 10th Marines, a soldier was killed when a five ton vehicle backed over him.

The examiner must also discuss the Veteran's assertions, that he has experienced depression since active service, which has progressively worsened to the present.

For purposes of the opinion, the examiner should assume 

that the Veteran is a credible historian. 

A complete rationale for all opinions offered must be provided.  If the examiner is unable to provide any required opinion, the examiner should fully explain why this is the case.  Likewise, if the examiner cannot provide an opinion without resorting to mere speculation, the examiner shall provide a complete explanation as to why this is so.  If the inability to provide a more definitive opinion is the result of a need for additional information, the examiner should identify the additional information that is needed.

 

 

B. MULLINS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Sara Schinnerer, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.