Citation Nr: A25034597
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 241003-481624
DATE: April 15, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to an initial compensable rating for bilateral pes planus is remanded.

Entitlement to an initial compensable rating for left hallux valgus is remanded.

Entitlement to an initial compensable rating for right hallux valgus is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Navy from October 1985 to September 1994, and from June 1989 to September 1994, during Peacetime and Gulf War Era.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a September 2024 rating decision by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO), which granted service connection for pes planus, left hallux valgus, and right hallux valgus as noncompensable, effective December 17, 2019. 

In the October 2024 Board Appeal: Notice of Disagreement, VA Form 10182, the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. As such, the Board's review is limited to the evidence of record at the time of the decision on appeal (September 25, 2024). The Board cannot consider evidence submitted during the period after the decision on appeal (on or after September 26, 2024). 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.301. However, because this case is being remanded, any evidence that is not considered by the Board at this time will be considered by the AOJ upon readjudication of this claim. 

As a final initial matter, the Veteran selected the Direct Review docket, and the Board notes that the allotted time to select a different Board review option under 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.202(c)(2) and Williams v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 305 (2024), which allows for a docket switch 60 days from the date of the VA Form 10182 or one year from the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision, whichever is later, has not elapsed; however, as this case is being remanded, there is no prejudice to the Veteran at this time as this is not a final decision and he will have an option to return to the Board following this remand, with all options again available to him.

First, the evidence of record shows the Veteran is incarcerated. 

Regarding the matters on appeal, the AOJ requested VA examinations for the Veteran's pes planus, left hallux valgus, and right hallux valgus on September 19, 2020. See September 2020 Exam Scheduling Request. On September 22, 2020, a clarification request stated that no contact information was given for the Veteran, to which VA responded with the Veteran's phone number, and the information that the Veteran did not provide an email address. See September 2020 Exam Scheduling Request Clarification Response. On February 10, 2022, the VA examinations were cancelled, with the reason listed as "Other." See February 2022 Exam Scheduling Request Contention Cancellations. In the March 2022 Report of General Information, it was noted that the Veteran was incarcerated and the status was open due to locating an examiner in the area for scheduling.

Subsequently, in September 2024, the Board granted service connection for the claims, and in the September 2024 rating decision on appeal, the AOJ implemented the Board's decision. Despite the grant of service connection for the claims, no VA examinations were performed. This includes any VA examinations that would determine the severity of the Veteran's disabilities.

In this regard, the Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (the Court) has specifically addressed VA's duty to assist incarcerated veterans in cases where a VA examination is warranted. Specifically, the Court has cautioned "those who adjudicate claims of incarcerated veterans to be certain that they tailor their assistance to the peculiar circumstances of confinement. Such individuals are entitled to the same care and consideration given to their fellow veterans." See Bolton v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 185 (1995) (citing Wood v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 190 (1991)).

The Board recognizes that VA does not have the authority to require a correctional institution to release a veteran so that VA can provide him the necessary examination at the closest VA medical facility. See 38?U.S.C. ยง?5711. Nevertheless, VA's duty to assist an incarcerated veteran includes: (1) attempting to arrange transportation of the claimant to a VA facility for examination; (2)?contacting the correctional facility and having their medical personnel conduct an examination according to VA examination work sheets; or (3) sending a VA or fee-basis examiner to the correctional facility to conduct the examination. Bolton, supra.

In affording an incarcerated veteran an examination, the RO must document substantial efforts to schedule and conduct the examination and associate such documentation to the claims folder. Additionally, Veterans Health Administration (VHA) compensation clinics must provide documentation that they have made substantial attempts to schedule and conduct the examination and have exhausted all possible venues for obtaining access to the incarcerated veteran for the examination. Therefore, in this case, all avenues need to be exhausted and all steps taken to provide an examination must be documented.

Therefore, because the examinations were never obtained, the Board finds that remand is required to attempt to reschedule the requested VA examinations in accordance with the applicable law. See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007).

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination to determine the current severity of his pes planus, left hallux valgus, and right hallux valgus, pursuant to the guidance pertaining to incarcerated Veterans. 

The RO must provide documentation that it has made substantial attempts to schedule and conduct the examination and have exhausted all possible venues for obtaining access to the incarcerated veteran for the examination.

The claims file must be made available to, and be reviewed by, the examiner. All tests deemed necessary should be conducted and the results reported in detail.

The examiner is advised that the Veteran is competent to report his symptoms and history and that such reports are to be considered in formulating any opinion.

All findings should be reported in detail and all opinions must be accompanied by a clear rationale.

 

 

MARTIN B. PETERS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Garfield, Jeannine F.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.1303.