Citation Nr: A25034156
Decision Date: 04/14/25	Archive Date: 04/14/25

DOCKET NO. 240626-450840
DATE: April 14, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a heart condition, to include residuals of a history of heart issues and cardiac catheterization, is remanded.

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from August 1986 until honorable discharge in August 1994.

The Veteran first filed a claim regarding a heart condition in January 2015 by calling the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) St. Louis, MO, Regional Office (RO). This call was memorialized by the VA RO via VA Form 21-0820, Report of General Information, completed contemporaneously with the call. This claim was initially developed under the "Legacy" adjudication process, the precursor to the current Appeals Modernization Act (AMA) process. In a September 2015 rating decision, the RO denied the claim, indicating that the Veteran did not have a diagnosed heart condition.

In September 2020, under the AMA, the Veteran filed VA Form 20-0995, Supplemental Claim Application, requesting readjudication of the claim for service connection for a heart condition. In a March 2021 rating decision, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) found that new and relevant evidence had been submitted and thus the claim was readjudicated. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. Upon readjudication, despite making favorable findings that the Veteran had diagnosed disabilities of a "history of heart issue(s)" and a "history of cardiac catheterization," the AOJ confirmed and continued the previous denial. Rating Decision, March 2021.

In August 2021, the Veteran again filed a Supplemental Claim, requesting readjudication of the claim for service connection for a heart condition. In a November 2021 rating decision, the AOJ found that new and relevant evidence had not been received, and thus the claim was not readjudicated. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. The AOJ confirmed and continued the previous denial.

In November 2022, the Veteran again filed a Supplemental Claim, requesting readjudication of the claim for service connection for a heart condition. In a January 2024 rating decision, the AOJ found that new and relevant evidence had been submitted and thus the claim was readjudicated. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. Upon readjudication, the AOJ determined that the Veteran did not have a currently diagnosed heart condition, and therefore the AOJ confirmed and continued the previous denial. 

The Veteran timely appealed this decision to the Board via a June 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement (NOD)). The Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.?The appeal is properly before the Board for adjudication.

The Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the January 2024 AOJ decision on appeal. 38?C.F.R. §?20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§?20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

However, because the Board is remanding the claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103 (c)(2)(ii).

REASONS FOR REMAND

In short, the AOJ committed a predecisional duty to assist error by failing to obtain adequate medical examination(s) and opinion(s) regarding the Veteran's diagnosed history of heart issues and history of cardiac catheterization. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a). A remand is necessary to correct this error.

Service Connection

Service connection may be granted for disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303. The three-element test for service connection requires evidence of: (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166 -67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

The Federal Circuit Court has held that VA has a duty to consider all theories of entitlement when determining eligibility for compensation. Szemraj v. Principi, 357 F.3d 1370, 1373 (Fed. Cir. 2004); See also Robinson v. Shinseki, 557 F.3d 1355, 1361 (Fed. Cir. 2009) (VA is required to consider all theories of entitlement raised either by the claimant or by the evidence of record as part of the non-adversarial administrative adjudication process).

Adequacy of Medical Opinions

When VA undertakes to provide a medical opinion, it must be adequate. Barr v. Nicholson, 21?Vet. App.?303, 312 (2007). Any medical opinion which the Board considers for adjudicative purposes must support its conclusions with an analysis that the Board can consider and weigh against contrary opinions. Stefl v. Nicholson,?21?Vet. App.?120, 124?(2007).

Entitlement to service connection a heart condition, to include residuals of a history of heart issues and cardiac catheterization, is remanded.

The Veteran contends that she is entitled to service connection for a heart condition, at times referred to as ischemic heart disease, based on exposure to herbicide agents and other toxins. Specifically, the Veteran contends that she was exposed to various toxins while on active duty, stationed at Ft. McClellan, AL, from August 1986 until February 1987. See Argument of Counsel, Third Party Correspondence, November 2022; VA Form 21-10210, Lay/Witness Statement, November 2022.

As a preliminary matter, the Board notes that the AOJ made favorable findings in the March 2021 rating decision that are relevant: the AOJ found that the Veteran has diagnosed disabilities, including a "diagnostic history of heart issue(s)," and a "history of cardiac catheterization." The Board is bound by the AOJ's favorable findings, absent clear and unmistakable error (CUE).?38 C.F.R. § 3.104?(c). These diagnoses are confirmed by the evidentiary record. There is no CUE present, and the Board will not upset the AOJ's findings.

Additionally, in determining entitlement to service connection for claimed disabilities, the Board must not limit its consideration based upon the specific claimed disability. Rather, the Board must consider all of the available evidence and allow medical professionals to appropriately diagnose disabilities based upon the Veteran's description of history and symptomatology. See?Clemons?v. Shinseki, 23?Vet. App.?1 (U.S. 2009). Accordingly, while the Veteran has claimed entitlement to service connection for a "heart condition," there is credible evidence, and the AOJ's favorable findings, that confirm diagnoses of a history of heart issues and a history of cardiac catheterization. Accordingly, the Board will recharacterize the claim to entitlement to service connection for a heart condition, to include residuals of a history of heart issues and cardiac catheterization. This better encompasses the claim based on the available evidence.

Turning to the elements of service connection, the first and second elements are met. The AOJ favorable findings confirm the Veteran's history of heart condition disabilities. Moreover, the Veteran's credible statements regarding exposure to toxins during active service constitutes an in-service event or injury. The first two elements are met.

The only remaining question for the Board is the third element, the so-called nexus, a causal link between the Veteran's heart condition(s) and her military service. The record before the Board is insufficient to answer this question.

The Veteran underwent a VA medical examination, a so-called disability benefits questionnaire (DBQ), concerning heart conditions in June 2023. Based upon this examination, and a review of the Veteran's claim file, the VA examiner determined that the Veteran does not have a current diagnosis of a heart condition that constitutes a disability. VA Medical Examination, June 2023. The examiner made several remarks of note: the examiner indicated that the Veteran had chest x-ray results from May 2004 which may indicate a heart disability, but stated that this finding cannot be used to determine current heart function; the examiner indicated that the Veteran had echocardiogram (ECHO) results from April 2016 which may indicate a heart disability, but stated that this finding cannot be used to determine current heart function; the examiner indicated that the Veteran had electrocardiogram (ECG) results from April 2016 which may indicate a heart disability, but stated that this finding cannot be used to determine current heart function, and; the examiner noted that the Veteran had undergone a cardiac catheterization in September 2015, but that the findings of "mild coronary plaques" did not constitute an official diagnosis of coronary artery disease (CAD). VA Medical Examination, June 2023. The examiner concluded, "[f]or the claimant's claimed condition of heart condition (ischemic heart disease) there is no diagnosis because [there are] no current...cardiologist's medical reports...which demonstrate a distinct heart diagnosis of any type, specifically no evidence of ischemic heart disease nor coronary artery disease." VA Medical Examination, June 2023. The examiner also notes that the Veteran endorses current symptoms of chest pain, quick and pounding heart beats, dizziness, and occasionally passing out when standing from a seated position. VA Medical Examination, June 2023. Additionally, the Veteran states that these symptoms have worsened over time, and that they impact her daily life whenever she has to stand from a seated position. VA Medical Examination, June 2023.

There is a single formal VA opinion associated with the June 2023 VA medical examination. In August 2023, a VA examiner rendered an opinion regarding whether or not the Veteran's claimed toxic exposure risk activity (TERA) participation during military service is related to the claimed heart condition(s). This opinion only discusses TERA issues; it does not discuss any other theories of entitlement (e.g. direct service connection, secondary service connection). Based upon the June 2023 VA medical examination finding that there is not a currently diagnosed heart condition, the examiner opined that there is no link between any claimed TERAs and the claimed heart conditions. VA Medical Opinion, August 2023. i.e., the examiner indicated that because there is not a current diagnosis of a heart condition, there is nothing to link to TERA participation.

This medical examination and this medical opinion are both inadequate for adjudicative purposes. The medical examination is inadequate in that it does not consider what, if any, impact the previously diagnosed conditions have on the Veteran's current symptoms. The examination does not consider what residual impacts the Veteran's "history of heart issue(s)" or cardiac catheterization have on the Veteran's current symptoms. While it may be the case that the Veteran's current symptoms do not rise to the level of a "disability" for VA purposes, it is clear from the record that during the pendency of this claim, the Veteran was diagnosed with heart condition disabilities. The AOJ made such favorable findings. This examination does not discuss what, if any, impact these acknowledged disability diagnoses have on the Veteran's current symptoms.

Similarly, the August 2023 VA medical opinion is inadequate in that it does not opine on the potential impact of these acknowledged diagnoses on the Veteran's current symptoms. As the Veteran has had diagnosed heart conditions, and has current cardiac symptoms, it is insufficient to state that there is no current formal diagnosis and therefore no service connection. It may well be the case that the Veteran's current symptoms are residuals of these previous diagnoses. It may also well be the case that these previous diagnoses are related to the Veteran's military service, and therefore service connection would be warranted. On the evidence currently before the Board, it is impossible to make a factual determination on these issues.

The AOJ committed a predecisional duty to assist error by failing to obtain adequate medical examination(s) and medical opinion(s) that considered all theories of entitlement raised by the Veteran's claims and by the evidence of record. A remand is necessary to correct these errors. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

1.  	Obtain an addendum medical opinion regarding the Veteran's heart condition(s), including any residual effects of the previously diagnosed history of heart issue(s) and cardiac catheterization, as outlined below. If necessary, schedule the Veteran for a VA examination. In any case, the examiner must review the claims file, including this opinion.

If a diagnosis cannot be provided but the Veteran's condition(s) manifest in symptoms that cause functional impairment, then the examiner should consider them a "disability" for the purpose of providing the requested opinion(s) below.

The examiner is asked to determine the following: 

(a)	 	Whether the Veteran's heart condition(s), including any residual effects of the previously diagnosed history of heart issue(s) and cardiac catheterization, are at least as likely as not related to military service.

(b)	 	Whether the Veteran's heart condition(s), including any residual effects of the previously diagnosed history of heart issue(s) and cardiac catheterization, are at least as likely as not related to the Veteran's claimed toxic exposure during service, including herbicide agent exposure at Ft. McClellan, AL.

VA has not conceded the Veteran's exposure to herbicide agents is subject to presumptive service connection under 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307, 3.309. However, the Veteran has provided competent statements that she was exposed to herbicide agent(s) at Ft. McClellan, AL, between 1986 - 1987.

Attempt to verify the Veteran's asserted in-service exposure to herbicide agents. If more details are needed, contact the Veteran to request the information. If there is still insufficient information to verify exposure to herbicide agents, issue a Formal Finding outlining the steps taken to assist the Veteran and notify the Veteran of VA's inability to verify the in-service herbicide agent exposure.

A full rationale must accompany all provided medical opinions.

2.  	After ensuring full compliance with this remand, readjudicate the claim on appeal.

 

 

Danette Mincey

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	A. T. Holtsclaw

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.