Citation Nr: A25034442
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 240620-449260
DATE: April 15, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for diabetes mellitus type II (DM II) is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for hypertension is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for loss of organ, gallbladder is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for loss of organ, small intestine is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Marine Corps from December 1972 to November 1975.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from June 2023 rating decision issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO) which denied service connection for DM II, hypertension, loss of organ, gallbladder and loss of organ, small intestine.  

In the June 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the June 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  If evidence was submitted after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the Veteran's claims, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Moreover, the Board concludes that the July 17, 2024, VA letter invalidating the Veteran's Higher-Level Review (HLR) appeal for service connection for pancreatic cancer, scars as secondary to pancreatic cancer, and adjustment disorder was sent in error.  The letter stated that the Veteran's appeal for the aforementioned issues could not be adjudicated because VA does not allow an HLR of a BVA decision.  A review of the claims file, however, reveals the Board has not yet issued a decision concerning these specific claims.  Thus, the Board finds that the HLR is valid, in effect, and impacts some issues in this decision, as further explained below.

1. Entitlement to service connection for diabetes mellitus type II (DM II).

The Veteran seeks service connection for DM II based on in-service toxic exposure.  See March 2023 Claim Application.  

Following a review of the record, and as discussed further below, the Board finds that a remand is necessary to correct a pre-decisional duty-to-assist (DTA) error.

Under the AMA, the Board must remand to the AOJ to correct pre-decisional DTA errors (including when the AOJ failed to make reasonable efforts to obtain VA treatment records or relevant federal or private treatment records, failed to obtain a VA examination, or provided an inadequate VA examination or opinion).  38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

A May 2023 Toxic Exposure Risk Activity (TERA) memo reflects that the Veteran was exposed to water contamination at Camp Lejeune during active service.  The contamination included hazards such as perchloroethylene (PCE), trichloroethylene (TCE), vinyl chloride, and benzene.

Additionally, in May 2023, the Veteran underwent a VA examination, which provided a diagnosis of DM II.  The examiner also provided a negative TERA opinion.  Specifically, the examiner opined that the Veteran's DM II is less likely than not caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activity(ies), after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the veteran.  As a rationale, the examiner stated that DM II is due to increased glucose intake and decreased function of the pancreas, which is not scientifically known to be caused by a TERA.

The Board finds that the VA opinion is inadequate because the examiner, without providing any basis or supporting medical data, concludes there is no scientific link between the common cause for DM II and a TERA.  The examiner also failed to address or discuss the Veteran's particular service circumstances, to include discussion of the Veteran's MOS-related exposure to fuels, fumes, and fluids as a truck driver.  

Since the only provided medical opinion is inadequate, the Board must remand to correct this pre-decisional DTA error.  Upon remand, an adequate VA medical opinion must be obtained.

2. Entitlement to service connection for hypertension.

The Veteran seeks service connection for hypertension based on in-service toxic exposure.  See March 2023 Claim Application.  

Following a review of the record, and as discussed further below, the Board finds that a remand is necessary to correct a pre-decisional duty-to-assist (DTA) error.

Under the AMA, the Board must remand to the AOJ to correct pre-decisional DTA errors (including when the AOJ failed to make reasonable efforts to obtain VA treatment records or relevant federal or private treatment records, failed to obtain a VA examination, or provided an inadequate VA examination or opinion).  38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

A May 2023 Toxic Exposure Risk Activity (TERA) memo reflects that the Veteran was exposed to water contamination at Camp Lejeune during active service.  The contamination included hazards such as perchloroethylene (PCE), trichloroethylene (TCE), vinyl chloride, and benzene.

Additionally, in May 2023, the Veteran underwent a VA examination, which provided a diagnosis of hypertension.  The examiner also provided a negative TERA opinion.  Specifically, the examiner opined that the Veteran's hypertension is less likely than not caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activity(ies), after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the veteran.  As a rationale, the examiner stated that hypertension is commonly caused by a diet high in salt, fat, and/or cholesterol, and chronic conditions involving such are not scientifically known to be caused by a TERA.

The Board finds that the VA opinion is inadequate because the examiner, without providing any basis or supporting medical data, concludes there is no scientific link between the common cause for hypertension and a TERA.  The examiner also failed to address or discuss the Veteran's particular service circumstances, to include discussion of the Veteran's MOS-related exposure to fuels, fumes, and fluids as a truck driver.  

Since the only provided medical opinion is inadequate, the Board must remand to correct this pre-decisional DTA error.  Upon remand, an adequate VA medical opinion must be obtained.

3. Entitlement to service connection for loss of organ, gallbladder.

4. Entitlement to service connection for loss of organ, small intestine.

The Veteran is seeking service connection for loss of his small intestine and gallbladder removal as secondary to his claimed pancreatic cancer.  The Board finds, however, that the outcome of the unresolved claim of entitlement to service connection for pancreatic cancer, which, had the AOJ carried out its statutory duties under 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a), should have already been adjudicated under a different appeal lane (see June 2024 HLR Claim), could significantly impact the issues of entitlement to service connection for these disabilities.  Harris v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 180 (1991) (two issues are "inextricably intertwined" when they are so closely tied together that a final Board decision cannot be rendered unless both are adjudicated).  Therefore, final decisions on the issues of service connection for loss of small intestine and for gallbladder removal cannot be rendered at this time to permit the AOJ to carry out its statutory obligations as noted above.  Id.  As these issues are inextricably intertwined, remand is necessary.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for a medical opinion by a qualified VA examiner regarding the Veteran's claim of entitlement to service connection for diabetes mellitus type II (DM II).  The entire claims file, including a copy of this Remand, must be made available to, and be reviewed by the examiner in conjunction with the requested opinions, and should the examiner require an additional examination to render the requested opinions, such examination should be scheduled.  

Following a review of the claims file and examination, if necessary, the examiner shall address the following:

(a.) Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's DM II had its onset in service or is otherwise related to his military service, to include exposure to perchloroethylene (PCE), trichloroethylene (TCE), vinyl chloride, benzene, fuels, fumes, and fluids.

In so opining, the examiner should address the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran.

In providing the above opinion, the examiner must specifically consider and discuss the relevant lay and medical evidence of record, including May 2023 VA examination and TERA medical opinion and May 2023 TERA Memo.

The examiner's review of the record is NOT restricted to the evidence listed above.  This list is provided to assist the examiner in locating potentially relevant evidence.  

2. Schedule the Veteran for a medical opinion by a qualified VA examiner regarding the Veteran's claim of entitlement to service connection for hypertension.  The entire claims file, including a copy of this Remand, must be made available to, and be reviewed by the examiner in conjunction with the requested opinions, and should the examiner require an additional examination to render the requested opinions, such examination should be scheduled.  

Following a review of the claims file and examination, if necessary, the examiner shall address the following:

(a.) Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's hypertension had its onset in service or is otherwise related to his military service, to include exposure to perchloroethylene (PCE), trichloroethylene (TCE), vinyl chloride, benzene, fuels, fumes, and fluids.

In so opining, the examiner should address the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran.

In providing the above opinion, the examiner must specifically consider and discuss the relevant lay and medical evidence of record, including May 2023 VA examination and TERA medical opinion and May 2023 TERA Memo.

The examiner's review of the record is NOT restricted to the evidence listed above.  This list is provided to assist the examiner in locating potentially relevant evidence.

3. The RO must conduct its higher level review of the Veteran's claims of entitlement to service connection for loss of small intestine and gallbladder in conjunction with the June 2024 HLR.

 

Michael J. Skaltsounis

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Alexander, Lasheyna T.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.