Citation Nr: A25034774
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 240716-456208
DATE: April 15, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for the Veteran's right hip degenerative arthritis is remanded.

Entitlement to a disability rating higher than 10 percent for the Veteran's right knee strain is remanded.

Entitlement to a disability rating higher than 30 percent prior to October 6, 2023, and higher than 20 percent from October 6, 2023, for the Veteran's right shoulder degenerative arthritis is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran had active duty service in the United States Army from March 1982 to November 1986.

In August 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, and requested readjudication of the denial of his service connection claim for a right hip disability, addressed in an April 2021 rating decision.  In January 2024, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the supplemental claim decision on appeal, which found that new and relevant evidence had been received and denied the claim based on the evidence of record at the time of that decision.  The rating decision on appeal denying the Veteran's increased rating claims for his right knee and right shoulder disabilities was issued in February 2024, and constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.  

In the July 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the January and February 2024 AOJ decisions on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Evidence was submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal and it was not considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  However, because the Board is remanding the claims, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

1. Right Hip 

The issue of entitlement to service connection for the Veteran's right hip disability is remanded to correct a duty to assist error that occurred prior to the January 2024 rating decision on appeal. The Veteran received VA examinations in July 2021 and October 2023, with accompanying nexus opinions in September 2021 and October 2023.  The September 2021 VA opinion concluded that the Veteran's right hip disability was not due to service because there was no evidence of in service treatment, and he was not diagnosed until 2020, many years after service.  However, the examiner did not consider the Veteran's January 2021 statement that his right hip condition was caused by running in combat boots and the physical requirements of the Army.  Additionally, the examiner did not address the Veteran's contention at his July 2021 VA examination that his bad knee problems contributed to his hip condition.  The October 2023 examiner considered whether secondary service connection was warranted.  The examiner provided an adequate opinion concerning secondary causation, the examiner failed to address secondary aggravation.  Accordingly, the Board finds a remand is necessary for a VA opinion that addresses the Veteran's lay statements about his in service training as a cause of his hip disability and addresses secondary aggravation.

The Board emphasizes that it is not determining whether the Veteran's statements are credible at this time, as the additional development set forth in the directives below could impact that determination. Nevertheless, the Board is requesting medical opinions regarding his lay contentions for thoroughness.

2. Right Knee and Right Shoulder 

The Veteran's increased rating claims for a right knee and right shoulder disability are also remanded to correct a duty to assist error that occurred prior to the February 2024 AOJ rating decision on appeal.  The AOJ obtained VA examinations for the Veteran's disabilities in October 2023.  At the examinations, the VA examiner acknowledged that the Veteran took medication for his disabilities.  The U. S. Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) recently held that if a Diagnostic Code for a musculoskeletal disability does not reference medication use, the Board must discount beneficial medication effects and evaluate the baseline severity of the disability.  Ingram v. Collins, 2025 U.S. App. Vet. Claims LEXIS 327, at *19 (Mar. 12, 2025); __ Vet. App. __.   

The Board cannot provide this estimate on its own because it is a medical determination.  Colvin v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 171 (1991).  Unfortunately, the only available option to allow compliance with Ingram is to remand for a supplemental opinion.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802.  Accordingly, a remand for a new VA opinion is needed. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Provide the Veteran's claims file to an examiner so a supplemental opinion may be provided for the Veteran's right hip disability.  The entire claims file and a copy of this remand must be made available to the examiner for review.  A new examination is only required if deemed necessary by the examiner.  

The examiner must opine as to the following:

a.) Whether the Veteran's right hip disability began during active service, is related to an incident of service, including running in combat boots and the physical requirements of service, or began within one year after discharge from active service. 

b.) Whether the Veteran's right hip disability was aggravated by his service-connected right and left knee disabilities. 

The examiner must provide all findings, along with a complete rationale for his or her opinion(s) in the examination report.  If any of the above requested opinions cannot be made without resort to speculation, the examiner must state this and provide a rationale for such conclusion.

2. Arrange for a supplemental opinion to be provided for the Veteran's right knee disability.  The entire claims file and a copy of this remand must be made available to the examiner for review.  A new examination of the Veteran is only required if deemed necessary by the examiner. 

The examiner should describe the current severity of the Veteran's right knee disability without consideration of any ameliorative impact of medication taken for his right knee.

Full range of motion without consideration of ameliorative impact of medication must be estimated.  It must be estimated for both active and passive motion, in weight bearing and non weight bearing.  If the Veteran reported flare-ups, the examiner must assess any additional functional loss during flare-ups, including estimated range of motion estimates.  

A complete rationale must be given for all opinions and conclusions expressed. If it is not possible to provide a specific measurement without resorting to mere speculation, the examiner must state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner does not have the knowledge or training. 

3. Arrange for a supplemental opinion to be provided for the Veteran's right shoulder disability.  The entire claims file and a copy of this remand must be made available to the examiner for review.  A new examination of the Veteran is only required if deemed necessary by the examiner. 

The examiner should estimate the current severity of the Veteran's right shoulder disability without consideration of any ameliorative impact of medication taken for his right shoulder.

Full range of motion without consideration of ameliorative impact of medication must be estimated.  It must be estimated for both active and passive motion, in weight bearing and non weight bearing.  If the Veteran reported flare-ups, the examiner must assess any additional functional loss during flare-ups, including range of motion estimates.  

A complete rationale must be given for all opinions and conclusions expressed. If it is not possible to provide a specific measurement without resorting to mere speculation, the examiner must state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner does not have the knowledge or training.

 

 

D. Martz Ames

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	R. Brunot, Counsel 

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.