Citation Nr: A25034711
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 210615-166236
DATE: April 15, 2025

REMANDED

Service connection for gout in left knee, right knee, left foot big toe, right foot big toe, left ankle and right ankle, to include as secondary to chronic kidney disease, Stage III, is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from November 1980 to June 2001.

The Veteran's July 2020 claim of service connection for gout was originally denied by way of a September 2020 rating decision.

In October 2020, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, requesting readjudication of the September 2020 rating decision. The agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued a November 2020 supplemental rating decision, in which it found that new and relevant evidence had been received and deny the claim on the merits. 

In November 2020, the Veteran submitted a Decision Review Request: Higher Level Review (VA Form 20-0996) requesting review of the November 2020 rating decision. The AOJ issued a Higher Level Review rating decision in February 2021. 

In February 2021, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, and requested readjudication of the issue of service connection for gout, most recently addressed in the February 2021 HLR rating decision. In February 2021, the AOJ issued a supplemental claim decision, which found that new and relevant evidence had been received and denied the claim based on the evidence of record at the time of that decision. 

In the June 2021 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Evidence Submission docket and identified all four rating decisions. In Terry v. McDonough, No. 20-7251 (Vet. App. Oct. 19, 2023), it was held that multiple administrative reviews can be filed as to one AOJ decision, so long as they are within one year of notice of that decision and not otherwise precluded by statute or regulation. In this case, the Board find that it is most beneficial and practical to interpret the Veteran's NOD as having appealed the February 24, 2021, Supplemental Claim rating decision as it considered the evidence of record since the initial claim in July 2020 up to the February 24, 2021, rating decision. 

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or representative with, or within 90 days from receipt of the VA Form 10182. 38 C.F.R. § 20.303. If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal and prior to receipt of the VA Form 10182, or (2) more than 90 days following receipt of the VA Form 10182, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.303, 20.801. Specifically, the Board has considered evidence received prior to the February 24, 2021, rating decision, as well as evidence submitted from June 15, 2021 (the date of receipt of the Notice of Disagreement) to September 13, 2021.

However, because the Board is remanding the claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

?

Service connection for gout of the left knee, right knee, left foot big toe, right foot big toe, left ankle, and right ankle, to include as secondary to chronic kidney disease, Stage III, is remanded.

In his October 2020 VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, the Veteran contended that his gout is secondary to his service-connected chronic kidney disease (CKD).  

In support of his claim, the Veteran submitted January 2021 correspondence from Dr. S.K. who opined that the Veteran more likely than not experienced gout symptoms during service. Dr. S.K. stated that "[t]here is more than a 50 percent probability that his gout was the cause of his Chronic Kidney Disease."  The Board notes that this appears to be an attempt link the Veteran's gout to his service-connected CKD. However, the opinion is inadequate insofar as in order for secondary service connection to be warranted, the Veteran's CKD would have had to cause or aggravate his gout. The opinion of Dr. S.K. asserts the opposite (that the gout caused the CKD). 

In October 2020, Dr. S.K. provided another opinion in which he stated that "multiple studies have shown that higher uric acid levels are an indicator of CKD progression, which could in turn lead to gout." The Board notes that this opinion is inadequate in that his conclusion that CKD "could" lead to gout is too speculative to have any probative value. See Obert v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 30, 33 (1993) (medical opinion expressed in terms of "may" also implies "may or may not" and is too speculative to establish medical nexus); Warren v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 4, 6 (1993) (stating that a physician's statement framed in terms such as "may" or "could" is not probative). 

The claims file contains two VA opinions (dated in September 2020 and in November 2020) that attempt to address secondary service connection. The September 2020  opinion states that "the conditions of gout and chronic kidney disease III are not medically related. The gout is a separate entity entirely from the chronic kidney disease III and unrelated to it. A thorough review of medical literature failed to demonstrate a causal relationship. A nexus has not been established." The November 2020 opinion once again stated that the two disabilities are not medically related. This opinion indicated that it "is difficult to evaluate the causal influence of uric acid on the progression of CKD in epidemiological research. Although a recent meta-analysis found that elevated serum UA (uric acid) levels were associated with incident CKD, the role of UA (uric acid) in CKD progression is still debating. A thorough review of medical literature failed to demonstrate a causal relationship." 

Establishing service connection on a secondary basis requires evidence sufficient to show (1) that a current disability exists and (2) that the current disability was either (a) caused by or (b) aggravated by a service-connected disability. Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439, 448 (1995) (en banc). Service connection on a secondary basis is warranted for any incremental increase in disability, regardless of its permanence. See Ward v. Wilkie, 31 Vet. App. 233 (2019). Secondary service connection may be granted where a non-service-connected disability would have been less severe but for a service-connected disability. Spicer v. McDonough, 61 F. 4th 1360 (Fed. Cir. 2023) (invalidating the requirement of "proximate cause" and instead held a "but for" causation or aggravation is enough to show entitlement to secondary service connection).

The two VA opinions are limited to whether a direct causal relationship between the Veteran's service-connected CKD and his nonservice-connected gout; however, neither opinion addressed whether the Veteran's CKD aggravated his gout. Consequently, the opinions are inadequate. 

The failure to obtain an adequate opinion addressing secondary service connection due to aggravation constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error for which a remand is required.

Additionally, the Board notes that the Veteran underwent a VA examination in September 2020, and the VA examiner opined that the Veteran's gout was not directly related to service. However, the opinion was based solely on the fact that the examiner found that a single lab result of elevated uric acid is not diagnostic evidence of gout. The Board notes that the service treatment records include numerous findings of bilateral foot pain, pain in the Veteran's toes, unresolved bilateral knee pain, and left ankle pain. The examiner did not discuss these findings in rendering his opinion. The Board finds an addendum opinion with a clarifying rationale is needed to fully address whether the Veteran's gout onset in service or is otherwise related to service. 

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Obtain an addendum opinion regarding the etiology of the Veteran's gout in the bilateral knees, bilateral big toes and bilateral ankles.  The examiner should review the claims file. The need for an in-person examination is left to the examiner's discretion.

The examiner is asked to provide a response to the following:

a)	Is it at least as likely as not (the likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's gout either onset in service or is otherwise related to service? 

Provide a rationale to support the opinion. In doing so, consider the significance of (if any) the pain in the  toes of both feet (January 1982), left foot arch trauma (January 1987), right foot pain (February 1994), difficulty walking due to left foot pain (February 1994), left ankle pain (approximately 1998), right knee tendinitis (March 1998), unresolved bilateral knee pain (August 1998), arthritis and bilateral knee pain reported on September 2000 Report of Medical History; and bilateral knee popping noted on the Retirement Examination.

b)	Is it at least as likely as not (the likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's gout was caused by his service-connected CKD?   

c)	Is it at least as likely as not (the likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's gout underwent any incremental increase, regardless of its permanence, due to the service-connected CKD?

A fully-explained rationale should be provided.

The term "incremental increase in disability" means additional impairment of earning capacity. Objective measurement, or numerical quantification, is not required to ascertain an increase in disability. Moreover, any "incremental increase in disability" need not be permanent.

The examiner is advised that 'proximate cause' is not required for secondary service connection. Rather, the question is whether the Veteran's service-connected CKD is a 'but for' cause of his gout, to include whether his gout would have been less severe but for his service-connected CKD.

 

 

D. JOHNSON

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	M. Prem, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.