Citation Nr: A25034571
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 220917-278454
DATE: April 15, 2025

ORDER

The appeal for service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder is dismissed.

The appeal for service connection for an insomnia disorder is dismissed.

The appeal for service connection for kidney stones is dismissed.

The appeal for increased rating for bilateral hearing loss is dismissed.

Service connection for hyperlipidemia is denied.

Service connection for plantar fasciitis is denied.

Service connection for coronary artery disease (CAD) is granted.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a lumbar spine disorder is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for left lower extremity neuropathy is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for right lower extremity neuropathy is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for bronchitis is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for pneumonia is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) is remanded.

Entitlement to a total disability rating based on individual unemployability as a result of service-connected disabilities (TDIU) is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. At the October 2024 Board hearing, before a decision was issued on these matters, the Veteran withdrew the appeal of the service connection claims for an acquired psychiatric disorder, an insomnia disorder, and the appeal of the increased rating claim for bilateral hearing loss; there is no question of fact or law in these matters remaining for the Board to consider.

2. High cholesterol, or hyperlipidemia, is a laboratory finding and not a chronic disability for which VA disability benefits may be awarded; the Veteran's hyperlipidemia is not part of an underlying pathologic process.

3. The Veteran was not diagnosed with plantar fasciitis during the pendency of the appeal.

4. The Veteran's diagnosed CAD is presumed to have been caused by presumed herbicide agent exposure during his active service.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria have been met for withdrawal of the service connection claim for an acquired psychiatric disorder. 38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. § 20.205.

2. The criteria have been met for withdrawal of the service connection claim for an insomnia disorder. 38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. § 20.205.

3. The criteria have been met for withdrawal of the service connection claim for kidney stones. 38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. § 20.205.

4. The criteria have been met for withdrawal of the increased rating claim for bilateral hearing loss. 38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. § 20.205.

5. The criteria have not been met to establish service connection for hyperlipidemia. 38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

6. The criteria have not been met to establish service connection for plantar fasciitis. 38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.304.

7. The criteria have been met for service connection for CAD. 38 U.S.C. § 1110, 1112; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.307, 3.309.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran had active service from June 1971 to June 1974.

The rating decision on appeal was issued in September 2022 and constitutes an initial decision; by law, the modernized review system, governed by the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.

In a September 2022 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Hearing docket. A Board hearing was held on October 31, 2024. A transcript of the hearing is of record.

By law, for claims appealed in this docket, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the September 2022 Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) rating decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran at the hearing or within 90 days following the hearing. 38 C.F.R. § 20.302(a). If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal and prior to the Board hearing, or (2) more than 90 days following the hearing, then, by law, the Board was not permitted to consider that evidence in this decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.302(a), 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the service connection claims for a lumbar spine disability, bilateral lower extremity neuropathy, bronchitis, pneumonia, and GERD, and the claim for a TDIU, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Dismissal

The Board has jurisdiction where there is a question of law or fact on appeal to the Secretary. 38?U.S.C. §?7104; 38?C.F.R. §?20.104. The Board may dismiss any appeal which fails to allege specific error of fact or law in the determination being appealed. 38?U.S.C. §?7105. An appeal may be withdrawn as to any or all issues involved in the appeal at any time before the Board promulgates a decision. Withdrawal may be made by the appellant or an authorized representative and must be in writing or on the record at a hearing. 38 C.F.R. § 20.205.

At the October 2024 Board hearing, the Veteran withdrew the appeal for the service connection claims for an acquired psychiatric disorder, an insomnia disorder, and kidney stones, and withdrew the appeal for the increased rating claim for bilateral hearing loss; this withdrawal was informed and explicit and unambiguous and, therefore, meets the legal criteria. See Hembree v. Wilkie, 33 Vet. App. 1 (2020). Thus, the service connection claims for an acquired psychiatric disorder, an insomnia disorder, and kidney stones, and the increased rating claim for bilateral hearing loss are dismissed.

Service Connection

Legal Criteria

Service connection is warranted for a disability due to a disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service. 38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.

To substantiate a claim of service connection there must be competent evidence showing: (1) the existence of a claimed disability; (2) incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury in active service; and (3) a causal relationship between the present claimed disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during active service. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

Certain chronic diseases may be presumed to be service connected if manifested as chronic in service or to a compensable degree within a specified period after active service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1112, 1113, 1137; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307, 3.309(a).

For chronic diseases listed in 38 C.F.R. § 3.309(a), service connection may be established by showing continuity of symptoms. See Walker v. Shinseki, 718 F.3d 1331 (Fed. Cir. 2013).

Certain diseases may be presumed to be service connected as due to exposure to herbicide agents in service if manifested in a veteran who served in Vietnam, to include offshore coastal waters during the Vietnam Era. 38 U.S.C. § 1116; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307, 3.309(e), 3.313. This presumption may be rebutted by affirmative evidence to the contrary. 38 U.S.C. § 1113; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307, 3.309.

Herbicide Agent Exposure

In the September 2022 rating decision, the AOJ found that the Veteran did not have service in Vietnam. However, in September 2023, VA determined that the Veteran did, in fact, have service in Vietnam. Given this contradiction, the Board will afford the Veteran the benefit of the doubt and, accordingly, the Board finds that the Veteran had service in Vietnam and, as such, was presumptively exposed to herbicide agents.

Hyperlipidemia

High cholesterol is referred to as hyperlipidemia. Hyperlipidemia is "a general term for elevated concentrations of any or all of the lipids in the plasma, including hypertriglyceridemia, hypercholesterolemia, etc."  See Dorland's Illustrated Medical Dictionary 795 (28th ed. 1994). Hypercholesterolemia is an "excess of cholesterol in the blood."  Id. at 792. Hyperlipidemia and elevated cholesterol are laboratory findings and are not disabilities in and of themselves for which VA compensation benefits are payable and not appropriate entities for the rating schedule. See 61 Fed. Reg. 20,440, 20,445 (May 7, 1996). The term "disability" (as used for VA purposes) refers to impairment of earning capacity. See Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439, 448 (1995).

The evidence of record does not suggest the Veteran's hyperlipidemia causes any impairment of earning capacity. "Congress specifically limits entitlement for service-connected disease or injury to cases where such incidents have resulted in a disability. In the absence of proof of a present disability there can be no valid claim."  Brammer v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 223, 225 (1992).

In this case, the evidence does not establish any physical functional impairment due to hyperlipidemia. See Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356 (Fed. Cir. 2018).

Service connection can only be granted for a disability resulting from disease or injury. See 38 U.S.C. § 1110. Hyperlipidemia is a laboratory finding that manifests itself only in laboratory test results and is not a disability for which service connection can be granted. In addition, there is no competent evidence that the hyperlipidemia is, instead, associated with an underlying pathologic process.

The Veteran asserted that hyperlipidemia was now a presumptive disease and referenced the newly enacted PACT Act. He apparently believed that, therefore, he is entitled to service connection. However, hyperlipidemia is not listed as a presumptive disease under the PACT Act.

Accordingly, service connection for hyperlipidemia / high cholesterol is denied as a matter of law.

Plantar Fasciitis

Factual Background

The Veteran asserted that he had plantar fasciitis due to his active service. At the Board hearing, he testified that his plantar fasciitis began several years after his active service. He testified that he received treatment, including injection therapy, and that his plantar fasciitis had resolved.

The Veteran's service treatment records (STRs) do not show any reports, symptoms, treatment for, or diagnosis of plantar fasciitis during his active service.

The Veteran's post-service medical records show that he received shoe inserts for plantar fasciitis in February 2008. However, his medical records do not show any reports, treatment, or diagnosis of plantar fasciitis during the period on appeal.

Analysis

The record as a whole does not support the conclusion that the Veteran currently has, or has had for any distinct period on appeal, a diagnosis of plantar fasciitis.

While the Veteran asserted that he had plantar fasciitis several years after his active service, the diagnosis of this condition requires clinical testing and medical expertise and cannot simply be diagnosed by lay observation alone; and the Veteran is not considered competent (meaning medically qualified by training or experience) to diagnose such a disability and relate it causally to his active service. See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372 (Fed. Cir. 2007). The Veteran testified that his plantar fasciitis began several years after his active service and that it resolved prior to the period on appeal.

In the absence of proof of a current disability, there can be no valid claim for service connection. Brammer v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 223, 225 (1992). Admittedly, the requirement that a current disability be present is satisfied "when a claimant has a disability at the time a claim for VA disability compensation is filed or during the pendency of that claim...even though the disability resolves prior to the Secretary's adjudication of the claim." McClain v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 319 (2007). Here, however, the Veteran has not shown a current diagnosis of plantar fasciitis.

Accordingly, the criteria have not been met to establish service connection for plantar fasciitis, and the claim must be denied.

Coronary Artery Disease

Factual Background and Analysis

The Veteran's medical records show that he was diagnosed with CAD in November 2020.

As discussed above, VA found that the Veteran had service in Vietnam, and thus, is presumed to have herbicide agent exposure.

As noted, when a veteran is diagnosed with CAD and is presumed to have herbicide agent exposure during active service, service connection will be warranted unless there is clear evidence to the contrary, which is not present here.

As such, the criteria have been met to establish service connection for CAD, and the claim is granted.

REASONS FOR REMAND

Service Connection for a Lumbar Spine Disorder

Regarding the Veteran's service connection claim for a lumbar spine disorder, he reported that the wear and tear from his active service resulted in a lumbar spine disorder. He testified that he had pain during his active service but did not seek medical treatment because he wanted to be "Superman." His medical records show that he was diagnosed with lumbar spine degenerative changes by a January 2017 lumbar spine x-ray.

Competent (that is, qualified) lay evidence means evidence not requiring that the person providing it have specialized education, training, or experience. Lay statements are qualified to establish that an event or circumstance occurred if the statements are provided by a person who has personal knowledge of and provides information about matters that can be observed and described by a lay person. 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(a)(2). This may include some medical matters, such as describing observable symptoms or reporting that a medical provider gave them a diagnosis in the past. Jandreau, 492 F.3d 1372. Lay evidence may be qualified to establish that an observable event or injury occurred during service, or that observable symptoms of a chronic disability began during service. Davidson v. Shinseki, 581 F.3d 1313 (Fed. Cir. 2009).

A VA medical examination must be provided when there is (1) competent evidence of a current disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability, and (2) evidence establishing that an injury, or disease occurred in service or establishing certain diseases manifesting during an applicable presumptive period for which the claimant qualifies, and (3) an indication that the disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability may be associated with a veteran's service or with another service-connected disability, but (4) insufficient competent medical evidence on file for the Secretary to make a decision on the claim. McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 81 (2006); see 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(d)(2); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(4)(i). The third prong, which requires that the evidence of record "indicate" that the claimed disability or symptoms "may be" associated with the established event, is a low threshold. McLendon, 20 Vet. App. at 83.

Here, the record contains competent medical evidence of a lumbar spine disorder, lay evidence that an injury occurred during his active service, and lay evidence that his lumbar spine disorder may be due to his active service, specifically, the Veteran's lay reports. However, the record leaves unclear whether the Veteran's lumbar spine disorder was caused by his active service.

Accordingly, the failure to properly develop the record to determine the cause of, if any, the Veteran's lumbar spine disorder is a pre-decisional duty to assist error, which requires a remand for corrective action.

Service Connection for Bilateral Lower Extremity Neuropathy

Regarding the Veteran's service connection claim for bilateral lower extremity neuropathy, he reported that his bilateral lower extremity condition began soon after his active service. An October 2017 VA examiner reported that the Veteran was diagnosed with diabetic bilateral lower extremity neuropathy.

VA has established a presumption of service connection due to herbicide agent exposure for some disorders, including early onset peripheral neuropathy. 38 C.F.R. § 3.309(e). In addition, a veteran is not precluded from establishing service connection on a direct basis if the probative evidence supports a causal relationship between their current disability and herbicide agent exposure. Combee v. Brown, 34 F.3d 1039, 1043 (Fed. Cir. 1994). As discussed above, the Board finds that the Veteran had service in Vietnam, and as such, has presumptive exposure to herbicide agents.

Furthermore, the Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxics Act of 2022 (PACT Act) provides that, if a veteran submits a claim for service connection with evidence of disability and evidence of participation in a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA), then VA shall obtain a medical opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not that there is a relationship between the disability and the TERA.

In September 2023 and February 2024, VA determined that the Veteran had TERAs. The AOJ has not developed or adjudicated this matter in accordance with the PACT Act. This constitutes an AOJ error in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty, which might have a reasonable possibility of aiding the substantiation of the Veteran's claim and requires correction on remand. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

Service Connection for Bronchitis and Pneumonia

Regarding the Veteran's service connection claims for bronchitis and pneumonia, he reported that he believed his bronchitis and pneumonia were due to his active service. He testified that he sanded and painted ships. In September 2023, VA determined that the Veteran was exposed to asbestos during his active service. While a January 2022 VA examiner provided negative opinions regarding whether military service was the cause of the Veteran's bronchitis and pneumonia, that examiner based the opinions on the lack of treatment during the Veteran's active service. However, the Veteran's STRs show that he was, in fact, treated for respiratory symptoms in June 1971, October 1971, February 1972, April 1972, October 1972, March 1973, June 1973, and October 1973. In addition, the Veteran submitted a medical article regarding the cause of respiratory disorders.

As such, the January 2022 VA examiner's opinions were based on inaccurate facts. In addition, as discussed above, the AOJ has not developed or adjudicated this matter in accordance with the PACT Act. These constitute AOJ errors in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty, which might have a reasonable possibility of aiding the substantiation of the Veteran's claim and requires correction on remand. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

Service Connection for GERD

Regarding the Veteran's service connection claim for GERD, he asserted that his GERD was due to his service-connected posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD). He submitted a medical article regarding GERD and acquired psychiatric disorders. However, he was not afforded a VA examination to determine the cause his GERD. In addition, as discussed above, the AOJ has not developed or adjudicated this matter in accordance with the PACT Act. These constitute AOJ errors in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty, which might have a reasonable possibility of aiding the substantiation of the Veteran's claim and requires correction on remand. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

TDIU

Regarding the Veteran's claim for TDIU, in April 2022, the Veteran asserted that he was entitled to a TDIU rating. 

The claims file documents that the Veteran receives Social Security Administration (SSA) disability benefits. These records may be relevant to the TDIU claim.

In addition, the claims file does not contain a completed VA form 21-8940, Veteran's Application for Increased Compensation Based on Unemployability. As such, the Board does not have sufficient information to adjudicate this issue. The Veteran should be contacted and asked to complete the required TDIU form, then the AOJ should adjudicate the issue. The Veteran is advised that any failure to cooperate (by completing and submitting a VA Form 21-8940) may affect his claim, because that form is designed to elicit information pertinent to assessing eligibility for TDIU.

Accordingly, the failure to properly develop the record in order to obtain any outstanding relevant SSA records and obtain a complete VA Form 21-8940 were pre-decisional duty to assist errors, which requires a remand for corrective action.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination to determine the cause of any lumbar spine disorder. The examiner should respond to the following:

a. Identify by diagnosis each current lumbar spine disorder found on examination.

b. Is any lumbar spine disorder related to the Veteran's service?

The examiner should discuss the Veteran's lay statements regarding the cause of his lumbar spine disorder.

c. If a diagnosed lumbar spine disorder is found to have not been due to the Veteran's active service, identify the cause for the condition that is considered to be more likely, and explain why.

2. Arrange for a TERA examination and opinion pursuant to 38 U.S.C. § 1168(a) to ascertain whether the Veteran's bilateral lower extremity neuropathy, bronchitis, pneumonia, and/or GERD is directly related to his active service, particularly any toxic exposure during his naval service and his presumptive herbicide agent exposure. In addition, the examiner should determine whether the Veteran's GERD was related to, caused by, or aggravated by a service-connected disability.

The examiner should respond to the following:

a. Is the Veteran's bilateral lower extremity neuropathy, bronchitis, pneumonia, and/or GERD related to the Veteran's active service, to include as a result of any toxic exposure? Why or why not?

The examiner must specifically address: (1) the total potential exposure through the Veteran's active service and (2) the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities.

b. Is the Veteran's GERD related to or caused by a service-connected disability? Why or why not?

The examiner should discuss the Veteran's lay statements about the cause of his GERD and the medical article regarding GERD and acquired psychiatric disorders.

c. Is the Veteran's GERD aggravated by a service-connected disability? Why or why not?

The examiner should discuss the Veteran's lay statements about the cause of his GERD and the medical article regarding GERD and acquired psychiatric disorders.

d. If the Veteran's bilateral lower extremity neuropathy, bronchitis, pneumonia, or GERD is determined to not have been due to the Veteran's active service, to include any TERA, or his GERD is determined to not have been caused or aggravated by a service-connected disability, identify the cause for the disability that is more likely, and explain why.

3. Request documents pertaining to any application by the Veteran for SSA disability benefits, including the SSA decision and medical records considered in deciding the claim. If medical records are not available, any other records in SSA's possession (including the SSA application and determination) should be obtained.

4. Provide the Veteran with VA Form 21-8940 and request that he submit the completed form with all appropriate information; then adjudicate the claim for TDIU. 

 

VICTORIA MOSHIASHWILI

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	T. Berryman, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.