Citation Nr: A25034365
Decision Date: 04/14/25	Archive Date: 04/14/25

DOCKET NO. 240805-461120
DATE: April 14, 2025

REMANDED

The claim of entitlement to service connection for a back disorder is remanded.

The claim of entitlement to service connection for a neck disorder is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran had multiple periods of active service between May 2014 and July 2019.  She also served in the Army National Guard.      

This matter comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal of a July 2024 rating decision by a U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In August 2024, the Veteran filed a VA Form 10182, notice of disagreement, against the decision.  She elected direct Board review.  See 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.301.   

A remand is warranted based on a duty to assist error in developing the claims.  

The RO scheduled the Veteran for VA examination in April 2024.  Remand for addendum medical report is warranted because the medical opinions addressing the claims do not indicate consideration of the Veteran's lay assertions.  

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Return the case to the VA examiner who conducted the April 2024 examination, or to a suitable substitute, for issuance of an addendum medical opinion.  After reviewing the claims file, the examiner should again address the following question:

Is it approximately at least as likely as not (i.e., probability of approximately 50 percent or more) that a back or neck disorder had its onset during service or is related to an event, disease, or injury during service?

In answering this question, the examiner should discuss the Veteran's lay assertions that she has experienced symptoms since service, and that she believes she developed back and neck problems due to wear and tear type injuries during service related to carrying heavy weights and riding in military vehicles on rough terrain.  

In rendering the requested report, the examiner should note that laypersons are competent to attest to matters of which they have first-hand knowledge, including observable symptomatology.

In remanding this case, the Board makes no credibility determination, expressed or implied, at this juncture.

The evidentiary standard "at least as likely as not" is defined as the "likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher."  Conversely, "less likely than not" is defined as the "likelihood is less than approximately balanced or nearly equal."

Please explain in detail any opinion provided and the supporting rationale.

If the examiner cannot provide an opinion without resorting to mere speculation, he or she shall provide a complete explanation for why an opinion cannot be rendered.  In so doing, the examiner shall explain whether the inability to provide a more definitive opinion is the result of a need for additional information, or that he or she has exhausted the limits of current medical knowledge in providing an answer to that particular question(s).

 

 

G. A. WASIK

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Christopher McEntee

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.1303.