Citation Nr: A25034591
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 210804-176569
DATE: April 15, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 10 percent for right knee patellofemoral pain syndrome is remanded.

Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 10 percent for left knee patellofemoral pain syndrome is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from January 1998 to June 2003.

The rating decision on appeal was issued in March 2021 and constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.

In the August 2021 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Evidence Submission docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2021 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran with, or within 90 days from receipt of, the VA Form 10182.  38 C.F.R. § 20.303.  If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal and prior to the date the Board received the VA Form 10182, or (2) more than 90 days following the date the Board received the VA Form 10182, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.303, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of entitlement to increased ratings for the right and left knee disabilities, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

1. Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 10 percent for right knee patellofemoral pain syndrome is remanded.

2. Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 10 percent for left knee patellofemoral pain syndrome is remanded.

The Board must remand an appeal to the AOJ for correction of an error on the part of the AOJ to satisfy its duties under 38 U.S.C. § 5103A if the error occurred prior to the date of the AOJ decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802.  Once VA undertakes the effort to provide an examination or opinion, it must provide an adequate one.  See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007).  Failure to obtain an adequate examination constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error requiring a remand.

In assigning a disability rating, the Board may not consider the ameliorative effects of medications where such effects are not explicitly contemplated by the rating criteria.  Jones v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 56, 63 (2012).  More recently, in Ingram v. Collins, 2025 U.S. App. Vet. Claims LEXIS 327, the Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims determined that because the applicable diagnostic codes and special regulations pertaining to musculoskeletal disabilities do not explicitly contemplate medication use, the Board must discount the beneficial effects of medication when assigning an evaluation of a musculoskeletal disability.

The Veteran seeks increased initial ratings for his service connected right and left knee disabilities.  In February 2021, a VA knee conditions examination was provided.  There, the Veteran reported constant bilateral knee pain for which he used over the counter pain relievers "as needed [a] couple of times a month."  Unfortunately, the VA examination report does not include any description of the ameliorative effects of pain medications on the Veteran's bilateral knee disabilities.  The examination is inadequate to evaluate the claim.  See Ingram, supra.  The failure to obtain an adequate examination is a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  The claim must be remanded to correct the error.

The Board notes, within the period for submission of evidence, the Veteran submitted a June 2021 VA knee conditions disability benefit questionnaire (DBQ).  The DBQ was completed by a private physician, and it provided an evaluation of the bilateral knee disabilities.  Unfortunately, the DBQ does not address the ameliorative effects of medications on the disabilities.  The evidence of record remains inadequate to determine the claim.  

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Schedule the Veteran for an examination by an appropriate clinician to determine the current severity of the service-connected bilateral knee disabilities.  The examiner should provide a full description of the disability and report all signs and symptoms necessary for evaluating the Veteran's disability under the rating criteria.  

In so doing, the examiner must test the Veteran's active motion, passive motion, and pain with weight-bearing and without weight-bearing.  If it is not possible to provide a specific measurement without speculation, the examiner must state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training). 

(Continued on the next page)

?

In so doing, the examiner must attempt to elicit information regarding the severity, frequency, and duration of any flare-ups, and the degree of functional loss during flare-ups.  If it is not possible to provide a specific measurement based on direct observation, the examiner should provide an estimate, if at all possible, of the additional impairment due to flare-ups based on the other evidence of record and the Veteran's statements.  If it is not possible to provide a specific measurement without speculation, the examiner must state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training).

In addressing the severity of the Veteran's knee disabilities (as to all evaluations directed above), the examiner is instructed to consider and specifically address: (1) whether any medications the Veteran uses or has used during the appeal period affect or affected the severity of his right and/or left knee symptomatology, and if so, to identify each medication and clearly explain how such medication affects the knee symptomatology, and (2) if any such medication is productive of ameliorative effects, clearly identify such effects and opine as to the severity of the condition absent such medication.

 

 

M. HYLAND

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Jeanne Celtnieks

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.