Citation Nr: A25034449
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 240515-440840
DATE: April 15, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a left knee disorder is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a left leg disorder is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a right leg disorder is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from January to November 2022, including foreign service in Iraq, Kuwait, and Qatar and with additional service in the Army Reserves.  For his meritorious service, the Veteran was awarded (among other decorations) the Army Achievement Medal and Army Commendation Medal.

These matters are before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal of an April 2024 rating decision from a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).  Given the date of this rating decision, the Veteran's appeal is governed by the modernized review system (known by the Board as AMA).  38 C.F.R. § 19.2.  

On his May 2024 VA Form 10182 to the Board, the Veteran selected direct review.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.

Generally speaking, under the modernized review system, the Board may only remand an issue to correct any pre-decisional duty to assist errors it identifies.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802.  That same regulation also provides that the Board may remand for correction of any other error by the AOJ in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty, if such correction would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the claim.  Id. 

In April 2024, three Exam Scheduling Request Contention Cancellation forms were associated with the claims file which indicate that the Veteran was scheduled for relevant VA examinations in  December 2023 but refused to participate.  Wood v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 190, 193 (1991) (participation in the VA process is a "two-way street"); see also 38 C.F.R. § 3.655 (establishing that absent a showing of good cause, a claimant's refusal to participate or cooperate during a VA examination is akin to a failure to report and serves as a basis for denial of a claim).   

However, on his VA Form 10182, the Veteran clearly stated that the "service provider canceled my C&P exam twice."  It does not appear that any subsequent efforts were made to reschedule the examinations after December 2023.

On this basis, the Board finds that the RO committed a duty to assist error in failing to schedule the Veteran for VA examinations, given his seeming representation that he would willingly participate.  Thus, a remand is instructed as to allow the required examinations to be obtained.

The above determination is based upon the Veteran's competency to report events capable of lay observation; however, the Board offers no findings as to his credibility at this time.  Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 469 (1994); Miller v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 249 (2020).

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Schedule the Veteran for VA examinations to assess the nature and etiology of the claimed disorders.  A copy of this claims file and remand must be reviewed.  

If the Veteran declines to participate, the examiner should still offer nexus opinions upon the evidence on record.

Each VA examiner must explicitly address the following:

(1)	Identify all left knee, left leg, and right leg disorders shown by the Veteran during the period on appeal.

If a diagnosis of arthritis is rendered, the examiner must explicitly identify the onset thereof.

(2)	For each current disorder, address whether it is at least as likely as not that the condition began in service, was caused by service, or is otherwise related to a period of active duty or active duty for training (ACDUTRA)?

Each examiner must explicitly address the Veteran's contention that his symptoms (including pain) onset during active duty; and reports of injuries caused by physical training (PT).

(3)	If a current right hamstring disorder is found, the examiner must also address whether it is at least as likely as not that that any current left knee/leg condition was caused or aggravated by the right hamstring condition (including overcompensating by the left knee/leg) or the treatment thereof? 

Consistent with Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 781-82 (2021), the examiner is advised that the term "at least as likely as not" means that the likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher.

A finding of "aggravation" does not require a permanent worsening of the disorder; rather, any incremental increase in a nonservice-connected condition attributable to a service-connected disability, whether permanent or not, constitutes aggravation.  Ward v. Wilkie, 31 Vet. App. 233, 240 (2019).

A complete rationale should be provided for all opinions or conclusions expressed.  It should be noted that the Veteran is competent to attest to observable symptomatology.  If there is a medical basis to support or doubt the history provided by the Veteran, the examiner should provide a fully reasoned explanation.

 

 

Evan M. Deichert

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Kovarovic, Kate

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.