Citation Nr: A25034972
Decision Date: 04/16/25	Archive Date: 04/16/25

DOCKET NO. 241216-497691
DATE: April 16, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, claimed as depression, as secondary to migraine headaches and tinnitus is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder, to include major depression disorder, is caused by his service-connected migraine headaches and tinnitus. 

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for establishing service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder as secondary to migraine headaches and tinnitus have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1131, 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.310, 3.102.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from July 1956 to July 1958. 

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal of a December 2024 rating decision of a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ). That decision is a higher-level review decision of an AOJ decision issued in October 2024. 

In October 2024, the AOJ issued a supplemental claim decision. In this decision, the AOJ determined that new and relevant evidence had been received and adjudicated the claim for service connection for depression on the merits. The Board is bound by this favorable finding. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).  

In the December 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Evidence Submission docket. 

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the October 2024 AOJ decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or the Veteran's representative with, or within 90 days from receipt of, the VA Form 10182. 38 C.F.R. § 20.303. If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the decision which was subsequently subject to higher-level review and prior to the date the Board received the VA Form 10182, or (2) more than 90 days following the date the Board received the VA Form 10182, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.303, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

The Veteran seeks service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, claimed as depression. The claims file indicates that the Veteran has current diagnoses including but not limited to major depression disorder. In order to accurately reflect the nature of the Veteran's disability, the Board has expanded the claim, per Clemons, to entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include major depression disorder. These changes are reflected on the title page and provide the most favorable review of the Veteran's claim in keeping with the holding in Clemons. See Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1 (2009).

The Board notes that the Veteran's claim has been advanced on the docket due to his age.

Service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include major depression disorder.

The Board finds that service connection for the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder, to include major depression disorder, as secondary to migraine headaches and tinnitus is established.

Service connection generally will be awarded when a veteran has a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a). Service connection may be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge, when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).

Service connection may also be established on a secondary basis for a disability which is proximately due to or the result of a service-connected disease or injury; or, for any increase in the severity of a nonservice-connected disease or injury that is proximately due to or the result of a service-connected disease or injury, and not due to the natural progression of the nonservice-connected disease. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a)-(b); Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439 (1995). To prevail under a theory of secondary service connection, there must be: (1) evidence of a current disorder; (2) evidence of a service-connected disability; and (3) medical evidence establishing a connection between the service-connected disability and the current disorder. See id. There is no requirement that the primary disability be the sole cause of the secondary disability. See Spicer v. McDonough, 61 F.4th 1360, 1364 (Fed. Cir. 2023) ("The but-for causation standard is not limited to a single cause and effect, but rather contemplates multi-causal links, including action and inaction..."). 

The determination as to whether these elements are met is based on an analysis of all evidence of record and an evaluation of its credibility and probative value. See Jones v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 219, 225 (2002). The Board is required to consider all pertinent medical and lay evidence when evaluating a claim for disability benefits. 38 U.S.C. § 1154(a); see also Washington v. Nicholson, 19 Vet. App. 362, 367-68 (2005) (holding that the Board must assess the credibility of and weight to be given to the evidence).

Competent lay evidence is any kind of evidence that does not require that the proponent have specialized education, training, or experience. 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(a)(2). Lay evidence is competent if it is provided by a person who has knowledge of facts or circumstances and conveys matters that can be observed and described by a lay person. See Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 469-71 (1994).

Competent medical evidence is necessary where the determinative question is one that requires medical knowledge. See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372 (Fed. Cir. 2007). Competent medical evidence is provided by a person who is qualified through education, training, or experience to offer medical diagnoses, statements, or opinions. See Cox v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 563, 569 (2007); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(a)(1). It may also include sound medical principles found in medical treatises and statements contained in authoritative writings such as medical and scientific articles and research reports or analyses. 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(a)(1). 

Where there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, VA shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102. However, when the evidence persuasively favors one side or the other, the evidence is not in approximate balance and the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply. See Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 781-82 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

Here, the Veteran seeks service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, claimed as depression, as secondary to migraine headaches and tinnitus. 

In the December 2024 decision on appeal, the AOJ made the following favorable finding: "The most recent VA examination corrected the diagnosis to major neurocognitive disorder due to unknown etiology with behavioral disturbance." This finding is binding on the Board. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c). The record also reflects current diagnoses including major depression disorder, recurrent episode, moderate; PTSD, chronic; and insomnia. See, e.g., Kansas City VAMC Treatment Records, January 2025, October 2024, August 2024. Therefore, the first element to establish secondary service connection is satisfied.  

In the October 2024 rating decision that was subject to higher-level review, the AOJ made favorable findings including that the claimed primary disabilities of migraine and tinnitus are service-connected. These findings are binding on the Board. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c). Accordingly, the second element to establish secondary service connection is satisfied. 

The remaining question is whether the evidence of record establishes that the Veteran's current acquired psychiatric disorder was caused by or aggravated by a service-connected disability. The Board concludes the evidence establishes that the Veteran's major depression disorder is caused by his migraine headaches and tinnitus.

The Veteran was afforded Mental Disorders (Other than PTSD and Eating Disorders) DBQs and Medical Opinion DBQs in July 2024 and October 2024. 

The July 2024 VA examiner, PsyD K.K., noted diagnoses of Major Depressive Disorder, Recurrent, Unspecified, with Anxious Distress and Insomnia Disorder. As to secondary service connection, the examiner opined that the Veteran's condition was less likely than not proximately due to or the result of his service-connected conditions of tinnitus and hearing loss. As a rationale, the examiner pointed out that the Veteran reported experiencing symptoms intermittently 10 to 15 years prior and more steadily since 2016 and reported the source of his symptoms as difficulty with relationships, loss, memory changes, and flashbacks. The examiner noted, "It appears from his description that his symptoms of depression and insomnia pre-dated his issues with hearing loss and tinnitus. While depression, insomnia, hearing loss, and tinnitus are currently comorbid, there is not indication to support a causal relationship."  The July 2024 examiner did not address whether the Veteran's disability is at least as likely as not aggravated by his service-connected disabilities. See July 2024 Medical Opinion DBQ. 

The October 2024 VA examiner, PsyD J.G., indicated a diagnosis of major neurocognitive disorder due to unknown etiology with behavioral disturbance. The examiner remarked that the Veteran exclusively meets the DSM-5 criteria for this diagnosis, and that his depressive symptoms are accounted for by this diagnosis. See October 2024 Mental Disorders DBQ. As to secondary service connection, the examiner opined the Veteran's claimed condition is less likely than not due to or the result of service-connected conditions. As a rationale, the examiner stated that the Veteran "evidenced severe cognitive impairments with behavioral disturbances which cannot be caused by tinnitus or migraines. There appears to be an organic disease process occurring within the Veteran that has not likely yet been identified. Furthermore, the Veteran did not present for [mental health] treatment until 2024, and there is no evidence of a history of a psychiatric problem prior to this time, when the Veteran was in his late 80s. Additionally, while there tends to be a higher incidence or prevalence of psychiatric symptoms in individuals with tinnitus, and tinnitus and psychiatric disorders are often comorbid, there is no documented causal relationship between tinnitus and any psychiatric condition... While there are documented correlations, there is no evidence in the scientific medical literature to suggest that tinnitus causes psychiatric disorders." The October 2024 VA examiner did not address whether the Veteran's disability is at least as likely as not aggravated by his service-connected disabilities. See October 2024 Medical Opinion DBQ. 

The evidence in favor of the claim includes a September 23, 2024 medical opinion of FNP-C B.S., a VA primary care provider. This provider opined that the Veteran's major depression is at least as likely as not due to or the result of his "tinnitus, migraines[.]" As a rationale, the provider referenced medical research and indicated, "Patient has had worsening depression over the past several years. He is having migraines which are getting worse due to worsening tinnitus. Tinnitus has been shown clinically to worsen migraines. The worsening pain and tinnitus has negatively impacted patient's mood and patient has now started medication for depression. We are also doing a neurology consult for his migraine headaches. His headaches are negatively impacting his quality of life and causing severe depression as evidenced by PHQ-9 of 27."   

In the October 2024 rating decision that was subject to higher-level review, the AOJ indicated that an addendum in the Veteran's VA treatment records authored by FNP-C B.S. contained "conflicting information regarding a depression diagnosis." In an addendum dated September 23, 2024, 9:24, FNP-C B.S. stated in part: "Performed chart review this weekend, and I was unable to find previous history of depression. I discussed this with patient, who stated he was never treated for depression before. Overall, I do not feel like I have enough evidence to write a disability letter for service connection claim. Notified veteran of the above." See Kansas City VAMC Treatment Records, September 2024. 

The Board finds that this note was an addendum to the provider's treatment note on September 17, 2024, and not an addendum to his medical opinion that the Veteran's major depression is at least as likely as not due to or the result of his migraines and tinnitus. The Board finds that this addendum does not invalidate FNP-C B.S.'s medical opinion as to secondary service connection. In a subsequent treatment note addendum dated September 23, 2024, 10:58, FNP-C B.S. noted: "Patient calls stating that his depression has gotten worse due to frequent migraines and tinnitus. His tinnitus has gotten worse, which is causing his migraines. He is experiencing daily headaches, which are severe. Because he is having this worsening pain his depression has worsened. The pain is impacting his daily life and he is not able to get out and do the things like he did before. He noticed the correlation with increased migraine headaches from his worsening tinnitus. PHQ-9=27. We are starting sertraline today, he is going to continue his mirtazapine, and we are currently ordering a CT Head with and without contrast for migraines and Neurology has been scheduled." See id. The September 2024 medical opinion as to secondary service connection explicitly references the neurology consult and PHQ-9 score of 27 noted in this second addendum. See Medical Opinion of FNP-C B.S., September 2024. 

The Board finds the October 2024 Medical Opinion DBQ to be inadequate in that it failed to thoroughly consider all relevant evidence of record. In noting the Veteran's exclusive diagnosis to be major neurocognitive disorder due to unknown etiology with behavioral disturbance, the October 2024 VA examiner did not adequately address the other acquired psychiatric disorder diagnoses noted in the Veteran's treatment records, including DSM-5 diagnoses of Major Depression Disorder, recurrent episode, moderate; PTSD, Chronic; and Insomnia noted by a VA psychiatrist only several days before the October 2024 VA examination. See Kansas City VAMC Treatment Records, October 2024. Further, in opining that there is no evidence of a history of a psychiatric problem prior to 2024, the examiner did not thoroughly consider the Veteran's lay statements reporting his symptoms had begun years earlier. E.g., July 2024 Mental Disorders DBQ. See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008) (stating, "The Board must be able to conclude that a medical expert has applied valid medical analysis to the significant facts of the particular case in order to reach the conclusion submitted in the medical opinion"). 

Between the July 2024 Medical Opinion DBQ and the September 2024 medical opinion of FNP-C B.S., the Board finds the September 2024 medical opinion to be more persuasive. In concluding there was no indication of causation, the July 2024 VA examiner assumed the Veteran's mental health symptoms predated his tinnitus symptoms. The July 2024 VA examiner's rationale did not address the Veteran's manifestation of tinnitus with migraine headaches, and did not cite medical research to support its conclusion. In contrast, the September 2024 medical opinion noted the Veteran's worsening depression over time, as well as his worsening headaches due to tinnitus. The opinion was submitted with a medical research article indicating that anxiety and depression is positively associated with pain including from strict migraine headaches. See Correspondence submitted September 2024. Another submitted research article noted, "previous studies have further found associations of tinnitus with depression, insomnia, and chronic pain conditions." See id. See also Nieves-Rodriguez, 22 Vet. App. at 304; D'Aries v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 97, 107 (2008) (stating, "The Board is permitted to favor one medical opinion over another provided it gives an adequate statement of its reasons and bases for doing so").

Resolving any reasonable doubt in favor of the Veteran, the Board finds the evidence weighs in favor of finding that the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder, to include major depression disorder, is caused by his service-connected migraine headaches and tinnitus. Thus, the third element to establish secondary service connection is satisfied. For these reasons, the Veteran's claim is granted. 

 

P.M. DILORENZO

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Boldt, Allison W.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.