Citation Nr: A25034053
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 240116-407768
DATE: April 11, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for erectile dysfunction, as secondary to service-connected disabilities, is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

The evidence is in approximate balance as to whether the Veteran's erectile dysfunction is related to his service-connected disabilities.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

Resolving reasonable doubt in favor of the Veteran, the criteria for service connection for erectile dysfunction, as secondary to service-connected disabilities, have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131. 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.310.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from February 1985 through February 1990 and May 2004 through December 2005 to include Gulf War Era service. 

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an August 2023 rating decision. 

In the January 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the August 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.    

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Law and Analysis

Service connection may be established for disability resulting from personal injury suffered or disease contracted in the line of duty in the active military, naval, air, or space service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131. That an injury or disease occurred in service is not enough; there must be chronic disability resulting from that injury or disease. Service connection may also be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge, when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).

Service connection may also be granted on a secondary basis for disability which is proximately due to or the result of a service-connected disease or injury. 38 U.S.C. § 1110 and 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a); Spicer v. McDonough, 61 F.4th 1360 (Fed. Cir. 2023) (holding that secondary service connection is warranted under the causation standard of 38 U.S.C. § 1110 where a nonservice-connected disability would have been less severe but for a service-connected disability, either because there is an etiological link (to include worsening of functionality) between the two, or because the service-connected disability resulted in the inability to treat the nonservice-connected disability). 

Except as otherwise provided by law, a claimant has the responsibility to present and support a claim for benefits. VA shall consider all information and lay and medical evidence of record in a case and when there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, VA shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (benefit-of-the-doubt rule not for application when evidence persuasively favors one side or the other). 

As a preliminary matter, the Board notes that in the August 2023 rating decision, the AOJ made several favorable findings: first that participation in a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA) is conceded as the Veteran's personnel records confirm service with TERA activity; second, that the Veteran has been diagnosed with a disability as the VA examiner diagnosed him with erectile dysfunction; and finally that the claimed primary disabilities are service-connected as the Veteran is service-connected for his back, left knee, and tinnitus. Findings identified as favorable in an AOJ decision are binding on subsequent adjudicators, including the Board. 38 U.S.C. § 5104(b)(4); 5104A; 38 C.F.R. § 20.801(a). Favorable findings can only be rebutted by evidence that identifies a clear and unmistakable error in the favorable finding. 38 C.F.R. § 20.801(a).

The Veteran contends his erectile dysfunction is secondary to his service-connected disabilities, namely left knee osteoarthritis, with residuals of medial meniscus tear with anterior cruciate ligament tear, lateral meniscus tear, and chondromalacia. See May 2021 VA Form 21-526EZ Fully Developed Claim (Compensation); see also January 2024 Appellate Brief. 

The Veteran's service treatment records are negative for any complaints, treatment, or diagnosis of erectile dysfunction. In June 2021 he underwent a VA medical examination where no diagnosis of erectile dysfunction was found. The examiner noted the Veteran's medical record was silent for any diagnosis of erectile dysfunction and found the Veteran's symptoms were subjective. The examiner further stated there was no medical authority or peer reviewed medical literature supporting the contention that the Veteran's knee disability could cause or aggravate the development of erectile dysfunction and found a nexus had not been established. See June 2021 Male Reproductive Organ Conditions Disability Benefits Questionnaire and Opinion. 

In January 2022 the Veteran submitted a December 2021 private medical opinion from C.M.B., PA-C, MPLC (initials used to protect privacy), wherein a diagnosis of erectile dysfunction was established. A physical examination was not conducted per the Veteran's request. C.M.B. noted the Veteran did not take medication for erectile dysfunction, but concluded the etiology of his erectile dysfunction was due to left knee osteoarthritis with residuals, medial meniscus tear with anterior cruciate ligament tear, lateral meniscus tear, chondromalacia, and limitation of extension with associated chronic pain and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) treatment. He further stated that it has been reported in medical literature that those suffering from chronic musculoskeletal pain experience a loss in sexual interest, arousal, or overall interference with intimacy with associated erectile and orgasm incapability related to mood changes, difficulty focusing, and hormonal changes that occur related to the chronic musculoskeletal pain condition. C.M.B. also noted the Veteran "is on medications known to cause ED as a side effect per the PDR (Physician's Desk Reference) and pharmaceutical literature." See December 2021 Private Medical Opinion.

The Veteran was afforded a second VA medical examination in February 2022 where the examiner found there was no diagnosis of erectile dysfunction. The Veteran reported his erectile dysfunction occurred when he turned 50 years old and that he was given the medication Cialis by his primary care physician, however he had to stop taking it as it made him sick. A physical examination was conducted whereafter the examiner found there was no male reproductive condition confirmed upon examination. The examiner also noted there were no medical records available for review for diagnosis, there was no clinical verification for the diagnosis of erectile dysfunction, and all symptoms were subjective and lay statements, therefore no diagnosis was warranted. The examiner concluded that as she was unable to confirm a current diagnosis of erectile dysfunction with the current available records and examination no nexus or plausible secondary relationship was established. See February 2022 Male Reproductive Organ Conditions (Including Prostate Cancer) Disability Benefits Questionnaire and Opinion. 

In February 2023 the Veteran submitted a second private medical opinion from C.W., DNP, APRN, FNP-BC (initials used to protect privacy), where she stated the Veteran reported he did not experience erectile dysfunction symptoms until after being diagnosed with his left knee condition, which caused him chronic pain. She noted the Veteran had been prescribed the medication Viagra for treatment of his erectile dysfunction. C.W. also noted the Veteran's use of Advil and Aleve for his knee condition and that he was diagnosed with erectile dysfunction in a January 2023 record from Charlton Family Health Center. She then noted two different studies discussing sexual functioning among patients with chronic pain and concluded that in her professional opinion the Veteran's erectile dysfunction was secondary to his service-connected left knee condition due to chronic pain. See February 2023 Private Medical Opinion. 

An April 2023 VA medical opinion found the Veteran's erectile dysfunction was not connected to his military service as there was no pathology to warrant a diagnosis. This was followed by a July 2023 VA medical examination where the Veteran was found to have a diagnosis of erectile dysfunction, which the Veteran reported began two to three years prior and that he used Viagra for treatment. In his opinion, the examiner found the Veteran's erectile dysfunction was less likely than not due to his service-connected disabilities. He noted erectile dysfunction can be due to psychological issues, genetic problems, medication, age, hormonal changes, anatomic problems, smoking, obesity, neural or circulatory issues, or idiopathic. He further stated that because there are multiple known causes of erectile dysfunction, as well as idiopathic erectile dysfunction, there was no way to determine the cause without speculating. The examiner further found musculoskeletal problems or tinnitus have not been linked to erectile dysfunction in the Veteran's record or in medical literature and are not a recognized direct cause of erectile dysfunction. He further opined that attributing the Veteran's erectile dysfunction to his service-connected conditions or pain from these conditions was completely speculative. He concluded that the "speculative opinions that were purchased from a physician's assistant and nurse practitioner...simply provide hypotheses based on guesswork without an iota of objective evidence of actual medical testing," and that these should not be used to establish service connection. See April 2023 VA Medical Opinion Disability Benefits Questionnaire; see also July 2023 Male Reproductive Organ Conditions (Including Prostate Cancer) Disability Benefits Questionnaire and Opinion. 

In August 2023 the Veteran was afforded a final VA medical opinion regarding his TERA exposure and erectile dysfunction. The examiner noted that being overweight or obese can cause erectile dysfunction by damaging the blood vessels, decreasing testosterone, and causing a generalized inflammation in the body. The examiner concluded his erectile dysfunction was less likely than not caused by his TERA burn pit exposure as the risk factors of the Veteran outside of military service regarding his weight far outweighed the factors identified by TERA. See August 2023 VA Medical Opinion Disability Benefits Questionnaire. 

The Board finds the evidence is in approximate balance as to whether the Veteran's erectile dysfunction is secondary to his service-connected disabilities. The negative VA opinions all contain deficiencies. The June 2021 examiner did not find a diagnosis of erectile dysfunction and based this solely on finding that the Veteran's statements were subjective. Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 (Fed. Cir. 2007) (a layperson is competent to describe symptoms at the time that supports a later diagnosis by a medical professional). She also failed to consider the effects of the medications the Veteran was using to treat his service-connected left knee disability when finding that there was no medical authority or peer reviewed medical literature supporting the contention that the Veteran's knee disability could cause or aggravate the development of erectile dysfunction. The February 2022 examiner found there was no diagnosis of erectile dysfunction but failed to explain the diagnosis reported in the December 2021 private medical opinion by C.M.B. She also stated that because all symptoms were subjective and based on lay statements, no diagnosis was warranted, which was an improper analysis. See Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331, 1337 (Fed. Cir. 2006) (lay evidence cannot be discounted due solely to a lack of verifying objective evidence).

The April 2023 VA medical examination found the Veteran's erectile dysfunction was not connected to his military service as there was no pathology to warrant a diagnosis, without providing a rationale as to this finding, or reconciling this with the two private medical examinations, which had both rendered a diagnosis. See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008) (holding that a medical opinion that contains only data and conclusions without any supporting analysis is afforded no weight). In the July 2023 opinion, the examiner noted erectile dysfunction can be due to medication yet failed to provide an analysis of the Veteran's reported use of medications, including NSAIDs, to treat his left knee disability. He also focused on whether the Veteran's service-connected disabilities were a direct cause of his erectile dysfunction and failed to do a proper analysis for secondary service connection, which also requires a consideration of aggravation. See El-Amin v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 136 (2013) (finding that a VA opinion addressing secondary service connection was inadequate as it did not address the issue of aggravation). Finally, the August 2023 VA TERA opinion concluded the Veteran's erectile dysfunction was not caused by his TERA exposure activity, however the opinion improperly focused on the Veteran's weight instead of providing an analysis as to the Veteran's contention of secondary-service connection. 

The private opinions are also similarly deficient. In his December 2021 opinion C.M.B. stated that it has been reported in medical literature that those suffering from chronic musculoskeletal pain experience a loss in sexual interest, arousal, or overall interference with intimacy with associated erectile and orgasm incapability related to mood changes, difficulty focusing, and hormonal changes that occur related to the chronic musculoskeletal pain condition, however he did not specify what literature he was referencing. Also, while noting that the Veteran is on medications known to cause erectile dysfunction as a side effect per the PDR and pharmaceutical literature, he failed to discuss which medications the Veteran was using or what pharmaceutical literature was referenced. Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 124 (2007) (an adequate medical opinion must support its conclusions with an analysis that the Board can consider and weigh against contrary opinions). In her February 2023 opinion C.W. noted two different studies discussing sexual functioning among patients with chronic pain and concluded that in her professional opinion the Veteran's erectile dysfunction was secondary to his service-connected left knee condition due to chronic pain, however she failed to provide a rationale relating specifically to the Veteran, which renders her opinion vague and conclusory. See Nieves-Rodriguez, 22 Vet. App. at 301.

Although the opinions all contain deficiencies, they can still be afforded probative weight. See Mozingo v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 97, 106-07 (2012) (an inadequacy does not mean an opinion does not have probative weight). When looking at these opinions in totality, the Board finds the evidence is in approximate balance as to whether the Veteran's erectile dysfunction is secondary to his service-connected disabilities, thus the Board resolves reasonable doubt in favor of the Veteran. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b). Therefore, entitlement to erectile dysfunction, as secondary to service-connected disabilities, is granted.  

 

Ann K. Minami

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Anna-Liisa Davis

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.