Citation Nr: A25034697
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 240711-453765
DATE: April 15, 2025

ORDER

Service connection for an acquired psychological disorder, to include anxiety and depression, is granted.  

FINDING OF FACT

The evidence is in at least relative equipoise as to whether the Veteran's acquired psychological disorder, to include anxiety and depression, is reasonably shown to be due to or aggravated by service-connected bilateral knee and lumbar spine musculoskeletal disabilities.  

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for service connection for an acquired psychological disorder, to include anxiety and depression, have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.307, 3.309.  

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Marine Corps from June 2006 to June 2021.  

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a December 2023 rating decision issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).  In July 2024, the Veteran perfected appeal to the Board by filing a VA Form 10182 Notice of Disagreement (NOD), selecting Direct Review of the evidence by a Veterans Law Judge and requesting review of the December 2022 (regarding a denied service connection claim for depression) and March 2023 (regarding a denied service connection claim for anxiety) rating decisions.  However, the Board notes that under the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA) review system, a NOD shall also be filed within one year from the date of the issuance of notice of the decision of agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ).  38 U.S.C. § 7105.  A NOD postmarked before the expiration of the one-year period shall be accepted as timely filed.  Id.  In this case, the December 2022 rating decision is more than one year prior to the July 2024 NOD.  As explained below, however, the Veteran's psychiatric claim has been expanded to include consideration of all relevant diagnoses.  As such, the Board will review the evidence, include diagnoses, as of the date of the December 2023 rating decision.  

Service connection for an acquired psychological disorder, to include anxiety and depression is granted.  

The Veteran seeks service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, including anxiety disorder and depression condition.  

In his September 2022 VA 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim (Compensation), the Veteran said that he developed depression towards the end of his enlistment because of his erectile dysfunction.  The Veteran explained that this was only made worse later on because his lower back and knee pain made it difficult to go to the gym and caused him to gain weight and lose more self-esteem.  

Here, the Board notes that the Veteran has raised the contention that his mental health condition is due to service, including as secondary to erectile dysfunction, back and knee pain.  

The Board further notes that the Veteran has variously referred to his psychological conditions as depression and anxiety.  Therefore, the Board will broadly construe the claim for service connection as a claim for service connection for an acquired psychological disorder (to include depression and anxiety).  Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1, 6 (2009) (holding that the Board must consider any disability that "may reasonably be encompassed by" the description of the claim and symptoms or other submitted information.).  

Service connection may be established for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service.  38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a).  

In order to establish service connection for a claimed disability on a direct basis, there must be competent evidence of (1) a current disability; (2) an in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service.  See Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166-67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).  

Service connection may also be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge, when the evidence establishes the disease was incurred in service.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).  

In addition to direct service connection, a disability may also be found service connected on a secondary basis by demonstrating that the disability is either (1) resulting from or the result of an already service-connected disease or injury or (2) aggravated by an already service-connected disease or injury.  See Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439, 448 (1995); 38 C.F.R. § 3.310.  Any medical opinion which addresses secondary service connection must include an aggravation opinion.  

VA shall consider all information lay and medical evidence of record in a case and when there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, VA shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant.  38 U.S.C. § 5107 (2012); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49, 53 (1990).  To deny a claim on its merits, there must be a showing that the evidence is not in approximate balance and is persuasively against the Veteran's claim.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F. 4th 776, 781 (Fed. Cir. 2021).  

Turning to the service medical record of evidence, the December 2019 report of medical history notes the Veteran's report of good health.  The accompanying December 2015 report of medical examination notes asymptomatic mild pes planus but otherwise normal findings upon clinical evaluation.  A September 2017 service treatment record (STR) notes that the Veteran's depression screening was negative.  A November 2020 occupational assessment notes that the Veteran denied depression and homicidal/suicidal urges.  

Post service, in a private July 2023 mental disorders evaluation, psychologist A.V. diagnosed the Veteran with depressive disorder due to another medical condition with depressive features.  

The Veteran underwent a VA mental disorders examination in August 2023, at which the psychiatrist diagnosed the Veteran with mood disorder due to general physiologic condition with anxious distress.  

Here, the Board finds that the first Shedden element has been satisfied based on the Veteran's diagnosed mental health conditions found in the evaluations above.  Further, the Board finds that the second Shedden element has been satisfied as the record reflects that the Veteran is service connected for a lumbar spine and bilateral knee disability.  See Shedden, 381 F.3d at 1166-67; 38 C.F.R. § 3.310.  

Finally, to determine whether a nexus exists between the claimed condition and service connected conditions, the Board looks to the medical expertise medical opinion on the subject.  

First, the unfavorable opinion of record reflects that the August 2023 VA psychologist opined that the claimed condition is less likely than not incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event or illness.  The psychiatrist rationalized that there are no records to support that the Veteran sought treatment for nor was diagnosed with depression or anxiety during service.  The psychiatrist indicated that there is no entry or separation examination reviewed in the file.  The psychiatrist acknowledged the private evaluation by explaining that the private provider asserts that depression and anxiety are secondary to pain, not due to depression that started in service.  

Here, the Board notes that first, the August 2023 VA psychologist does not appear to have access to the entirety of the claims file, as the psychologist indicated that the there is no entry or separation examination in the file.  However, the Board notes that the Veteran's entrance examination has been discussed above.  Second, the Board finds that the psychologist failed to address the Veteran's contentions.  Instead, the psychologist provided a direct service connection opinion and did not provide a secondary service connection opinion, while acknowledging, but not reconciling the July 2023 private opinion.  More specifically, with the direct service connection opinion that was rendered, the psychologist relied on the absence of documented treatment for the claimed condition and fails to account for the Veteran's lay contentions.  However, in each case where a veteran is seeking service-connection for any disability due consideration shall be given to the places, types, and circumstances of such veteran's service as shown by such veteran's service record, the official history of each organization in which such veteran served, such veteran's medical records, and all pertinent medical and lay evidence.  38 U.S.C §1154.  Thus, the Board finds that the rationale is conclusory.  Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 123 (2007).  Hence, the Board finds that the opinion is inadequate and does not assign any probative value the August 2023 opinion.  Id.  

On the other hand, the favorable record of evidence reflects that in the July 2023 private mental disorders evaluation, Dr. A.V. opined that the claimed condition is at least as likely as not the result of or aggravated by the Veteran's service-connected knee, shoulder and lumbar spine conditions.  Dr. A.V. rationalized that evidence from the evaluation shows that the Veteran experiences depressed mood and anxiety arising from the chronic pain of his service connected conditions.  Dr. A.V. explained that the Veteran's service connected conditions have resulted in a reduced capacity to engage in stress reduction and health promotion activities, such as some forms of exercise and activities previously enjoyed (going to the gym and walking).  Dr. A.V. indicated that the Veteran experiences psychiatric symptoms as a result of the pain, which along with the negative impact on his relationships due to increased irritability, result in problems performing occupational tasks and a reduced ability to handle stress.  Dr. A.V. found that the Veteran's reported symptoms are consistent with research that links pain to a mood disorder.  Dr. A.V. explained that chronic pain and depression most likely have a bidirectional association: depression is a predictor of persistent pain and pain is a predictor of the persistence of depression.  Dr. A.V. indicated that a possible explanation is that impaired functioning caused by pain can lead to social isolation, which in turn can lead to a negative effect on depressive symptoms, while the reverse is also true.  

Further, in a November 2023 addendum opinion, a psychologist opined that the claimed condition is less likely than not proximately due to or result of the Veteran's service-connected conditions.  The psychologist rationalized that depression and anxiety are not diagnosed separately; therefore, it is less likely than not due to the physical health conditions.  The psychologist indicated that the mood disorder subsumes symptoms of depression and anxiety.  The psychologist explained that the Veteran has avoidance of activities that he once enjoyed and is more isolated and depressed due to the pain and because of the limitations.  

Here, while on its face, the opinion appears to be negative, the rationale, in fact, supports the July 2023 private opinion for the proposition and finding that the Veteran is experiencing symptoms that include the symptoms noted above as a result of the pain, which along with the negative impact on his relationships due to increased irritability.  Dr. A.V. explained that this pain from the Veteran's service-connected conditions have resulted in a reduced capacity to engage in stress reduction and health promotion activities such as some forms of exercise and activities previously enjoyed (going to the gym and walking).  

Dr. A.V. further expounded on the medical rationale behind this proposition to indicate that the Veteran's reported symptoms are consistent with research that links pain to mood disorder, as chronic pain and depression most likely have a bidirectional association.  

Here, the Board finds that the combined rationale provides adequate medical analysis to explain the Veteran's reported symptoms and current psychological order in light of his service connected disabilities.  

Thus, the Board finds that the opinions are well supported and factually accurate, fully articulated based on sound reasoning.  See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008).  Accordingly, the Board assigns the opinions significant probative value.  

There is no existing, probative medical opinion in the record to contradict the finding of direct causation and the Board has no basis to contradict the conclusion.  See Colvin v. Derwinski, 1?Vet. App.?171, 175 (1991).  

Based upon the foregoing, the Board finds that the lay and medical evidence demonstrates that the Veteran's acquired psychological disorder is the result of or aggravated by the service connected lumbar spine and bilateral knee disabilities.  As such, the benefit of doubt is afforded to the appellant and service connection is granted for an acquired psychological disorder.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); Lynch, 21 F. 4th at 781.  

 

 

DELYVONNE M. WHITEHEAD

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Alli, Q.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.