Citation Nr: A25034845
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 240814-464625
DATE: April 15, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 70 percent for the Veteran's service-connected posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is denied.

FINDING OF FACT

During the period on review, the Veteran's service-connected PTSD has most closely approximated occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, and has not been manifested by total occupational and social impairment.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 70 percent for the Veteran's service-connected PTSD have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.3, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from February 2010 to June 2013.

In the August 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Board of Veterans' Appeals' (Board) Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the April 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board, including the July 2024 VA PTSD examination.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  

If the Veteran would like the United States Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim[s], considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

The Veteran has been awarded entitlement to a total disability rating based on individual unemployability (TDIU) for the entire period on review, and thus, such an issue is not before the Board.  See June 2024 and August 2024 rating decisions; see Harper v. Wilkie, 30 Vet. App. 356, 361-62 (2018). 

More than 60 days have passed since the receipt of the August 2024 VA Form 10182, and more than one year has passed since the issuance of the April 2024 HLR rating decision.  Accordingly, a Board docket switch under 38 C.F.R. § 20.202(c)(2) is legally precluded.  See Williams v. McDonough, 37?Vet. App.?305 (2024).  As such, the Board may proceed with its appellate consideration. 

Under 38 U.S.C. § 7104, Board decisions must be based on the entire record in the proceeding and upon consideration of all evidence and material of record and applicable provisions of law and regulation.  The law requires only that the Board address its reasons for rejecting evidence favorable to the Veteran.  Timberlake v. Gober, 14 Vet. App. 122, 128-29 (2000).  The Board must review the entire record but does not have to discuss each piece of evidence.  Gonzales v. West, 218 F.3d 1378, 1381 (Fed. Cir. 2000).  The analysis below focuses on the most salient and relevant evidence within the period on review and on what this evidence shows, or fails to show, on the claim.  The Veteran must not assume that the Board has overlooked pieces of evidence that are not explicitly discussed herein.  See Timberlake, supra.

1. Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 70 percent for the Veteran's service-connected PTSD is denied. 

In the April 2024 rating decision, the Veteran was awarded a 70 percent rating, effective August 15, 2023, for his service-connected PTSD under Diagnostic Code 9411, 38 C.F.R. § 4.130.  He seeks a higher disability rating on appeal.  Beyond a generic statement that the Veteran is entitled to a higher rating in the August 2024 appellate brief, neither the Veteran nor his representative have explained why his disability has more closely approximated total occupational and social impairment sufficient to warrant a higher 100 percent rating during the period on review, or what evidence supports the assignment of a higher rating.  

Under the General Formula for Mental Disorders (General Formula), the Board must conduct a "holistic analysis" that considers all associated symptoms, regardless of whether they are listed as criteria.  See Bankhead v. Shulkin,?29?Vet. App.?10, 22?(2017);?38 C.F.R. § 4.130.  The Board must determine whether unlisted symptoms are similar in severity, frequency, and duration to the listed symptoms associated with specific disability percentages.  Then, the Board must determine whether the associated symptoms, both listed and unlisted, caused the level of impairment required for a higher disability rating.  See Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki,?713 F.3d 112, 114-18?(Fed. Cir. 2013). 

Under the General Formula, a 70 percent rating is assigned when symptoms such as suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant speech; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a work like setting); or inability to establish and maintain effective relationships cause occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood. 

A maximum 100 percent rating is assigned for total occupational and social impairment due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; or memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name. ?With the relevant rating criteria established, the Board now turns to the pertinent evidence of record. 

The Veteran attended a VA PTSD examination in March 2024.  The Veteran reported that his first marriage from 2015 to 2021 was difficult and involved mutual physical and verbal abuse.  He remarried in 2021 and lives with his wife, his three daughters, his wife's sister, and her two daughters.  He reported having angry outbursts towards his family, without violence, and he stated that his behavior often scared his family members.  He described his relationship with his wife and kids as "good," but he described an emotional disconnect.  He stated he needed to repair aspects of his relationship with his two older daughters because they witnessed the abuses from his first marriage.  He maintained contact with one friend from childhood who he spoke to and saw regularly.  He was arrested for domestic violence in 2018 and attended mandatory anger management courses and counseling for 6 to 12 months, but he struggled to engage with the treatment. 

The Veteran was unemployed and occasionally accepted freelance work as a painter with his friend.  He last worked as a mechanic one year prior to the examination but quit in lieu of being fired over several inappropriate interpersonal interactions.  He described having angry outburst at co-workers, and on one occasion at a supervisor, and he stated that he had a blunt and rude attitude at work that resulted in negative responses from co-workers.

The Veteran reported an intense hypervigilance in cities and large crowds due to safety concerns.  His need to focus on watching people interfered with his ability to engage in activities.  He reported experiencing flashbacks to military service, but he denied panic attacks.  He reported difficulty falling asleep and the need to frequently check windows and doors throughout the night when triggered by noise.  His anxiety and intrusive memories were worse at night, and he had difficulty relaxing his mind when trying to fall asleep.  He reported infrequent trauma-related nightmares.  

The Veteran was diagnosed with PTSD linked to fear of hostile or military terrorist activity during his service in Afghanistan.  The symptoms applicable to the diagnosis for rating purposes were depression; anxiety; suspiciousness; chronic sleep impairment; mild memory loss, such as forgetting names, directions, or recent events; flattened affect; disturbances of motivation and mood; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work-like setting; suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; and impaired impulse control, such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence. 

The VA examiner performed a mental status examination.  The Veteran arrived on time for his appointment and was cooperative throughout the examination.  He appeared as his stated age and was adequately dressed and groomed.  His speech had a normal pitch, volume, and fluency but it was somewhat slow-paced.  His affect was blunted and dysphoric.  His thought processes were logical and linear and there was no evidence or report of hallucinations, delusions, paranoia, or mania.  His intellectual functioning was within normal limits, and he was oriented to all spheres.  His cognition was grossly intact, he appeared to be an adequate historian, and his insight/judgment were fair.  

Regarding suicidal ideation, the Veteran reported a single suicide attempt in 2012 which resulted in an inpatient hospitalization.  The Veteran denied current suicidal ideation and recalled that his most recent thoughts of suicide occurred in 2014, shortly after leaving service.  However, the Veteran endorsed death ideation "most days," stating that he did not care if he were to die.  He stated that thinking about his wife and kids served as a coping mechanism.

The Veteran's available VA treatment records did not document psychiatric findings more severe than those observed and noted at the March 2024 VA examination.  The Veteran was seen by a VA mental health provider in August 2023.  He endorsed symptoms of daily intrusive thoughts, memories, and feelings related to his deployment to Afghanistan in 2011 where he witnessed an improvised explosive device kill and severely injure several people.  The Veteran endorsed passive thoughts of wishing he were dead and exhibited a general apathy for life, but he denied current intent or plan.  The Veteran also endorsed avoidance symptoms, difficulty concentrating, hypervigilance, a low mood, and difficulty falling asleep.  The Veteran described his current wife as providing a strong social support, and he reported having one close friend, as he found it difficult to trust others.

The clinician conducted a mental status examination where the Veteran's mood was dysphoric, and his affect was flat and guarded.  His thought processes were logical, cohesive, and goal-directed, and he was alert and fully oriented to person, place, time, and situation.  No auditory/visual hallucinations or delusions were reported or observed; his insight was grossly intact; and his motor activity was normal.  Similar findings were noted in September 2023, with the exception of his mood being euthymic at the first September 2023 visit and reverting back to dysphoric at the second September 2023 visit. 

The Veteran was seen again in October 2023 by VA providers.  He was oriented to all spheres; his eye contact was avoidant; his mood was dysphoric; his affect was constricted but congruent with his mood and the content that was discussed; his speech rate was slow, but his volume was within normal limits; he exhibited fidgeting behavior; his thought processes were fairly organized; his thought content was linear; and there was no evidence of hallucinations, delusions, or paranoia.

The Veteran was seen for a comprehensive psychosocial assessment by VA providers in November 2023.  He stated that he did not like going places and reported a short temper.  He reported the presence of recurrent involuntary distressing memories and flashbacks.  He reported avoidance of external stimuli and isolated to the house playing video games because he disliked cities or being around too many people.  He stated that this social withdrawal behavior limited his capacity to form new friendships.  He exhibited a negative self-perception and a persistent anger, rage, and aggression, especially towards subjects he viewed as a threat to his safety.  Although he tended to raise his voice frequently, his anger was not manifested by violence.  He stated that he was hypervigilant and experienced an exaggerated startle response.  He reported difficulty with concentration, short-term memory loss, and difficulty falling asleep.  The Veteran described his relationship with his spouse as "great," and his relationship with his three children as "really good."  He reported communication with a childhood friend every day, and they played video games together and chatted on discord.  He often helped at his friend's painting business.  The record shows that the Veteran engaged in cognitive processing therapy beginning in November 2023.  

The Veteran's predominant psychiatric symptoms during the period on review are chronic sleep impairment, anxiety, depression, hypervigilance, social withdrawal, recurrent flashbacks and memories, mild memory loss, and irritability/anger, without violence towards himself or others.  These symptoms most closely approximate the symptoms contemplated by a 70 percent rating under the General Formula. 

The Veteran has never exhibited gross impairment in thought processes or communication.  His thought processes were constantly found to be linear and goal-directed, and he was able to communicate his symptoms and problems effectively.  He never experienced delusions or hallucinations during the period on review.  He did not engage in grossly inappropriate behavior.  He was cooperative during all assessments and maintained a positive family life.  While he reported a short-temper, anger, and irritability, such symptoms were not accompanied by violent tendencies towards himself or others.  He was consistently determined to be oriented to all spheres.  He remained fully capable of activities of daily living.  He was adequately groomed at the March 2024 VA examination, and no other mental status examinations or VA psychiatric visits noted any grooming or hygiene issues or an inability to perform the activities of daily living.  Lastly, the March 2024 VA examination and VA treatment records noted the presence of mild memory impairment, but the Veteran never experienced severe memory or cognitive decline such that he was unable to recall his own name, the name of family members and close relatives, or his own occupation (occasionally helping his best friend with painting).  

The Veteran did not exhibit any of the symptoms commensurate with a 100 percent rating under 38 C.F.R. § 4.130 during the period on review.  The severity, frequency, and duration of the Veteran's psychiatric symptoms have more closely approximated the symptoms contemplated by a 70 percent rating, which are less severe, less frequent, and shorter in duration than those contemplated by a 100 percent rating during the period on review.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.126.

The evidence demonstrates that the Veteran suffers from severe occupational impairment, as signified by the award of TDIU benefits based on his service-connected PTSD symptoms.  The Veteran's anger, short-temper, difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances, and inability to maintain work relationships would severely impair his occupational functioning.  Likewise, his difficulty with concentration and mild memory loss would result in the Veteran being off task more frequently than tolerated by most employers in the competitive workforce.  The Veteran's childhood best friend ran a painting business, and the Veteran would occasionally assist him with painting jobs.  This employment was clearly performed in a sheltered work environment.  While the Veteran did not have total occupational impairment, as demonstrated by this occasional freelance work, his PTSD symptoms resulted in occupational deficiencies consistent with his presently assigned 70 percent rating under the General Formula.  

Additionally, the record does not reflect that the Veteran's PTSD symptoms resulted in total social impairment during the period on review.  The Veteran has maintained a positive and supportive relationship with his spouse, and he continually expressed concern for the well-being of his children.  While he described difficulty emotionally connecting to his family members, he used encouraging terms when describing his relationship to his wife and kids, and he often cited his relationships with his wife and kids as a protective factor against more traumatic thoughts and behaviors.  He also described the ability to maintain a close friendship with a childhood friend, who he spoke to and interacted with on a regular basis.  While the Veteran expressed difficulty making friends; exhibited social withdrawal, and endorsed hypervigilant behavior, the record does not show complete and total social impairment during the period on review.  In the absence of probative evidence of total occupational and social impairment, a higher 100 percent rating under the General Formula is not for application. 

In sum, the electronic claims file is devoid of probative evidence showing that the Veteran's PTSD symptoms rose to the level of total occupational and social impairment during the period on review.  He experienced none of the symptoms set forth in the General Formula as indicative of a 100 percent rating, and there is no persuasive evidence that any other unlisted psychiatric symptoms were of a similar frequency, severity, or duration as those contemplated by a 100 percent rating.  See Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436, 442 (2002); Vasquez-Claudio, 713 F.3d at 116-17.  The evidence is not in approximate balance and persuasively weighs against the Veteran's claim.  As such, the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine is not for application.  See 38 U.S.C. §5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; see Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 780-82 (2021).  As the evidence fails to demonstrate that the Veteran's PTSD symptoms resulted in total occupational and social impairment during the period on review, the Veteran's request for a disability rating in excess of 70 percent for his service-connected PTSD must be denied.

 

 

Cynthia M. Bruce

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	M. Galante, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided.  This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability.  38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.