Citation Nr: A25034185
Decision Date: 04/14/25	Archive Date: 04/14/25

DOCKET NO. 241028-486279
DATE: April 14, 2025

ORDER

Service connection for tinnitus is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral hearing loss is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for hypothyroidism is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

Tinnitus was not shown in service, or for many years thereafter, and is not otherwise related to active-duty service.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for service connection for tinnitus have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.307, 3.309.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Appellant served on active duty from November 14, 1979, to December 3, 1979, when he was discharged by reason of erroneous enlistment.

This case is before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a March 2024 rating decision, which denied service connection for tinnitus, bilateral hearing loss, and hypothyroidism. The Appellant appealed this rating decision by filing a VA Form 10182 in October 2024. He selected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

For the issue adjudicated herein, if the Appellant would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, he may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

However, for the issues remanded herein, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Service Connection for Tinnitus

The Appellant seeks service connection for tinnitus. See January 2024 VA Form 21-526EZ.

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by service. 38 U.S.C. § 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a). Service connection may be also granted on a presumptive basis for certain chronic diseases, including tinnitus as an organic disease of the nervous system, if the disability was manifested to a compensable degree within one year of separation from service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1112(a)(1), 1113; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307(a)(3), 3.309(a). Service connection may additionally be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge, when all of the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).

Finally, when all of the evidence is assembled, "if the positive and negative evidence is in approximate balance (which includes but is not limited to equipoise), the claimant receives the benefit of the doubt." Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021); see also 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b).

The Appellant's service treatment records (STRs) are silent for any complaints, findings, treatment, or diagnosis related to tinnitus. 

Following service, VA treatment records dated from 1998 to 2003 are negative for complaints or findings of tinnitus. In November 2004, a VA clinician noted the presence of tinnitus in the left ear for the past 5 years that occurred infrequently and for very short periods of time. There was no tinnitus in the right ear. The Appellant also denied noise exposure in service while reporting working in a manufacturing plant for the past 3 years and having to wear hearing protection while in the factory. Subsequent VA treatment records note ongoing complaints of tinnitus, which was noted to be bilateral in December 2021.

The Appellant has claimed service connection for tinnitus but has not indicated how it is related to service. His STRs are negative for tinnitus and his post-service treatment records show that the earliest onset for tinnitus was in 1999, as reported in a November 2004 VA treatment record. Thus, there is no evidence that tinnitus manifested in service, that it manifested to a compensable degree within a presumptive period, or that it was noted in service with attributable continuity of symptomatology. 

There is also no medical or other competent evidence establishing that the Appellant's tinnitus is related to his active military service. Notably, the Appellant denied noise exposure in service. See November 2004 treatment record. Although the Appellant may believe his current tinnitus is related to his service, he is not competent as a lay person to provide a nexus opinion regarding this issue. Such medical opinions are medically complex and require specialized medical education and knowledge. See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377, 1377 n.4 (Fed. Cir. 2007).

With regard to whether a VA examination is required to address the etiology of tinnitus, while there is competent medical evidence of current disability, there is no indication in the record (other than the Appellant's non-specific contentions) showing that tinnitus was caused by his brief period of service. The Board acknowledges that no VA examination has been provided in this matter. However, the Board may only remand the appeal to the AOJ for correction of an error on the part of the AOJ to satisfy its duties to assist, if the error occurred prior to the AOJ decision on appeal. See 38 C.F.R. § 20.802. Here, the appellant did not provide any information as to how he believes his claimed disability is related to his military service. The record merely notes the Appellant's report that tinnitus began many years after his separation from service. Therefore, the Board cannot find that a duty to assist error occurred at the time of the March 2024 rating decision where there was no indication in the record as to how the claimed disability was related to service, and a VA examination or medical opinion regarding this claim is neither necessary nor warranted. See Waters v. Shinseki, 601 F.3d 1274 (Fed. Cir. 2010) (recognizing that there is not a duty to provide an examination in every case).

In sum, the Board finds that the weight of the evidence is against a finding that the Appellant's tinnitus was shown in service; it was not diagnosed until years thereafter and is not otherwise show to be related to the Appellant's active-duty service. Accordingly, service connection for tinnitus is denied.

REASONS FOR REMAND

Service Connection for Hearing Loss and Hypothyroidism 

The pre-decisional evidence of record shows left ear hearing loss according to the standards of 38 C.F.R. § 3.385 on an October 1979 service entrance examination report. Additionally, STRs show a diagnosis of hypothyroidism which existed prior to service. See STRs. Post-service VA treatment records note findings of bilateral hearing loss (including in December 2021) and hypothyroidism (including in July 2001). 

To date, no VA medical opinions have been provided to assess the etiology of the Appellant's hearing loss or hypothyroidism. See McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 84 (2006). The Board finds that this amounts to pre-decisional duty to assist errors, as such evidence was sufficient to trigger VA's duty to obtain VA medical opinions to determine whether the Appellant's hearing loss and hyperthyroidism pre-existed his active-duty service and was aggravated beyond its natural progression during his military service. Accordingly, remand is warranted for a VA medical opinion consistent with the directives herein.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain a VA medical opinion from an appropriate examiner to determine the nature and etiology of the Appellant's hypothyroidism. The examiner should review the claims file. Thereafter, the examiner should address the following:

a) Is it clear and unmistakable (i.e., undebatable from a medical standpoint) that the Appellant's hypothyroidism pre-existed service?

b) If so, is it clear and unmistakable (i.e., undebatable from a medical standpoint) that the Appellant's pre-existing hypothyroidism was NOT aggravated by service?

The examiner is advised that the Appellant is competent to report his symptoms/history and that such reports must be acknowledged and considered in formulating any opinion. If his reports are discounted, the examiner should provide a reason for doing so.

A rationale for all requested opinions shall be provided. The rationale must include a discussion of the underlying medical principles specific to the facts of this case and not simply reference generic medical literature. If the examiner cannot provide an opinion without resorting to mere speculation, they shall provide a complete explanation stating why this is so. In so doing, the examiner shall explain whether the inability to provide a more definitive opinion is the result of a need for additional information or that they have exhausted the limits of current medical knowledge in providing an answer to that particular question.

2. Schedule the Appellant for a VA hearing loss examination to determine whether he has current hearing loss in accordance with 38 C.F.R. § 3.385. The examiner should review the claims file. Thereafter, for any hearing loss diagnosed, the examiner should address the following:

a) Is it clear and unmistakable (i.e., undebatable from a medical standpoint) that the Appellant's hearing loss, pre-existed service?

b) If so, is it clear and unmistakable (i.e., undebatable from a medical standpoint) that the Appellant's pre-existing hearing loss was NOT aggravated by service?

c) If the examiner finds that hearing loss, either did not clearly and unmistakably preexist service OR was clearly and unmistakably not aggravated by service, the examiner must opine whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) related to service.

In rendering the above opinions, the examiner must consider and discuss the October 1979 enlistment examination report.

The examiner is advised that the Appellant is competent to report his symptoms/history and that such reports must be acknowledged and considered in formulating any opinion. If his reports are discounted, the examiner should provide a reason for doing so.

A rationale for all requested opinions shall be provided. The rationale must include a discussion of the underlying medical principles specific to the facts of this case and not simply reference generic medical literature. If the examiner cannot provide an opinion without resorting to mere speculation, they shall provide a complete explanation stating why this is so. In so doing, the examiner shall explain whether the inability to provide a more definitive opinion is the result of a need for additional information or that they have exhausted the limits of current medical knowledge in providing an answer to that particular question.

 

 

A. ISHIZAWAR

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Fletcher, Kathleen

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.