Citation Nr: A25034858
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 240206-413891
DATE: April 15, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for a left knee condition is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for a right knee condition is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for a low back condition is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for sinusitis is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for eye allergies is denied.

Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 10 percent for allergic rhinitis is denied. 

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for major depressive disorder is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for headaches is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for asthma is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for vertigo is remanded.  

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran does not have a current diagnosis of a left or right knee condition; there is no evidence of pain productive of functional impairment of earning capacity.

2. The Veteran does not have a current diagnosis of a low back condition; there is no evidence of pain productive of functional impairment of earning capacity.

3. At no time during the pendency of the claim does the Veteran have a diagnosis of sleep apnea, and the record does not contain a recent diagnosis of such disability prior to the Veteran's filing of a claim.

4. At no time during the pendency of the claim does the Veteran have a diagnosis for sinusitis, and the record does not contain a recent diagnosis of such disability prior to the Veteran's filing of a claim.

5. The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran's claimed eye allergies began during active service or are otherwise related to an in-service injury or disease.

6. At no time during the pendency of the Veteran's claim has her allergic rhinitis been manifested by nasal polyps.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for service connection for a left knee condition have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

2. The criteria for service connection for a right knee condition have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

3. The criteria for service connection for a low back condition have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

4. The criteria for service connection for sleep apnea have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

5. The criteria for service connection for sinusitis have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

6. The criteria for service connection for eye allergies have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

7. The criteria for an initial rating in excess of 10 percent for allergic rhinitis. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.7, 4.97, Diagnostic Code 6522.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from September 1994 to August 1997, with additional service in the United States Naval Reserve. 

The rating decisions on appeal were issued in April 2023, May 2023, January 2024 and constitute initial decisions; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.

In the February 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the respective April 2023, May 2023, and January 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decisions on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of entitlement to service connection for major depressive disorder, headaches, asthma, and vertigo, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Service Connection 

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by service. 38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a). Establishing service connection generally requires (1) medical evidence of a current disability; (2) medical or, in certain circumstances, lay evidence of in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) medical evidence of a nexus between the claimed in-service disease or injury and the current disability. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004).  

The determination as to whether the requirements for service connection are met is based on an analysis of all the evidence of record and the evaluation of its credibility and probative value. 38 U.S.C. § 7104 (a); Baldwin v. West, 13 Vet. App. 1 (1999). When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, VA shall resolve reasonable doubt in favor of the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Ortiz v. Principi, 274 F.3d 1361, 1364 (Fed. Cir. 2001); Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc). 

1. Left Knee, Right Knee, Low Back, Sleep Apnea

The Veteran essentially contends that she has left knee pain, right knee pain, back pain, and sleep apnea that are related to her period of military service. Specifically, on her August 2023 Fully Developed Claim, VA Form 21-526EZ, she indicated she had left and right knee pain from working on the flight line, as well as back pain from lifting aircraft and fuel equipment. She did not indicate how she developed sleep apnea, rather stating that she had "difficulty sleeping."  

The AOJ made no favorable findings in the rating decision on appeal.

The Veteran's service treatment records are negative for complaints, diagnoses, or treatment for knee pain, back pain, or sleep apnea. Post-service treatment records are negative for complaints, diagnoses, or treatment for these conditions, as well.

As the record does not reflect current diagnoses related to a left knee condition, a right knee condition, a low back condition, or sleep apnea, the cornerstone element of service connection has not been met, and service connection is not warranted. See Boyer v. West, 210 F.3d 1351, 1353 (Fed. Cir. 2000); Brammer v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 223, 225 (1992). No further discussion of the remaining elements is necessary. The Board acknowledges the Court's holding in Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d. 1356 (2018), but does not find a basis for determining that there is functional impairment related to a diagnosis of a left knee condition, right knee condition, low back condition, or sleep apnea. Moreover, the record does not reflect, and the Veteran did not allege, that she suffers from impairments of earning capacity due to her claimed conditions that are of similar severity, frequency and duration as those VA has determined by regulation would cause impaired earning capacity in an average person. Wait v. Wilkie, 33 Vet. App. 8 (2020).

The Board notes that the Veteran has not been afforded VA examinations addressing her claimed left knee condition, right knee condition, low back condition, or sleep apnea. However, the Board finds that such examinations are not required. In this regard, in determining whether the duty to assist requires that a VA medical examination be provided, or medical opinion obtained with respect to a veteran's claim for benefits, there are four factors for consideration. These four factors are:

1.	whether there is competent evidence of a current disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability; 

2.	whether there is evidence establishing that an event, injury, or disease occurred in service, or evidence establishing certain diseases manifesting during an applicable presumption period; 

3.	whether there is an indication that the disability or symptoms may be associated with the veteran's service or with another service-connected disability; and 

4.	whether there otherwise is sufficient competent medical evidence of record to make a decision on the claim. 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(d); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(4). 

With respect to the third factor above, the Court has stated that this element establishes a low threshold and requires only that the evidence "indicates" that there "may" be a nexus between the current disability or symptoms and the veteran's service. McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006).

The service and post-service treatment records are negative for complaints, treatments or diagnoses related to a left knee condition, right knee condition, low back condition, or sleep apnea. There is no indication of a link between the claimed back, bilateral knee, and sleep apnea disorder the Veteran's active duty service other than her bare assertion on the VA Form 21-526EZ. Notably, a bare assertion of a nexus by the Veteran, alone, does not suffice to trigger the duty to assist. See Waters v. Shinseki, 601 F.3d 1274, 1278 (Fed. Cir. 2010). Therefore, the Board finds that VA examinations and/or opinions are not necessary to decide this claim.

The Board acknowledges the statements of the Veteran as to the existence and etiology of a left knee condition, right knee condition, low back condition, and sleep apnea and acknowledges that the Veteran is competent to give evidence about what she experienced. However, while the Veteran is competent to report her current symptoms, as a lay person she does not have the education, training, experience to diagnose or opine as to the etiology of the conditions. See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 (Fed. Cir. 2007).

In the absence of proof of a present disability (and, if so, of a nexus between that disability and service), there can be no valid claim for service connection. See Boyer, 210 F.3d 1351 (Fed. Cir. 2000); Brammer, 3 Vet. App. 223 (1992). Therefore, as the evidence of record fails to show that the Veteran has a left knee condition, right knee condition, low back condition, or sleep apnea, the Board concludes that service connection is not warranted, and no further discussion of the remaining elements is necessary. See Coburn v. Nicholson, 19 Vet. App. 427, 431 (2006) (finding that the absence of any one element will result in denial of service connection).

2. Sinusitis

On her October 2022 Fully Developed Claim, VA Form 21-526EZ, the Veteran indicated that she developed sinusitis due to exposure from fumes on the flight line during service.  

In the April 2023 rating decision on appeal, the AOJ made the following favorable finding: the evidence shows that a qualifying event, injury, or disease had its onset during service; a service treatment record dated in September 1995 showed treatment for maxillary sinuses.

The Veteran received a VA examination in March 2023 and the examiner did not find a diagnosis of chronic sinusitis; rather, she was diagnosed with allergic rhinitis.

The Board finds the March 2023 VA examination report highly probative and concludes that there is no current disability; thus, the first element of the service connection claim has not been satisfied. While the Veteran is competent to report her current symptoms, as a lay person she does not have the education, training, experience to diagnose chronic sinusitis or distinguish between chronic sinusitis and allergic rhinitis. There is no other competent medical evidence of a current chronic sinusitis disorder. See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 (Fed. Cir. 2007).

The Veteran is already service-connected for allergic rhinitis.

Congress specifically limits entitlement for service-connected disease or injury to cases where incidents have resulted in a recognized disability.  In the absence of proof of a present disability, there can be no valid claim for service connection. Brammer, 3 Vet. App. 223, 225 (1992). Thus, in this case, without evidence of a current disability, service connection for sinusitis must be denied.

3. Eye Allergies

On her October 2022 Fully Developed Claim, VA Form 21-526EZ, the Veteran indicated that she developed eye due to exposure from fumes from air crafts. 

In the May 2023 rating decision on appeal, the AOJ made the following favorable finding: the Veteran has been diagnosed with a disability, dry eyes. The Board is bound by this favorable finding absent clear and unmistakable evidence to the contrary. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).

A January 2016 Primary Care Note reflects that there was no pain, vision changes, redness, or jaundice of the eyes.  

The Veteran received a VA examination in April 2023 and the examiner, an optometrist, provided a diagnosis of dry eye syndrome.  The examiner provided a detailed rationale for his opinion that the Veteran's dry eye syndrome was not at least as likely as not of service origin. He discussed the relevant evidence and explained, in pertinent part, that given that the Veteran had no symptoms of dry eyes or ocular allergies at any time other than the noted episode of seasonal rhinitis, (and did not have such symptoms on her separation examination or complaints or pathology on her 2016 VA examination), and today has typical dry eye syndrome common among her age cohort, it is less likely than not that the her complaints and dry eye syndrome was incurred in or caused by military service.

The Veteran is competent to report her eye symptoms. Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 469 (1994). However, she is not competent to determine the etiology of her dry eye syndrome, as it is outside the scope of a lay person. Jandreau v. Nicholson,492 F.3d 1372 (Fed. Cir. 2007). The Board finds the medical nexus opinion from the VA optometrist is competent and persuasive because he reviewed the claims file, examined the Veteran, and is an optometrist with the training and expertise to assess eye disorders. This medical opinion outweighs the unsupported assertion of the Veteran. 

In the absence of any other competent medical opinion supporting a causal relationship between the Veteran's current dry eye syndrome and her active military service, the evidence is persuasively against the claim. Thus, the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine is not applicable and service connection for eye allergies is not warranted. See 38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc). 

?

Increased Ratings

Disability evaluations are determined by evaluating the extent to which a veteran's service-connected disability adversely affects his or her ability to function under the ordinary conditions of daily life, including employment, by comparing his or her symptomatology with the criteria set forth in the Schedule for Rating Disabilities. The percentage ratings represent as far as can practicably be determined the average impairment in earning capacity resulting from such diseases and injuries and the residual conditions in civilian occupations. Generally, the degrees of disability specified by the schedule are considered adequate to compensate veterans for considerable loss of working time from exacerbation or illness proportionate to the severity of the several grades of disability. See 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1. 

Separate diagnostic codes identify the various disabilities and the criteria for specific ratings. If two disability evaluations are potentially applicable, the higher evaluation will be assigned to the disability picture that more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating.  Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.7. Any reasonable doubt regarding the degree of disability will be resolved in favor of the veteran. 38 C.F.R. § 4.3.

In initial rating cases, where the appeal stems from a granted claim of service connection with respect to the initial evaluation assigned, VA assesses the level of disability from the effective date of service connection.  See Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119, 125; 38 U.S.C. § 5110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.400.  Staged ratings are also appropriate in any increased rating claim in which distinct time periods with different ratable symptoms can be identified. Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007). The analysis in this decision is, therefore, undertaken with consideration of the possibility that different ratings may be warranted for different time periods.

Once the evidence has been assembled, it is the Board's responsibility to evaluate the evidence. 38 U.S.C. § 7104(a). When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence as to any issue material to the determination of a matter, VA will resolve reasonable doubt in favor of the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc).

Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 10 percent for allergic rhinitis

The Veteran's allergic rhinitis is currently rated under 38 C.F.R. § 4.97, Diagnostic Code 6522, for allergic or vasomotor rhinitis. As this is an appeal as to the initial rating assigned, the relevant temporal focus is from October 26, 2022, the date of the award of service connection to present.

Under Diagnostic Code 6522, a 10 percent rating is assigned for allergic rhinitis without polyps but with greater than 50 percent obstruction of nasal passage on both sides or complete obstruction on one side. A maximum 30 percent rating is assigned for allergic rhinitis with polyps. 38 C.F.R. § 4.97. 

The Veteran received a VA examination in March 2023 and the examiner noted a diagnosis of allergic rhinitis.  The Veteran reported that she has had watery eyes, nasal congestion, and sinus pressure for at least 20 years. She was taking medication, but it only provided "a few hours of relief."  The examiner noted that there was greater than 50 percent obstruction of the nasal passage on both sides due to rhinitis but there was no complete obstruction of either side.  There was permanent hypertrophy of the nasal turbinates but no nasal polyps.  Finally, the Veteran did not have any granulomatous conditions.  

While the March 2023 examiner found that the Veteran has greater than 50 percent obstruction of the nasal passage on both sides, she did not find that the Veteran has allergic rhinitis with polyps. The Board observes that the remaining evidentiary record does not include any medical evidence that shows that the Veteran's allergic rhinitis causes polyps at any time during the appeal period. There is simply no probative evidence showing any polyps. Under such circumstances, a rating higher than 10 percent is not warranted.

The Board acknowledges the Veteran's assertions that her allergic rhinitis is more severe than evaluated. The Veteran is competent to report her symptoms and her statements are credible. Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 469 (1994). However, she is not competent to determine the severity of her nasal condition, as it is outside the scope of a lay person. Jandreau v. Nicholson,492 F.3d 1372 (Fed. Cir. 2007). The Board finds that the most probative evidence (i.e., the VA examination report and VA treatment records) demonstrate that the currently assigned rating is appropriate.

Accordingly, the Board concludes that the evidence is neither evenly balanced nor approximately so with regard to whether a rating in excess of 10 for the Veteran's allergic rhinitis is warranted.  Rather, the evidence persuasively weighs against a rating increase for any period on appeal.  The benefit of the doubt doctrine is therefore not for application. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b), 38 C.F.R. § 4.3, Lynch, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc).

REASONS FOR REMAND

By this remand, the Board makes no determination, expressed or implied, concerning the credibility of any lay statements on file at this time.

1. Entitlement to service connection for major depressive disorder is remanded. 

The Board finds that entitlement to service connection for major depressive disorder must be remanded to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error; namely, failure to obtain an adequate VA nexus opinion.

On the Veteran's October 2022 VA Form 21-526EZ, she asserted that her claimed anxiety and depression were due to fumes from working on the flight line between 1994 and 1997.

In the May 2023 rating decision on appeal, the AOJ made a favorable finding that the Veteran has been diagnosed with major depressive disorder with anxious distress, recurrent, moderate.

The Veteran's July 1997 Report of Medical History form (completed for the purpose of separation from active duty) shows she reported being in "good" health. She denied frequent trouble sleeping, depression or excessive worry, or nervous trouble of any sort.  The July 1997 Report of Medical Examination shows a psychiatric assessment was normal. She was found qualified for separation.

The Veteran's September 1997 Report of Medical History form (completed for the purpose of "affiliation - USNR") shows she reported being in "excellent" health. She denied frequent trouble sleeping, depression or excessive worry, or nervous trouble of any sort. 

Service personnel records show the Veteran was discharged from US NAVAL Reserve service in June 2002. 

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in May 2023. The Veteran reported that she began to experience psychiatric symptoms in 2003 when her first born child died from meningitis. She denied receiving mental health services while in the military. The examiner opined that the diagnosed major depressive disorder with anxious distress, recurrent, moderate was at least as likely as not caused by service, as the Veteran reported depression as secondary to the death of a child.  The examiner explained that the psychological effects of losing a child could lead to psychological problems to include depression and anxiety and those symptoms could be long term.  

In May 2023, the AOJ sought an addendum opinion from the examiner. The AOJ explained that the Veteran only served on active duty from 1994 to 1997 and did not have a record of having lost any children during such time. The AOJ indicated that service treatment records show the Veteran used a contraceptive implant which was removed when it caused weight gain, headaches and depressive symptoms. No deaths were in her personnel records or in her medical records.

The examiner provided an addendum opinion that merely copied the entirety of the AOJ's clarification request, and then stated, "the Veteran's depression is less likely than not related to military service." She did not offer a rationale for her addendum opinion. 

The failure to obtain an adequate VA nexus opinion supported by rationale that addresses the significance of, if any, noted depressive symptoms in service following use of a contraceptive implant was a pre-decisional duty to assist error that necessitates a remand for development. 

?

2. Entitlement to service connection for headaches (migraines)

The Veteran received a VA examination in March 2023 and the examiner noted a diagnosis of migraines.  Based on the results of the examination, the examiner opined that the condition was less likely than not related to service because service treatment records and post-service medical records were silent for complaints of or treatment of migraines.  As such, a nexus had not been established.  

The Board finds the March 2023 medical opinion inadequate, as it is based on the absence of documented treatment for headaches.  The Board notes that a medical opinion based solely on the absence of documentation in the record is inadequate and a medical opinion is also inadequate if it does not take into account the Veteran's reports of symptoms and history (even if recorded in the course of the examination).  Dalton v. Peake, 21 Vet. App. 23 (2007).  Moreover, the examiner's rationale does not address the Veteran's specific contention that her headaches are related to exposure to aircraft fumes while working on the flight line.

Failure to provide an adequate VA medical opinion was a pre-decisional duty to assist error that necessitates a remand for development. In remanding this issue, the Board makes no credibility determination, expressed or implied, at this time.

3. Entitlement to service connection for asthma is remanded

In the May 2023 rating decision, the AOJ rendered a favorable finding that the Veteran has been diagnosed with asthma.

The Veteran received a VA examination in March 2023. The Veteran reported that approximately 10-15 years ago, she noticed mild shortness of breath and wheezing. She did not get any treatment at the time. She also reported that between four to five years ago her breathing became worse; she went to go see her doctor and was diagnosed with asthma. The examiner opined that the asthma was less likely than not related to service because the service treatment records and post-service medical records were silent for complaints of or treatment of asthma.   

The Board finds the March 2023 medical opinion inadequate, as it is based on only the absence of complaints and treatment for respiratory symptoms in service. The rationale does not reflect consideration of the Veteran's general contention on her VA Form 21-526EZ - that exposure to fumes from aircraft and working flightline led to her claimed respiratory disorders. The Board also notes that the Veteran's military personnel records reflect that she participated in trainings including aircraft fire fighting that would have exposed her to fumes. 

Failure to provide an adequate VA medical opinion was a pre-decisional duty to assist error that necessitates a remand for development. In remanding this issue, the Board makes no credibility determination, expressed or implied, at this time.

4. Entitlement to service connection for vertigo is remanded

The McLendon elements are satisfied with regard to the claim of service connection for vertigo. See McLendon, 20 Vet. App. 79, 8186 (2006). See also 38 U.S.C. § 5103A (d)(2); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159 (c)(4)(i).

Regarding the first element, private treatment records reflect that the Veteran was seen for dizziness and vertigo in June 2020.

Regarding the second element, the Veteran asserted that her condition was due to exposure to fumes while working on the flight line.  The Veteran's military personnel records reflect that she participated in trainings including aircraft fire fighting that would have exposed her to fumes.  Furthermore, a January 2024 Toxic Exposure Risk Activity (TERA) memorandum found that there was evidence of non-deployment related exposure in the eFolder which was consistent with the circumstances of the Veteran's service.  Specifically, the Veteran served as a mess specialist and had possible exposure to food and water testing, chlorine, quaternary ammonium, and iodine.  As a result, the memoranda concluded that the Veteran participated in a TERA.

Regarding the third and fourth elements, there is an indication that the Veteran's vertigo could be related to her active duty service, but there is insufficient evidence of record by which the Board can make a decision. The four McLendon elements are satisfied.

It was a pre-decisional duty to assist error for the AOJ to not obtain a VA medical opinion where the McLendon elements are met with regards to vertigo. A remand is therefore required. In remanding this issue, the Board makes no credibility determination, expressed or implied, at this time.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of her major depressive disorder.  The claims file should be reviewed by the examiner.

The examiner must provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's  major depressive disorder with anxious distress had onset during her active service or is otherwise due to her service, to include as a result of depressive symptoms in service following use of a contraceptive implant and/or exposure to fumes while working on the flight line.

A rationale should be provided. 

2. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of her headaches.  The claims file should be reviewed by the examiner.

The examiner must provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's headaches had their onset during her active service or is otherwise due to her service, to include as a result of exposure to aircraft fumes while working on the flight line.

A rationale should be provided.

The Board highlights that the lack of documentation in the record is an inadequate basis for a negative opinion and a medical opinion is also inadequate if it does not take into account the Veteran's reports of symptoms and history (even if recorded in the course of the examination).

3. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of her asthma.  The claims file should be reviewed by the examiner.

The examiner must provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's asthma onset during active service or is otherwise due to her active service, to include as a result of exposure to fumes from aircraft and working flightline led to her claimed respiratory disorders. The Veteran's military personnel records reflect that she participated in trainings including aircraft fire fighting that would have exposed her to fumes. 

A rationale should be provided. The Board highlights that the lack of documentation in the record is an inadequate basis for a negative opinion and a medical opinion.

4. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of her vertigo.  The claims file should be reviewed by the examiner.

The examiner must provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's vertigo had its onset during active service or is otherwise due to her service, to include conceded TERA. In formulating the opinion, the examiner must consider: 1) the total potential exposure through all applicable deployments; and 2) the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran.

A rationale should be provided. The Board highlights that the lack of documentation in the record is an inadequate basis for a negative opinion and a medical opinion.

 

 

 

D. JOHNSON

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	A. Daniels, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.