Citation Nr: A25034707
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 240713-456268
DATE: April 15, 2025

ORDER

Readjudication of the claim for service connection for hypertension is warranted.

Readjudication of the claim for service connection for a psychiatric disorder, to include adjustment disorder, is warranted.

REMANDED

Service connection for hypertension is remanded.

Service connection for a psychiatric disorder other than insomnia disorder, to include adjustment disorder, is remanded.

Service connection for gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD), to include as secondary to service-connected insomnia disorder, is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. New evidence was received after the April 2024 denial that is relevant to the claim for service connection for hypertension. 

2. New evidence was received after the April 2024 denial that is relevant to the claim for service connection for a psychiatric, to include adjustment disorder.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for readjudication of the claim for service connection for hypertension have been met. 38 U.S.C. § 501, 5103A, 5108; 38 C.F.R. § 3.156, 3.2501.

2. The criteria for readjudication of the claim for service connection for a psychiatric disorder, to include adjustment disorder, have been met. 38 U.S.C. § 501, 5103A, 5108; 38 C.F.R. § 3.156, 3.2501.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran had active service in the Army from February 1966 to February 1967. He had additional service in the Army Reserve from March 1977 to March 1989.

The matter concerning service connection for an adjustment disorder came before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a June 2023 Higher-Level Review (HLR) rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ). In a June 2023 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Hearing docket. A Board hearing was held on August 11, 2023. A transcript of the hearing has been associated with the claims file. In a December 2023 decision, the Board granted service connection for tinnitus and remanded the remaining claims, including service connection for adjustment disorder, for further development. [The AOJ is further developing the remanded claims for service connection for bilateral hearing loss and right eye injury residuals and will readjudicate them in a later decision.]

In December 2023, the Veteran filed a VA 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim, seeking service connection for panic attacks. In April 2024, the AOJ issued a supplemental claim decision, which implicitly found that new and relevant evidence had been received and denied the claim for service connection for adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood with insomnia and panic attacks based on the evidence of record at the time of that decision. Service connection for hypertension also was denied in the April 2024 rating decision, which constitutes an initial decision with respect to that matter.

In April 2024, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, and requested readjudication of the hypertension and adjustment disorder claims addressed in the April 2024 rating decision. In July 2024, with a notification date of July 12, 2024, the AOJ issued the supplemental claim decision on appeal, which found that new and relevant evidence had not been received. 

The matter concerning service connection for GERD, characterized as heartburn, was denied in another July 2024 rating decision, with a notification date of July 11, 2024, which constitutes an initial decision with respect to that matter. 

In a July 2024 VA Form 10182, the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. However, on August 21, 2024, the Veteran filed a second VA Form 10182, electing the Hearing docket. 

A Board hearing was held on February 4, 2025. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the respective July 2024 AOJ decisions on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or his representative at the hearing or within 90 days following the hearing. 38 C.F.R. § 20.302(a). If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the decisions on appeal and prior to the Board hearing, or (2) more than 90 days following the hearing, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.302(a), 20.801. 

The Veteran's VA Form 10182 indicated he was appealing both the April 2024 and July 2024 rating decisions on the hypertension and adjustment disorder claims.  In light of the Board's determination that new and relevant evidence has been received to warrant readjudication of both the psychiatric disorder and hypertension claims, the Board finds that there is no prejudice to the Veteran by finding the July 2024 rating decision is on appeal for both issues.

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the applications to readjudicate, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims for service connection on the merits, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Applications to Readjudicate

VA regulations applicable to adjudications under the AMA provide that if new and relevant evidence is presented or secured with respect to a supplemental claim, the AOJ will readjudicate the claim taking into consideration all of the evidence of record. If new and relevant evidence is not presented or secured, the AOJ will issue a decision finding that there was insufficient evidence to readjudicate the claim. In determining whether new and relevant evidence is presented or secured, VA will consider any VA treatment records reasonably identified by the claimant and any evidence received by VA after VA issued notice of a decision on the claim and while the evidentiary record was closed. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.

New evidence is evidence not previously part of the actual record before agency adjudicators. Relevant evidence is information that tends to prove or disprove a matter at issue in a claim and includes evidence that raises a theory of entitlement not previously addressed. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501(a)(1). New and relevant evidence received before VA issues its decision on a supplemental claim will be considered as having been filed in connection with the claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501(a)(2).

The evidentiary record for a supplemental claim includes all evidence received by VA before VA issues notice of a decision on the supplemental claim. For VA to readjudicate the claim, the evidentiary record must include new and relevant evidence that was not of record as of the date of notice of the prior decision. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501(b). Upon receipt of a substantially complete supplemental claim, VA's duty to assist in the gathering of evidence is triggered and includes any such assistance that may help secure new and relevant evidence to complete the supplemental claim application. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501(c).

Service connection for hypertension

The April 2024 rating decision denied the Veteran's claim for service connection for hypertension. The decision noted that there was no evidence of hypertension in service or a link between the disorder and service. In a May 2024 letter, a friend, and former roommate, of the Veteran relayed the Veteran's report that the Army wanted to keep him for a couple weeks more to monitor his blood pressure. See May 31, 2024 Buddy/Lay Statement. This evidence was not already of record and indicates the Veteran's hypertension may have had its onset during service. Thus, it may prove or disprove the nexus element of the claim. Thus, readjudication of the claim is warranted.

Service connection for a psychiatric disorder, to include adjustment disorder

The April 2024 rating decision also denied the claim for service connection for adjustment disorder. The decision noted that there was no evidence of the disorder in service or a link between the disorder and service. In a May 2024 letter, a friend, and former roommate, of the Veteran stated he witnessed the Veteran having panic attacks from 1968 to the mid-1970s. See May 31, 2024 Buddy/Lay Statement. This evidence was not already of record and indicates the Veteran's psychiatric disorder may have had its onset shortly after separation from service. Thus, it may prove or disprove the nexus element of the claim. Thus, readjudication of the claim is warranted.

REASONS FOR REMAND

Under the AMA, the Board may only remand an issue for the correction of (1) duty to assist errors occurring prior to the date of the AOJ decision on appeal (i.e., pre-decisional duty to assist errors) and (2)?AOJ errors in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty, if correction of such error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the appellant's claim.?See?38?C.F.R. §?20.802(a).

Service connection for hypertension

The issue of entitlement to service connection for hypertension is remanded to correct a duty to assist error that occurred prior to the July 2024 rating decision on appeal. While the AOJ provided the Veteran with a VA examination in December 2023, the AOJ did not obtain a medical opinion on the etiology of the disorder. However, based on the evidence associated with the claims file prior to the July 2024 rating decision, the Board finds that an opinion was required to determine whether his hypertension began in service or within one year thereafter or was otherwise related to service.

The Veteran reported at the December 2023 VA examination that he had elevated blood pressure readings at Fort Hood from 1966 to 1967 due to high stress levels. See December 26, 2023 C&P Exam. The May 2024 letter from a friend relaying the Veteran's report that the Army wanted to keep him for a couple more weeks to monitor his blood pressure suggests he may have developed hypertension prior to discharge from active duty service in February 1967. See May 31, 2024 Buddy/Lay Statement. While service treatment records from active duty service, including the separation examination report, do not show he had hypertension or elevated blood pressure readings, treatment records from Reserve service do, including a January 1985 examination report showing a blood pressure reading of 180/124 with a note that he had random elevated blood pressure. See January 17, 2023 STR - Medical. However, a February 1977 Reserve enlistment examination report already showed an elevated reading of 150/88. See January 17, 2023 Military Personnel Record. Thus, the record is unclear as to whether the Veteran's hypertension had its onset during active duty service or a period of active duty for training (ACDUTRA), or existed prior to Reserve service and, if so, whether it was aggravated during a period of ACDUTRA. Given the above, the AOJ should have obtained a medical opinion on the matter.

As the record indicated the Veteran's hypertension may have been incurred in or aggravated during a period of ACDUTRA, the AOJ also should have attempted to verify the dates of his periods of ACDUTRA. The record indicates the Veteran served in the Army Reserve from March 1977 to March 1989. See July 6, 2023 Military Personnel Record.

Service connection for a psychiatric disorder, to include adjustment disorder

The issue of entitlement to service connection for a psychiatric disorder, to include adjustment disorder, is remanded to correct a duty to assist error that occurred prior to the July 2024 rating decision on appeal. While the AOJ provided the Veteran with an examination in December 2023, the AOJ did not obtain a medical opinion in compliance with the prior remand. 

In the remand portion of the December 2023 decision, the Board requested an examination and opinion. The Board requested that an examiner clarify whether the Veteran had a personality disorder in service and provide opinions on whether his psychiatric disorder began in service or was otherwise related to service, or was caused or functionally worsened by his service-connected insomnia disorder. While the AOJ provided an examination in December 2023, the examiner only addressed the Veteran's insomnia disorder and did not respond to the Board's requests. The AOJ's failure to obtain a medical opinion in compliance with the prior remand directives is a pre-decisional duty to assist error and remand is warranted.

Service connection for GERD, to include as secondary to service-connected insomnia disorder

The issue of entitlement to service connection for GERD is remanded to correct a duty to assist error that occurred prior to the July 2024 rating decision on appeal. The AOJ obtained a June 2024 medical opinion. However, while the opinion did address the question of whether the GERD was caused by the service-connected insomnia disorder, the opinion did not address whether it was aggravated by the insomnia disorder or whether it began in or was related to service. 

The Veteran indicated his GERD began in service when his company commander started threatening him and accusing him of doing things and that it was secondary to his now service-connected insomnia disorder. See May 18, 2024 VA 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim. Thus, the AOJ should have requested a supplemental opinion that addressed the aggravation and service incurrence aspects of the claim. In that regard, the medical opinion of record was based on the Acceptable Clinical Evidence (ACE) process without an in-person or video telehealth examination, and the report of that examination reflects that the date of onset of the Veteran's GERD was unknown. See June 13, 2024 C&P Exam. Thus, to ensure an opinion based on an accurate history of the Veteran's GERD, the AOJ should have provided him with an examination to elicit his medical history.

Also, the Veteran essentially indicated his GERD was secondary to the claimed psychiatric disorder on appeal. As the remand of the above psychiatric disorder claim could affect the GERD claim, the Board finds that the claims are inextricably intertwined and a decision on that aspect of the GERD claim will be deferred.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Attempt to verify the Veteran's periods of ACDUTRA from March 1977 to March 1989. All verified dates of service and all responses received should be documented and associated with the claims file. If necessary, submit a request for information to the Defense Finance and Accounting Service (DFAS), to include copies of any leave and earning statements. Document all requests for information as well as all responses in the claims file.

2. Obtain a medical opinion on the etiology of the Veteran's hypertension. The examiner should review the claims file and note that review in the report.

(a.) The examiner should opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not the Veteran's hypertension had its onset during active duty service (from February 1966 to February 1967) or within one year thereafter or is otherwise causally related to service. The examiner should discuss the Veteran's report at the December 2023 VA examination he had elevated blood pressure at Fort Hood from 1966 to 1967 due to high stress levels; and the friend's statement relaying the Veteran's report the Army wanted to keep him for a couple more weeks to monitor his blood pressure. See December 26, 2023 C&P Exam; May 31, 2024 Buddy/Lay Statement.

(b.) The examiner should opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not the Veteran's hypertension was incurred in or aggravated during a period of ACDUTRA. The examiner should discuss the February 1977 Reserve enlistment examination report showing a blood pressure reading of 150/88 and January 1985 examination report showing a blood pressure reading of 180/124 with a note that the Veteran had random elevated blood pressure. See January 17, 2023 STR - Medical; January 17, 2023 Military Personnel Record.

The examiner should discuss the Veteran's service treatment records and VA medical records, including all prior VA examination records. The examiner should also discuss the Veteran's lay statements regarding the history and chronicity of symptomatology. The examiner should provide a complete rationale for all conclusions.

3. Schedule the Veteran for an examination to determine the nature and etiology of his adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood. The examiner should review the claims file and note that review in the report. The examiner should address the following:

(a.) The examiner should clarify whether the Veteran had a personality disorder in service. If the Veteran is found to have had a personality disorder in service, the examiner should opine whether a current psychiatric disorder was at least as likely as not superimposed on a personality disorder during service and resulted in additional disability.

(b.) The examiner should opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not the Veteran's psychiatric disorder began in service or is otherwise related to service.

(c.) The examiner should opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not the Veteran's psychiatric disorder was caused by or functionally worsened by a service-connected disability, to include insomnia disorder. In other words, would the Veteran's psychiatric disorder not have developed or been functionally worsened but for a service-connected disability?

The examiner should discuss the Veteran's service treatment records, including October 1966 request for an eye exam (noting in response to a congressional inquiry Veteran's complaints of recurrent bifrontal headaches occurring in the evening, excessive agitation, frequent loss of temper, insomnia and nervousness); undated 1966 letter from Veteran to Senator (indicating trouble with eyes hurting and bad nerves); December 1966 mental health consultation (diagnosing Veteran with passive aggressive personality, noting Veteran's referral to mental hygiene service by ophthalmology clinic due to persistent recurrent headaches, excessive agitation, insomnia, frequent loss of temper, and noting Veteran's report that he did not get along with men in his company, fights a great deal and feels hostile toward companions); and February 1967 separation examination report (noting passive aggressive personality in summary of defects and diagnoses).

The examiner should provide a complete rationale for all conclusions.

4. Schedule the Veteran for an examination to determine the etiology of his GERD. The examiner should review the claims file and note that review in the report. The examiner should address the following:

(a.) The examiner should opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not the Veteran's GERD had its onset during active service or is otherwise causally related to service. The examiner should discuss the Veteran's statement his GERD began in service when his company commander started threatening him and accusing him of doing things. See May 18, 2024 VA 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim.

(b.) The examiner should opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not the Veteran's GERD was caused by the service-connected insomnia disorder. 

(c.) The examiner should opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not the Veteran's GERD was aggravated by the service-connected insomnia disorder.

The examiner should discuss the Veteran's service treatment records and VA medical records, including all prior VA examination records. The examiner should also discuss the Veteran's lay statements regarding the history and chronicity of symptomatology. The examiner should provide a complete rationale for all conclusions.

 

 

Tiffany Dawson

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	J.W. Kim

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.