Citation Nr: A25034276
Decision Date: 04/14/25	Archive Date: 04/14/25

DOCKET NO. 230627-357183
DATE: April 14, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for cholelithiasis (claimed as stomach condition/pain) is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran, who is the appellant in this case, served on active duty from July 1976 to December 1977, and from December 1977 to December 1980.

This matter comes before the Board on appeal from an October 2022 rating decision by a VA Regional Office (RO), the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ), that denied the Veteran's claim for service connection for his cholelithiasis on the basis that there was no link between the Veteran's diagnosed cholelithiasis and military service.  

In June 2023, the Veteran initiated this appeal to the Board with the filing of a Decision Review Request (VA Form 10182), requesting direct review by a Veterans Law Judge on the evidence of record at the time of the October 2022 rating decision.? In a June 2023 correspondence, the Board acknowledged the appeal and informed the Veteran and his representative that the appeal had been placed on the Board's direct review docket.? Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the AOJ's rating decision on appeal, here as of October 28, 2022, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review.? 38?C.F.R. §?20.301.? If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the October 2022 decision, the Board did not consider it herein.? 38 C.F.R. §§?20.300, 20.301, 20.801.?? 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of service connection for cholelithiasis, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of that claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Entitlement to service connection for cholelithiasis is remanded.

The Veteran seeks service connection for cholelithiasis as secondary to his degenerative arthritis of the lumbosacral spine.  See September 2022 VA Form 21-526EZ.  More specifically, the Veteran contends that the medication he has taken for the last 20 years to treat his arthritis has caused him severe pain, and that he had to visit the emergency room for his stomach pain.  Id.  

In the October 2022 rating decision, the AOJ identified the following favorable findings: 1. The Veteran has been diagnosed with cholelithiasis; 2. The claimed primary disability of degenerative arthritis of the lumbosacral strain is service connected; 3. The Veteran's cholelithiasis disability is a chronic disease which may be presumptively linked to his military service; and 4. The Veteran has sufficient service to meet the minimum requirements for service connection.  The Board is bound by these favorable findings as they are not rebutted by evidence that identifies a clear and unmistakable error in the favorable findings.  38 U.S.C. § 5104A. 

Under the AMA, the Board may only?remand?an issue for the correction of (1) duty to assist errors occurring prior to the date of the AOJ decision on appeal (i.e., pre-decisional duty to assist errors) and (2) AOJ errors in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty, if correction of such error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the appellant's claim.? See?38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

Here, remand is necessary to obtain an adequate medical opinion.? See 38 U.S.C. § 5103A (d); 38?C.F.R. §§ 3.159(c)(4),?20.802.? When VA undertakes to provide an examination or obtain an opinion, it must ensure that the examination or opinion is adequate.? See Barr v. Nicholson, 21?Vet. App.?303, 311-12 (2007).?

In October 2022, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination for his stomach disability. The examiner opined that it was less likely than not that the Veteran's cholelithiasis was caused by his service-connected degenerative arthritis of the lumbosacral spine, explaining "[h]is OPTRs are silent for a chronic stomach (gastric) disability/diagnosis. Veteran has a known diagnosis of cholelithiasis (gallstones) and has infrequent episodes of biliary colic. Cholelithiasis is not due to L-S spine degenerative arthritis or medications used to treat it." This opinion is conclusory, fails to consider the lay statements of the Veteran that he noticed when he takes Naproxen regularly, his stomach pain gets worse, and failed to discuss if the Veteran's cholelithiasis was aggravated by his service-connected degenerative arthritis of the lumbar spine. See Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 124-25 (2007) (stating that a medical opinion must support its conclusion with an analysis that the Board can weigh, and a mere conclusion by a medical doctor is insufficient to allow the Board to make an informed decision); Dalton v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 23, 39 (2007) (finding that an examiner impermissibly ignored the appellant's lay assertions that he had sustained a back injury in service); El-Amin v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 136, 140-41 (2013) (stating that a secondary service connection medical opinion was inadequate because it did not discuss aggravation). The Board assigns this medical opinion no probative value.  

To the extent that the RO failed to request a secondary service connection opinion that directed the examiner to opine as to whether the Veteran's service-connected degenerative arthritis aggravated his cholelithiasis, that is also a pre-decisional duty to assist error requiring a remand to correct.  See September 2022 Exam Request; 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).  

A remand is required to obtain a new opinion addressing the relationship, if any, between the Veteran's service-connected degenerative arthritis of the lumbar spine and his cholelithiasis.  38?C.F.R. § 20.802(a).          

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Refer the claims file to an appropriately qualified clinician for preparation of a medical opinion regarding the Veteran's cholelithiasis.  The clinician must review the claims file and indicate such review has occurred.  No additional examination of the Veteran is necessary unless the reviewing clinician determines otherwise.  Although an independent review of the claims file is required, the Board specifically calls the clinician's attention to the following: 

(a.) The Veteran's lay statements that when he takes Naproxen regularly, he notices his stomach pain gets worse, and that he must take Omeprazole daily when he is taking Naproxen.  See July 18, 2019, Primary Care OPT Comprehensive Note. 

(b.) The recommendation of Dr. D.L., M.D., that the Veteran avoid narcotics for pain relief, as that can worsen the Veteran's cholelithiasis symptoms.  See September 6, 2022, Addendum.   

The clinician is asked to provide a response to the following: 

a.	Is the Veteran's cholelithiasis at least as likely as not caused by his service-connected degenerative arthritis of the lumbar spine, to include medication to treat that condition?

b.	Is the Veteran's cholelithiasis at least as likely as not aggravated by his service-connected degenerative arthritis of the lumbar spine, to include medication to treat that condition?

Any requested opinion should be supported by a rationale.  In rendering any opinion, the clinician is advised that the Veteran is competent to report his symptoms and history.  The clinician is not to improperly discount the Veteran's lay statements or mistakenly rely?on an absence of medical evidence in the record to support his or her conclusions. 

If the clinician cannot provide an opinion without resorting to speculation, they should state whether the need to speculate is caused by a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (i.e. no one could respond given medical science and the known facts) or by a deficiency in the record or the examiner (i.e. additional facts are required, or the examiner does not have the needed knowledge or training). 

 

 

Luke Pelican

Acting Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Pawlowski, E. Jennifer

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.