Citation Nr: A25034823
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 240520-440808
DATE: April 15, 2025

ORDER

The claim for an increased rating for nonpainful right shoulder scars is denied. 

REMANDED

1. Service connection for left shoulder pain is remanded. 

2. Entitlement to an increased rating for right shoulder replacement, also claimed as right shoulder pain), which currently has a 30 percent rating effective October 23, 2023, is remanded.

3. Service connection for back pain is remanded. 

4. Service connection for left knee pain is remanded. 

5. Service connection for right knee pain is remanded. 

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran's nonpainful right shoulder scars manifest with the criteria for a noncompensable rating. 

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for an increased rating for nonpainful right shoulder scars have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1-4.14, 4.21, 4.40, 4.45, 4.46, 4.59, 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 7802, 7804.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran had active service from September 1994 to September 1998. 

This matter comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from February and March 2024 rating decisions of the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ). In May 2024, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement (NOD)) and elected directed review. Thus, the Board may only consider the evidence of record before the AOJ at the time of its decision on the issues on appeal. See 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300(a), 301. The Board will not consider evidence received after the AOJ decision unless the claimant files a timely request for a Board hearing or an opportunity to submit additional evidence on the NOD (VA Form 10182). 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. The appellant has not filed such a request. If additional evidence was submitted after the AOJ decision, the Board will not consider it. If the appellant would like VA to consider any evidence that was added to the claims file that the Board could not consider, the appellant may file a supplemental claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a supplemental claim are included with this decision. See also Cook v. McDonough, 36 Vet. App. 175 (2023).

The claim for an increased rating for nonpainful right shoulder scars is denied. 

The Veteran contends that he is entitled to a higher rating for his right shoulder scars. He currently has a noncompensable rating effective October 23, 2023. 

Disability evaluations are determined by the application of the facts presented to VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities (Rating Schedule) at 38 C.F.R. Part 4. The percentage ratings contained in the Rating Schedule represent, as far as can be practicably determined, the average impairment in earning capacity resulting from diseases and injuries incurred or aggravated during military service and the residual conditions in civilian occupations. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.321(a), 4.1. The evaluation of the same disability or same manifestations under various diagnoses is to be avoided. This is otherwise known as pyramiding, which is prohibited. 38 C.F.R. § 4.14. See Esteban v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 259, 261-62 (1994).

Where there is a question as to which of two evaluations shall be applied, the higher rating will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that evaluation. Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7. Any reasonable doubt regarding the degree of disability should be resolved in favor of the claimant. 38 C.F.R. § 4.3.

The rating criteria for scars other than on the head, face or neck are outlined in Diagnostic Codes (DCs) 7801 through 7805 in the VA Rating Schedule. 

Under DC 7802, for burn scars or scars due to other causes, not of the head, face, or neck, that are not associated with underlying soft tissue damage, areas of 929 square centimeters or greater would warrant a 10 percent rating. 

Under DC 7804, one or two painful or unstable scars warrants a 10 percent rating. If a scar is neither painful nor unstable, a noncompensable evaluation is warranted.  

In March 2024, the Veteran was afforded a VA exam regarding his right shoulder scars. The examiner noted the Veteran has two scars from his 2021 right shoulder replacement surgery. They were noted as being neither painful nor unstable and with no underlying soft tissue damage. The scars measured 12 by .5 centimeters and 3 by .5 centimeters with a combined total area of 7.5 square centimeters. 

Thus, based on the number and characteristics of the Veteran's right shoulder scars, they warrant a noncompensable rating. The claim for an increased rating for nonpainful right shoulder scars is therefore denied. 

REASONS FOR REMAND

Service connection for left shoulder pain and entitlement to an increased rating for right shoulder replacement, also claimed as right shoulder pain), which currently has a 30 percent rating effective October 23, 2023, is remanded.

The Veteran contends he is entitled to an increased rating for his right shoulder replacement. It currently has a 30 percent effective October 23, 2023. 

The Veteran also contends he is entitled to service connection for left shoulder pain. In his October 2023 claim, he noted that "now my other shoulder hurts likely from compensating." In October 2023, the VA sent the Veteran correspondence to identify which shoulder he was claiming due to pain. In November 2023, the Veteran responded that his right shoulder had been replaced and his left shoulder hurts, possibly due to compensation. 

In March 2024, the Veteran was afforded a VA exam regarding his right shoulder. The examiner did not include any information regarding the Veteran's left shoulder and noted it was an unclaimed joint. However, the Veteran clearly intended for his left shoulder to be included in his evaluation. 

Remand is therefore warranted to cure this pre-decisional duty to assist error.

Service connection for back pain and bilateral knee pain is remanded. 

The Veteran contends that he is entitled to service connection for back and bilateral knee pain. Specifically, he reports that his knees hurt from such in-service activities as hiking and carrying packs and crawling. He also reports his back hurts from hiking and carrying packs and other weight out in front of me and from a fall off a repel tower. That in-service fall was the basis for service-connection for the Veteran's right shoulder replacement. 

Service connection may be granted for disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303. The three-element test for service connection requires evidence of: (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166 -67 (Fed. Cir. 2004). Service connection may also be granted for a disability that is proximately due to, or aggravated by, service-connected disease or injury. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310.

In a service treatment record entry from March 1998, the Veteran reported pain in his knees and back. The Veteran provided a statement from a fellow servicemember, who attested to the Veteran's in-service injury. See Correspondence of November 13, 2023. 

Thus, the Board finds that a remand is warranted to cure a pre-decisional duty to assist error as the AOJ did not afford the Veteran a VA examination in connection with these claims. An examination is required when there is (1) competent evidence of a current disability, (2) evidence establishing an in-service event, injury or disease, (3) an indication that the current disability may be related to the in-service event, but (4) insufficient evidence to decide the case. McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 83 (2006).

Here, the Board finds the first McLendon element, the evidence of a current disability, is satisfied by the Veteran's competent statements and that of his fellow servicemember. The Board finds the second McLendon element, establishing an in-service event, injury or disease, is satisfied by the Veteran's in-service fall. With respect to the third McLendon element, the aforementioned evidence generally indicates the Veteran's current complaints of back and bilateral knee pain may be related to his in-service fall. For the fourth McLendon element, the Board finds that without an adequate examination and opinion, there is insufficient evidence to decide the case. As such, the Board finds a remand for an examination is warranted for a full and fair adjudication of these issues. 

These matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Refer the Veteran for a shoulder examination regarding both shoulders. The examiner must determine whether he has a current left shoulder disability, including the nature and etiology of any such disability. The examiner is asked to opine whether any left shoulder disability was at least as likely as not caused by his service, to include his service-connected right shoulder disability. As a proper evaluation of the Veteran's right shoulder disability is inextricably intertwined with the level of disability, if any, in his left shoulder, an updated examination regarding his right shoulder is also required.

All pertinent evidence, including both lay and medical, should be considered in rending these opinions. If an opinion cannot be given without resorting to speculation, the examiner should explain why and state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training). A rationale should be provided for any opinion offered.

2. Refer the Veteran for a back examination. The examiner must determine whether he has a current back disability, including the nature and etiology of any such disability. The examiner is asked to opine whether any back disability was at least as likely as not caused by his in-service fall from a repel tower.

All pertinent evidence, including both lay and medical, should be considered in rending these opinions. If an opinion cannot be given without resorting to speculation, the examiner should explain why and state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training). A rationale should be provided for any opinion offered.

3. Refer the Veteran for a knee examination. The examiner must determine whether he has a current knee disability, including the nature and etiology of any such disability. The examiner is asked to opine whether any knee disability was at least as likely as not caused by his in-service fall from a repel tower.

All pertinent evidence, including both lay and medical, should be considered in rending these opinions. If an opinion cannot be given without resorting to speculation, the examiner should explain why and state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training). A rationale should be provided for any opinion offered.

 

 

Ann K. Minami

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	H.D. Partridge

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.