Citation Nr: A25034379
Decision Date: 04/14/25	Archive Date: 04/14/25

DOCKET NO. 240717-456993
DATE: April 14, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for diabetic neuropathy of the left upper extremity (claimed as peripheral neuropathy) is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for diabetic neuropathy of the left lower extremity (claimed as peripheral neuropathy) is denied. 

Entitlement to service connection for diabetic neuropathy of the right lower extremity (claimed as peripheral neuropathy) is denied. 

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for cardiovascular arterial disease (CAD) is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for carpal tunnel of the right wrist (claimed as peripheral neuropathy) is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran's diabetic neuropathy of the left upper extremity is less likely than not related to the Veteran's active-duty service.

2. The Veteran's diabetic neuropathy of the left lower extremity is less likely than not related to the Veteran's active-duty service.

3. The Veteran's diabetic neuropathy of the right lower extremity is less likely than not related to the Veteran's active-duty service.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for service connection for diabetic neuropathy of the left upper extremity have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

2. The criteria for service connection for diabetic neuropathy of the left lower extremity have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

3. The criteria for service connection for diabetic neuropathy of the right lower extremity have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Air Force from June 1977 to January 1981.

The Appeals Modernization Act (AMA) creates a new framework for Veterans dissatisfied with VA's decision on their claim to seek review. The AMA became effective on February 19, 2019. The AMA modernized review system applies to all claims for which VA issues a notice of an initial decision on or after the February 19, 2019 effective date of the modernized review system.

These matters come before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a May 2024 rating decision issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In the July 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) (NOD), the Veteran elected the direct review option. 

For the Direct Lane docket, the Board's review is limited to the evidentiary record at the time of the RO decision on appeal. See Andrews v. McDonough, 34 Vet. App. 151, (2021). For this case, that means the Board cannot consider evidence submitted after May 15, 2024.

The Board interprets the Veteran's selection of the Direct Review option with an indication of a decision being rendered within 365 days as well as statements of record as reflecting an intent to have this matter reviewed in an expeditious manner, thus, the Board will proceed to adjudicate the claim finding that the Veteran does not wish to change Board dockets under Williams v. McDonough, 37?Vet. App.?305 (2024).

Service Connection

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service. 38?U.S.C. §?1110; 38?C.F.R. §?3.303(a). To establish a right to compensation for a present disability, a Veteran must show: (1) the existence of a present disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service-the so-called "nexus" requirement. Holton v. Shinseki, 557 F.3d 1362, 1366 (Fed. Cir. 2009) (quoting Shedden v. Principi, 38 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004)). The absence of any one element will result in the denial of service connection.

1. Entitlement to service connection for diabetic neuropathy of the left upper extremity (claimed as peripheral neuropathy) is denied.

2. Entitlement to service connection for diabetic neuropathy of the left lower extremity (claimed as peripheral neuropathy) is denied.

3. Entitlement to service connection for diabetic neuropathy of the right lower extremity (claimed as peripheral neuropathy) is denied.

The Veteran contends that his left upper extremity and bilateral lower extremity neuropathy is due to exposure to trichloroethylene during his active-duty service. The Board finds the elements of service connection have not been met.

With respect to current disability, in the May 2024 rating decision the AOJ made a favorable finding that the Veteran has a current diagnosis of diabetic neuropathy of the upper left extremity and bilateral lower extremities. Accordingly, the Board finds the Veteran has a current disability.

With respect to in-service incurrence, the AOJ made a favorable finding in the May 2024 rating decision that the Veteran's exposure to trichloroethylene was conceded based on his military occupational specialty as a non-destructive inspection specialist. Accordingly, the Board finds the in-service incurrence element has been met.

The remaining question is whether there is a nexus between the Veteran's current disability and in-service exposure. The record contains a negative nexus opinion.

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination for his neuropathy in May 2024. At that time, the examiner opined the Veteran's diabetic neuropathy was less likely than not related to toxic exposures while on active-duty service. Regarding the Veteran's upper left extremity, the examiner stated the Veteran's diabetic neuropathy of the left upper extremity was a result of prolonged blood glucose, not from toxic exposure. Regarding his bilateral lower extremities, the examiner stated the Veteran has a clear history of diabetic neuropathy which is a condition related to the Veteran's diabetes, rather than the result of toxic exposure. Additionally, the Veterans private treatment records from November 2020 indicate the Veteran suffered from diabetic neuropathy due to longstanding type 1 diabetes. The Veteran is not service connected for diabetes.

Accordingly, the Board finds that a service-connection for diabetic neuropathy of the left upper extremity and bilateral lower extremities has not been established, and the Veteran's claims are denied.

REASONS FOR REMAND

Under the AMA, the Board must remand a claim to correct an error by AOJ to satisfy its duty to assist the Veteran under 38?U.S.C. §?5103A, if the error occurred prior to the AOJ decision on appeal. 38?U.S.C. §?5103A (f)(2)(A); 38?C.F.R. §?20.802 (a). The Board may also remand a claim to correct any other AOJ error "in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty, if correction of the error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating" the claim. 38?C.F.R. §?20.802 (a).

1. Entitlement to service connection for cardiovascular arterial disease (CAD) is remanded.

The Veteran contends that his CAD is related to exposure to trichloroethylene during his active-duty service.

In the May 2024 rating decision, the AOJ made a favorable finding that the Veteran has a current diagnosis of CAD. The AOJ also made a favorable finding that the Veteran was exposed to trichloroethylene while on active-duty service. Thus, the Board finds that the Veteran has a current disability, and the in-service incurrence element has been met.

The remaining question is whether there is a nexus between the Veteran's current disability and toxic exposure. 

In a May 2025 VA examination, the examiner opined the Veteran's CAD was less likely than not related to the Veteran's in-service exposure, stating that current medical literature fails to show this condition is the result of exposure. However, in February 2024 the Veteran provided a medical article abstract which indicated exposure to trichloroethylene is a risk factor for developing cardiovascular problems. The VA examiner did not address this medical evidence in formulating their opinion. The Board finds this is a pre-decisional duty to assist error and remand is warranted. 

2. Entitlement to service connection for carpal tunnel of the right wrist (claimed as peripheral neuropathy) is remanded.

Initially, the Board notes that the Veteran filed a service connection claim for upper right extremity peripheral neuropathy; however, the record indicates the Veteran has a diagnosis for right wrist carpal tunnel disorder. As noted in?Clemons, a Veteran may not be competent to diagnosis his or her particular disability. See?Clemons?v. Shinseki,?23?Vet. App.?1?(2009). Thus, VA will not limit the scope of a claim solely to the diagnosis as reported by the Veteran. Accordingly, the Board finds it appropriate to recharacterize the Veteran's claim as a claim for service connection for carpal tunnel of the right wrist.

In the May 2024 rating decision, the AOJ made a favorable finding that the Veteran has a diagnosis of right wrist carpal tunnel and conceded that the Veteran had exposure to trichloroethylene while on active-duty service. Thus, the Board finds that the Veteran has a current disability and in the in-service incurrence element has been met.

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in May 2024 for his claim of upper extremity neuropathy. Regarding the Veteran's right upper extremity, the examiner found the Veteran had a diagnosis of carpal tunnel rather than neuropathy. In the accompanying medical opinion, the examiner opined the Veteran's left upper extremity neuropathy was less likely than not related to the Veteran's in-service toxic exposure; however, the examiner did not provide an opinion regarding the Veteran's diagnosed right wrist carpal tunnel. The Board finds this is a pre-decisional duty to assist error and remand is warranted.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination to determine the nature, onset, and etiology of his cardiovascular arterial disease and right wrist carpal tunnel. Any and all studies, tests, and evaluations deemed necessary by the examiners should be performed.

The Veteran is competent to attest to observable events and symptomatology and such reports must be acknowledged and considered in formulating any opinion. If the Veteran's reports are discounted, the examiner should provide a reason for doing so.

The examiners should address the following:

CARDIOVASCULAR ARTERIAL DISEASE

(a.) Whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's cardiovascular arterial disease manifested in service, within one year of separation from service, or is otherwise related to service, including any in-service toxic exposures. The examiner must consider the total potential exposure; and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities.

The examiner must address the medical literature provided by the Veteran which indicates that exposure to trichloroethylene is a risk factor for developing cardiovascular problems.

RIGHT WRIST CARPAL TUNNEL

(b.) Whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's right wrist carpal tunnel manifested in service, within one year of separation from service, or is otherwise related to service including any in-service toxic exposures. The examiner must consider the total potential exposure; and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities.

 

GAYLE STROMMEN

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Risley, H.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.