Citation Nr: A25034886
Decision Date: 04/16/25	Archive Date: 04/16/25

DOCKET NO. 250103-497368
DATE: April 16, 2025

ORDER

Service connection for migraine headaches, to include as secondary to service-connected disabilities, is granted.

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 50 percent for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to a finding of total disability based on individual unemployability due to service-connected disabilities (TDIU) is remanded

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran's migraine headache condition is aggravated by his service-connected disabilities.

2. Throughout the period on appeal, the Veteran's PTSD was manifested by symptoms which most closely approximate occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity; depressed mood, anxiety, chronic sleep impairment, and mild memory loss were present.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for migraine headaches have been met. 38 U.S.C. § 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.310. 

2. Throughout the period on appeal, the criteria for a rating in excess 50 percent for PTSD have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1 4.7, 4.21, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Marine Corps from January 1966 to November 1967. This case comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a January 2024 rating decision (PTSD) and April 2024 rating decision (headaches) issued by an agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) of the United States Department of Veterans Affairs (VA).

In the January 2025 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal, the Veteran elected the Evidence Submission docket, appealing the above issue. The Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the AOJ decision on appeal corresponding to the issue on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or his attorney with, or within 90 days from receipt of, the VA Form 10182. 38 C.F.R. § 20.303. The Veteran timely submitted additional evidence.

The Board notes that it may not decide an appeal before the deadline for requesting a docket switch has elapsed. Williams v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 305 (2024).?However, this appeal has been advanced on the docket due to the Veteran's age, and in January 2025, the Veteran submitted a signed statement waiving his right to select a different Board review option.

While the issue of entitlement to TDIU was not decided in the January 2024 and April 2024 rating decisions, a claim for a TDIU is part of an increased rating claim when such claim is expressly raised by the Veteran or reasonably raised by the record. Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447 (2009). The Veteran did expressly raise TDIU claim due, in part, to his PTSD, so a claim for a TDIU is pending as part of his increased rating claim for PTSD. See Harper v. Wilkie, 30 Vet. App. 356 (2018).

With respect to the claims decided herein, VA has met all statutory and regulatory notice and duty-to-assist provisions. See 38 U.S.C. §§ 5100, 5102, 5103, 5103A, 5106, 5107, 5126; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.156(a), 3.159, 3.326. Neither the Veteran nor his representative has advanced any procedural arguments in relation to VA's duty to notify and assist. Scott v. McDonald, 789 F.3d 1375 (Fed. Cir. 2015).

Service Connection - Headaches

Service connection is awarded for disability that is the result of a disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131. Service connection requires competent evidence showing: (1) the existence of a present disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F. 3d 1163 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

Secondary service connection may be granted for a disability that is proximately due to, or aggravated by, a service-connected disease or injury. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310.

The Veteran contends that his currently diagnosed migraine headaches have been caused or aggravated by his service-connected disabilities, specifically sleep apnea, tinnitus, and PTSD.

The Veteran's service treatment records (STRs) do not contain any symptoms, complaints, or treatment related to migraine headaches; and the Veteran has not argued that his symptoms began during active duty service.

The Veteran has reported his migraine headache disorder began in 2005 or 2009. He receives care for migraine headaches at VA medical facilities and through private providers. 

In April 2023, Veteran sought emergency care at the VA and was diagnosed with a vestibular migraine.

In July 2023, his private treatment provider prescribed him medication for headaches and recommended that the Veteran focus on improving his sleep and regularly using his CPAP machine.

In an August 2023 VA migraine examination, the examiner noted the Veteran reported he was diagnosed with headaches in 2005, which was a year before he was diagnosed with PTSD. The examiner opined that it was less likely than not the Veteran's migraines were related to PTSD or tinnitus because migraines were diagnosed before PTSD and there is no medical evidence migraines are caused by his tinnitus. This opinion is inadequate as it does not address aggravation and does not address whether migraines were caused or aggravated by service-connected sleep apnea. It also fails to discuss whether psychiatric symptoms were present prior to an official diagnosis.

In September 2023, VA records indicate the Veteran complained of more frequent headaches. He reported 5 to 6 hours of sleep daily, and his medical provider advised him that sometimes lack of sleep could cause headaches.

In a December 2023 VA Toxic Exposure Risk Activities (TERA) medical opinion, the examiner opined that no medical literature supported headaches as a complication, symptom, or condition that resulted from Veteran's TERA during military service.

A March 2024 VA addendum medical opinion focused on a negative opinion pertaining to vertigo causing migraines. Within that opinion, the examiner listed other possible causes of migraines, which included sleep changes. The examiner stated missing sleep or getting too much sleep can trigger migraines in some people. The opinion did not clearly answer whether or not the Veteran's migraines were caused or aggravated by a service-connected disability, and the Veteran is not service connected for vertigo.

VA treatment records show the Veteran has been diagnosed with insomnia and a chronic sleep impairment related to his PTSD. These records are discussed more below.

In November 2024, the Veteran stated that his doctor told him the lack of oxygen from sleep apnea can contribute to his headaches. He stated that anxiety, frustration, and stress worsen start his headaches.

The Veteran's representative submitted two medical journal articles on the comorbidity between headaches and mood/anxiety disorders that suggest psychological stress can be a central contributor to headaches.

In a private December 2024 medical opinion, the examiner reviewed the Veteran's medical records and opined that it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's PTSD symptoms "contributed to the development and progression" of his headaches as they have resulted in chronic pain and frequent episodes of stress and tension, which trigger and exacerbate a headache. The Board finds this opinion is inadequate as it conflates causation and aggravation.

The Board finds no medical opinion of record clearly answers the question as to whether or not the Veteran's headaches are caused or aggravated by his service-connected disabilities. However, the Veteran's private provider in July 2023 and September 2023 recommended that the Veteran improve his sleep as they were concerned lack of sleep could be contributing to Veteran's headache symptoms. 

Furthermore, the Veteran has stated that he notices a worsening of his headaches symptoms when his psychiatric symptoms are present or appear. While the Veteran is not considered competent to opine that his headaches are related to service-connected disabilities as opposed to other factors, he is competent to report a directly observed cause and effect relationship. See Kahana v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 428 (2011).

Thus, the Board finds that the evidence is at least in equipoise as to whether the Veteran's headaches, as a free-standing secondary disability, are related to his service-connected PTSD and/or sleep apnea. In this regard, there is no adequate medical opinion relating his service-connected disabilities to his headaches, but the medical shows the Veteran has chronic sleep impairment due to his PTSD and his sleep apnea and his treating providers suggest that Veteran's sleep impairments are worsening his headaches. Based on the above evidence, and resolving any reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Board finds that the evidence is in equipoise and the benefit of the doubt is given to the Veteran. Accordingly, secondary service connection for headaches is warranted.

Increased Ratings - PTSD

Disabilities, which assigns ratings based on the average impairment of earning capacity resulting from a service-connected disability. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. Part 4. Where there is a question as to which of two evaluations shall be applied, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating. Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7.  After careful consideration of the evidence, any reasonable doubt remaining is resolved in favor of the Veteran. 38 C.F.R. § 4.3. Pertinent regulations do not require that all cases show all findings specified by the Rating Schedule, but that findings sufficiently characteristic to identify the disease and the resulting disability and, above all, coordination of rating with impairment of function, will be expected in all cases. 38 C.F.R. § 4.21.

To evaluate the level of disability and any changes in condition, it is necessary to consider the complete medical history of the Veteran's condition. Schafrath v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 589 (1991). Separate evaluations may be assigned for separate periods of time based on the facts found. In other words, the evaluations may be staged. Staged ratings are appropriate for any rating claim when the factual findings show distinct time periods during the appeal period where the service-connected disability exhibits symptoms that would warrant different ratings. Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007).

PTSD is rated under the general rating formula for mental disorders 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411. From July 11, 2012, to April 1, 2015, the Veteran's PTSD is currently rated as 30 percent disabling. 

A 30 percent rating is assigned for occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks (although generally functioning satisfactorily, with routine behavior, self-care, and conversation normal), due to such symptoms as: depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks (weekly or less often), chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss (such as forgetting names, directions, recent events). 38 C.F.R. § 4.130.

A 50 percent rating is assigned for occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to such symptoms as: flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short- and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships. 38 C.F.R. § 4.130.

A 70 percent rating is assigned for occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a worklike setting); inability to establish and maintain effective relationships. 38 C.F.R. § 4.130.

A 100 percent rating is assigned for total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name. 38 C.F.R. § 4.130.

The U.S. Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit has noted the "symptom-driven nature" of the General Rating Formula and that "a Veteran may only qualify for a given disability rating under § 4.130 by demonstrating the particular symptoms associated with that percentage, or others of similar severity, frequency, and duration." Vasquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 116 (Fed. Cir. 2013). The Federal Circuit has explained that "symptomatology should be the fact-finder's primary focus when deciding entitlement to a given disability rating." Id. at 117.

The psychiatric symptoms listed in the above rating criteria are not exclusive but are examples of typical symptoms for the listed percentage ratings. Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436 (2002). However, if the evidence shows that a veteran has symptoms or effects that cause occupational or social impairment equivalent to what would be caused by the symptoms listed in the diagnostic code, the appropriate equivalent rating will be assigned. Id. at 443.

The Veteran receives regular mental health treatment from the VA, and is on medication for PTSD and major depressive disorder (MDD). The Veteran has generally reported his symptoms as unchanged and consisting of a chronic sleep impairment, insomnia, depressed and anxious mood.

In a March 2022 VA mental health treatment plan note, the Veteran was noted to have no suicidal ideations (SI).

February 2023 VA records indicate the Veteran reported he was "so-so" and sleeping on and off. He was compliant with medication. He described his sleep as restless some nights and having nightmares and cold sweats. His mood was described as depressed and anxious. He endorsed loneliness or isolation. He denied SI or homicidal ideations (HI). He was dressed casually, was cooperative/open, his speech was clear/coherent and spontaneous, his mood was dysphoric (depressed/anxious/irritable), affect was congruent, thought processes was relevant, coherent, he had no delusions, hallucinations. His judgment was within normal limits, and his insight was good. He was oriented to person, place, and time. His diagnoses were listed as PTSD, MDD, and insomnia.

July 2023 VA records indicate the Veteran complained of not sleeping well due to "too much on mind," and Vietnam flashbacks. He reported depressed mood and some anxiety. He still didn't like crowded places. He was compliant with medication. He was dressed casually, was cooperative/open, his speech was clear/coherent and spontaneous, his mood was dysphoric (depressed/anxious/irritable), affect was congruent, thought processes was relevant, coherent, he had no delusions, hallucinations. His judgment was within normal limits, and his insight was good. He was oriented to person, place, and time.

In a December 2023 VA PTSD examination, he was dressed casually and neatly groomed, was cooperative/open, his speech was normal, his mood was depressed and anxious, affect was appropriate, thought processes was relevant, coherent, he had no delusions, hallucinations. His judgment was within normal limits, and his insight was good. He was oriented to person, place, and time. He denied SI or HI. The examiner noted the Veteran's diagnosis of PTSD and checked his functional limitations as occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity. The examiner listed his symptoms as depressed mood, anxiety, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss, and disturbances of motivation and mood. 

The private December 2024 medical opinion included a list and summary of Veterans PTSD treatment. The Veteran reported he struggles with poor sleep, difficulty concentrating, and symptoms of depressed mood and anxiety. The examiner concluded that his ability to complete daily tasks was limited. The examiner did not otherwise include information on his PTSD not already in the record or note any new symptoms.

Based on the Veteran's overall symptomatology and the resulting impairment stemming therefrom, the Board finds that the disability picture presented throughout the period on appeal does not most closely approximates the level of severity contemplated by the 70 percent rating for mental disorders, and the 50 percent rating is most appropriate. 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.7, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411. Medical providers never noted abnormal or inappropriate behaviors, and the Veteran reported some isolation, chronic sleep impairment, depression, anxiety. Throughout the period on appeal, there is no indication in the medical records, or in his testimony, that his symptoms were severe enough to cause occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas. His insight, judgement, and thought were normal, and the Veteran was able to take care of his activities of daily living and keep up with appointments. He has had no SI. Thus, a 70 percent rating, or higher, is not warranted prior to May 30, 2023. Considering the record as a whole, the Veteran's deficiencies due to his psychiatric disorder more closely approximates the 50 percent rating. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b).

REASONS FOR REMAND

The above grant of service connection for migraine headaches gives rise to an error fulfilling a statutory and regulatory duty; the denial of service connection below did not lead to assigment of an initial disability evaluation.  The rating for migraines is inextricably intertwined with the question of entitlement to TDIU, which is dependent upon the degree of functional impairment, reflected by the assigned ratings, from service-connected disabilities

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Take appropriate action to implement the above grant of service connection, to include assignment of an initial evaluation.

2. Then, adjudicate the question of entitlement to TDIU on the basis of an accurate legal and factual basis. 

 

WILLIAM H. DONNELLY

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	L.M. Barletta

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.