Citation Nr: A25034236
Decision Date: 04/14/25	Archive Date: 04/14/25

DOCKET NO. 201221-132048
DATE: April 14, 2025

ORDER

The motion alleging clear and unmistakable error (CUE) in the evaluation assigned for status post hysterectomy with bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, residual of endometriosis, is dismissed without prejudice to refiling.

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran has not alleged CUE in a specific VA decision or set forth the alleged errors of fact or law in that decision, the legal or factual basis for such allegations, and why the result would have been manifestly different but for the alleged error.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

Because the pleading requirements for a motion for revision of a decision based on CUE have not been met, the motion must be dismissed without prejudice to refiling.  38 U.S.C. § 5109A; 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(a).

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty with the United States Navy from May 1981 to September 1982.

This case comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an April 2020 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO), which is the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) in this matter.

In May 2020, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR), and requested review of the April 2020 rating decision.  In October 2020, the AOJ issued the HLR decision on appeal, which considered the evidence of record at the time of the prior April 2020 decision.  

In the December 2020 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Evidence Submission docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the April 2020 AOJ decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or her representative with, or within 90 days from receipt of, the VA Form 10182.  38 C.F.R. § 20.303.  The Board acknowledges that the Veteran's attorney submitted additional evidence, including medical treatment records and medical literature about endometriosis.  However, in CUE cases, the record in the appeal to be reviewed is the record and law that existed at the time of the prior rating decision, not additional evidence submitted or otherwise obtained after the fact.  A finding of CUE must be based solely on the evidence of record at the time of the decision in question.  See Russell v. Principi, 3 Vet. App. 310, 313-14 (1992).  Therefore, the Board may not consider this additional evidence in connection with the Veteran's CUE motion.

Additionally, it appears that on her VA Form 20-0996 Request for HLR, the Veteran raised the issue of entitlement to a separate 50 percent rating for endometriosis and residual of status post hysterectomy secondary to endometriosis.  In the April 2020 rating decision on appeal, the AOJ addressed only the Veteran's motion alleging CUE with respect to the evaluation of status post hysterectomy with bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, residual of endometriosis; the AOJ did not address a claim for an increased rating.  In this regard, the Board notes that because a CUE claim involves an allegation of an error with some degree of specificity, a veteran's assertion of a particular clear and unmistakable error by the RO constitutes a distinct claim.  Andre v. Principi, 301 F.3d 1354 (Fed. Cir. 2002).  If the Veteran would like VA to consider a claim of entitlement to a separate 50 percent rating for endometriosis and residual of status post hysterectomy secondary to endometriosis, she is invited to submit such a claim to the AOJ. 

Finally, the Board observes that there may be a missed issue related to a VA Form 9 submitted in August 2016.  By way of background, a September 2012 Board decision granted service connection for endometriosis.  In an October 2012 rating decision, the RO implemented the September 2012 Board decision and granted service connection and assigned a 50 percent rating for status post hysterectomy with bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, residual of endometriosis.  In January 2013, the Veteran submitted an NOD seeking a separate rating for endometriosis.  In October 2014, the RO issued a Statement of the Case (SOC) in which it denied a separate evaluation for endometriosis.  The SOC listed the Veteran's then-address of record and cc'd her attorney.  There is no indication the SOC was returned as undeliverable.  The Veteran did not respond to the SOC or submit a substantive appeal within 60 days of the date of mailing of the SOC.  However, in statements submitted in January, June, and August 2016, the Veteran and her attorney contended that they never received the October 2014 SOC.  In August 2016, the Veteran's attorney submitted a VA Form 9 alleging non-receipt of the October 2014 SOC and expressing intent to appeal the issue listed in that SOC.  It does not appear that the AOJ ever addressed or responded to the August 2016 VA Form 9.  Should the Veteran believe this is a missed issue from an earlier claim, she may notify the AOJ of such.  However, the Board intimates no opinion as to the merits of whether there is a missed issue that remains pending before the AOJ.  In any case, the matter is not part of the current appeal concerning CUE.

The motion alleging CUE in the evaluation assigned for status post hysterectomy with bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, residual of endometriosis, is dismissed without prejudice to refiling.

The Veteran, through her attorney, contends that there is CUE in the evaluation assigned for her status post hysterectomy with bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, residual of endometriosis.  See statement accompanying June 2018 VA Form 21-526EZ.

Once a decision becomes final, it may only be revised by a showing of CUE.  38 C.F.R. §§ 3.104, 3.105.  CUE is a very specific and rare kind of "error."  It is the kind of error, of fact or of law, that when called to the attention of later reviewers compels the conclusion, to which reasonable minds could not differ, that the result would have been manifestly different but for the error.  Simply to claim CUE on the basis that previous adjudications had improperly weighed and evaluated the evidence can never rise to the stringent definition of CUE.  Similarly, neither can broad-brush allegations of "failure to follow the regulations" or "failure to give due process," or any other general, nonspecific claim of "error."  Fugo v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 40, 43-44 (1993).  In addition, failure to address a specific regulatory provision involves harmless error unless the outcome would have been manifestly different.  Id. at 44.

Where evidence establishes CUE, the prior decision will be reversed or amended.  38 C.F.R. § 3.105(a).  For the purpose of authorizing benefits, the rating or other adjudicatory decision which constitutes a reversal of a prior decision on the grounds of CUE has the same effect as if the corrected decision had been made on the date of the reversed decision.  Id.

CUE is established when the following conditions are met: (1) either (a) the correct facts in the record were not before the adjudicator, or (b) the statutory or regulatory provisions in existence at the time were incorrectly applied; (2) the alleged error must be "undebatable," not merely "a disagreement as to how the facts were weighed or evaluated"; and (3) the commission of the alleged error must have "manifestly changed the outcome" of the decision being attacked on the basis of CUE at the time that decision was rendered.  Evans v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 180, 185 (2014), aff'd, 642 F. App'x 982 (Fed. Cir. 2016); Damrel v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 242, 245 (1994); Russell v. Principi, 3 Vet. App. 310, 313-14 (1992).

The error must be of a type that is outcome-determinative, and subsequently developed evidence may not be considered in determining whether an error existed in the prior decision.  See Porter v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 233, 235-36 (1993); Glover v. West, 185 F.3d 1328 (Fed. Cir. 1999).  A manifest change in the outcome of an adjudication means that, absent the alleged CUE, the benefit sought would have been granted at the outset.  King v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 433, 441 (2014).  The standard is not whether it is reasonable to conclude that the outcome would have been different.  Id. at 442.

Any claim of CUE must be pled with specificity.  See Andre v. Principi, 301 F.3d 1354 (Fed. Cir. 2002).  The request must set forth clearly and specifically the alleged clear and unmistakable error, or errors, of fact or law in the prior decision, the legal or factual basis for such allegations, and, unless it is the kind of error that, if true, would be CUE on its face, the claimant must also give specific arguments as to why the result of the prior determination would have been manifestly different but for the alleged error.  Fugo, 6 Vet. App. at 44; see also Simmons v. Principi, 17 Vet. App. 104 (2003); Phillips v. Brown, 10 Vet. App. 25 (1997) (distinguishing denial of CUE due to pleading deficiency and denial of CUE on merits).  Assertions of CUE that fail to satisfy the pleading requirements should be dismissed without prejudice to refiling.  Simmons, 17 Vet. App. at 113-14.

In adjudicating a motion to revise a final RO decision based on CUE, the Board must first make a threshold determination as to whether the motion pleads an alleged error of fact or law with sufficient clarity and specificity.  In this case, the Board finds that the Veteran's allegation of CUE does not plead an alleged error of fact or law with sufficient clarity and specificity.

Unlike a claim for benefits, a CUE motion includes a specific allegation of error; "[t]hat is, both in name and in logic, a CUE claim is not a generalized assertion of entitlement to benefits.  Rather, it is an assertion that the RO committed a particular clear and unmistakable error."  Andre, 301 F.3d at 1361.  Here, the Board finds that the Veteran's motion does not adequately plead CUE because she has not set forth clearly and specifically an alleged clear and unmistakable error, or errors, of fact or law in a specific prior final VA decision, the legal or factual basis for such allegations, and specific arguments as to why the result of the prior determination would have been manifestly different but for the alleged error.  Fugo, 6 Vet. App. at 44.  Indeed, neither the Veteran nor her attorney have identified the prior final VA decision alleged to contain CUE.  The Veteran's attorney contends that "endometriosis should have a separate rating from the status/post hysterectomy with bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, residual of endometriosis."  See statement accompanying June 2018 VA 21-526EZ.  This is essentially the same argument previously made in connection with her prior increased rating claim, though now she contends this is a CUE.  

It is an "unassailable proposition that merely to aver that there was CUE in a case is not sufficient to raise the issue."  Fugo, 6 Vet. App. at 44.  The Board finds that in this case, the Veteran has merely averred CUE without pleading an alleged error of fact or law with sufficient clarity and specificity.  Ultimately, the lack of specificity of the Veteran's request renders it insufficient to raise a cognizable CUE motion; it does not "call[] to the attention of later reviewers [an error that] compels the conclusion, to which reasonable minds could not differ, that the result would have been manifestly different but for the error."  Id. at 43.  In any case, even if the rating decision being challenged could be inferred from context, the RO has not adjudicated, in the first instance, a request for revision of a specific prior final decision based on CUE; therefore, the Board lacks jurisdiction to adjudicate such a request.

The Veteran is invited to submit a motion to revise, based on CUE, a specific prior final rating decision that comports with the strict filing requirements outlined in 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(a)(1)(vii) (2024).  In particular, the Board emphasizes that such a motion must specifically identify the decision and issue being attacked and must plead, with some degree of specificity, the alleged error of fact or law.  Unless it is the kind of error that, if true, would be CUE on its face, the claimant must also give specific arguments as to why the result of the prior determination would have been manifestly different but for the alleged error.  38 C.F.R. § 3.105(a)(1)(vii); Fugo, 6 Vet. App. at 44; see also Phillips, 10 Vet. App. at 25.

(Continued on the next page)

?

However, at present, the Veteran has not alleged CUE in a specific prior final decision with some degree of specificity as to what the alleged error is and given persuasive reasons as to why the result would have been manifestly different but for the alleged error.  Therefore, the CUE motion must be dismissed without prejudice to refiling.

 

 

L. CHU

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	G. T. Raftery, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.