Citation Nr: A25034691
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 240822-466404
DATE: April 15, 2025

ORDER

Readjudication of the previously denied claim for service connection for tinnitus based on the receipt of new and relevant evidence is warranted.

Entitlement to service connection for tinnitus is granted.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The evidence not part of the record considered in the November 2022 rating decision is new and tends to prove or disprove a matter at issue regarding the underlying claim to establish service connection for tinnitus.

2. Resolving all reasonable doubt in favor of the Veteran, the probative, competent, and persuasive evidence of record shows that it is as likely as not that the Veteran has continuously had symptoms of tinnitus during and since service.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for readjudication of the previously denied claim for service connection for tinnitus have been met. 38 U.S.C. § 5108; 38 C.F.R. § 3.156(d).

2. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for tinnitus have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 1112, 1113, 1110, 1137, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § § 3.102, 3.303, 3.307, 3.309.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Air Force from November 2015 to June 2016.

In the August 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the August 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

As a final preliminary matter, less than one year has elapsed since the Veteran was notified of the August 2024 rating decision on appeal. Generally, the Board may not decide an appeal prior to the expiration of this one-year period. Williams v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 305 (2024). However, in a September 2024 written brief to the Board, the Veteran's representative specifically stated that the Veteran wished to appeal this decision, and the Veteran submitted another statement later in September 2024 reflecting his wishes to have the Board readjudicate this case.  The Board interprets these statements as beliefs of the Veteran and his representative that the appeal is ready for readjudication and does not want the Board to wait until the expiration of the one-year period. The Board finds that the combination of these statements is sufficient for the Board to proceed with an adjudication in this appeal. See Clark v. O'Rourke, 30 Vet. App. 92, 97-98 (2018) (allowing waiver of a right to a particular time period for submission of evidence to be waived if there is "a voluntary, knowing, and intentional waiver of that right"). Moreover, as the Board is granting the Veteran's appeal, in full, no prejudice will result from issuance of this decision.

Service Connection

Service connection may be established for disability caused by disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.304.  To establish service connection for a claimed disability, there must be (1) medical evidence of a current disability; (2) medical, or in certain circumstances, lay evidence of in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) evidence, generally medical, of a causal relationship between the claimed in service disease or injury and the current disability.  Hickson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 247 (1999).

Service connection may also be established for any disease initially diagnosed after service, when the evidence establishes that the disease was incurred in service.  38 U.S.C. § 1113 (b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (d); Cosman v. Principi, 3 Vet. App. 503 (1992).  The disease entity for which service connection is sought must be chronic rather than acute and transitory in nature.  For the showing of chronic disease in service, a combination of manifestations must exist sufficient to identify the disease entity and sufficient observation to establish chronicity at the time, as distinguished from merely isolated findings or a diagnosis including the word chronic.

Secondary service connection may be established for a disability that is proximately due to, the result of, or aggravated by a service-connected disability.  38 C.F.R. § 3.310.

Competent lay evidence means any evidence not requiring that the proponent have specialized education, training, or experience.  Lay evidence is competent if it is provided by a person who has knowledge of the facts or circumstances and conveys matters that can be observed and described by a lay person.  38 C.F.R. § 3.159 (a)(2).  Lay testimony is competent when it regards the readily observable features or symptoms of injury or illness and may provide sufficient support for a claim of service connection.  Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372 (Fed. Cir. 2007).  The Veteran is competent to provide testimony concerning factual matters of which he has firsthand knowledge, such as experiencing a physical symptom such as pain.  Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007); Washington v. Nicholson, 19 Vet. App. 362 (2005).  Therefore, the Board must assess the competence and credibility of lay statements.  Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007).

Competency of evidence differs from weight and credibility.  Competency is a legal concept determining whether testimony may be heard and considered by the trier of fact, while weight and credibility are factual determinations going to the probative value of the evidence to be made after the evidence has been admitted. Rucker v. Brown, 10 Vet. App. 67 (1997).

A Veteran need only demonstrate that there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence to prevail.  To deny a claim on its merits, the weight of the evidence must be against the claim.  Alemany v. Brown, 9 Vet. App. 518 (1996).

While the Board must provide reasons and bases supporting a decision, there is no need to discuss, in detail, the evidence submitted by or on behalf of the Veteran. Gonzales v. West, 218 F.3d 1378 (Fed. Cir. 2000) (Board must review the entire record but does not have to discuss each piece of evidence).  The analysis below focuses on the most salient and relevant evidence of record.  The Veteran should not assume that the Board has overlooked pieces of evidence that are not explicitly discussed.  Timberlake v. Gober, 14 Vet. App. 122 (2000).

1. Whether readjudication of the previously-denied claim to establish service connection for tinnitus is warranted due to VA's receipt of new and relevant evidence 

VA will readjudicate a claim if new and relevant evidence is presented or secured. 38 C.F.R. § 3.156 (d). "Relevant evidence" is evidence that "tends to prove or disprove a matter in issue." 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. As the statutory definition of "relevant" does not require that the evidence relate to an unestablished fact necessary to substantiate the claim or raise a reasonable possibility of substantiating the claim; "new and relevant" evidence is a lower standard than the "new and material" evidence standard.

Petition to reopen

In a November 2022 decision, the AOJ denied the Veteran's appeal seeking to establish service connection for tinnitus. The Veteran appealed the AOJ's November 2022 denial to the Board of Veterans Appeals, but later withdrew his appeal on July 29, 2024.  The Veteran elected to instead file an August 2024 supplemental claim to pursue the claim for service connection for tinnitus.  The August 2024 decision on appeal stated that the Veteran had not submitted new and relevant evidence.

In view of above, the question is whether relevant evidence not considered in the AOJ's November 2022 decision has been added to the record such that the Veteran's claim should be readjudicated.

The Veteran submitted a VA Form 21-4138 Statement in Support of Claim in August 2024. The Veteran reported that he was exposed to gunfire after removing hearing protection while on active duty and that his MOS had a "hazardous noise level."  

The Board observes that this evidence meets the standard of "new and relevant" evidence, because the lay evidence had not been previously submitted and because it contains information that would tend to prove or disprove the Veteran's claims for tinnitus.  Although the Veteran referenced an August 2022 VA examination in which similar comments were made, the Veteran expressed the information in a different manner in the August 2024 statement.  In August 2024, the Veteran stated that he experienced an in-service incident exposing him to noise when he removed headgear while shots were fired.  In August 2022, the VA examiner stated that the Veteran reported exposure to a lot of shooting while serving as Security Forces and that hearing protection was used, other than a single incident in which the Veteran "removed the muffs and everybody started shooting at once."  In addition, the Veteran stated that his MOS had a "hazardous noise level," which he had not previously contended.

In view of the above, the Board finds that VA has received new and relevant evidence since the AOJ's November 2022 denial of the Veteran's appeal to establish service connection for tinnitus. To that extent, the Veteran's appealed issue is granted, and readjudication of the underlying claim is warranted.

2. Entitlement to service connection for tinnitus.

The AOJ favorably found in the August 2024 rating decision that the Veteran had been diagnosed with tinnitus and that evidence showed a qualifying event, injury, or disease had its onset during service.  The AOJ noted that an August 2022 VA examination confirmed a diagnosis of tinnitus.  The AOJ also conceded that the Veteran was exposed in-service noise based on the Veteran's MOS of security force helper.  As there is no clear and unmistakable evidence to the contrary of those favorable findings, the Board is bound by those favorable findings. 

The Veteran contends that service connection for tinnitus is warranted.

Given that VA has conceded that the Veteran has a current diagnosis of tinnitus and experienced a qualifying in-service event, the question is whether there is a link between the Veteran's current diagnosis of tinnitus and the qualifying in-service event.

In a December 2015 service medical record, the Veteran reported experiencing tinnitus.

In a July 2022 claim, the Veteran stated that his tinnitus characterized by occasional deep ringing in his ears was caused by in-service loud noises, including the shooting of guns.

An August 2022 medical examination diagnosed the Veteran with tinnitus and opined that it was less likely than not caused by or a result of noise exposure in service based on the continued intermittent nature of the tinnitus and the time since separation.

In an August 2024 statement, the Veteran stated that his current tinnitus was exposed to hazardous noise in his MOS and that he was also exposed to gunfire without ear protection.

A review of the competent evidence of record shows the Veteran has credibly reported symptoms of tinnitus continuously since service.  Therefore, the Board finds that tinnitus can be service-connected based on a credibly reported continuity of symptomatology of a chronic disease.  Therefore, the claim for service connection for tinnitus is granted.

The Board finds that the Veteran, as a lay person, is both credible and competent to provide evidence of the existence of the medical condition of tinnitus, as it comes to him through his senses of ringing in the ears, and the fact that it has been continuous since active service.  Specifically, the Board finds that tinnitus, which manifests as ringing in the ears, is not the type of medical condition which requires specialized medical knowledge or training to assess.  Charles v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 370, 374 (2002) (finding veteran competent to testify as to ringing in the ears (tinnitus); see also Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377, Note 4 (fed. Cir. 2007).  A lay person, such as the Veteran, may competently state that he perceives ringing in the ears.  The Veteran may also competently state when that condition started and if it has continued to the present.  The Veteran has consistently asserted that he began experience ringing in the ears during service as a result of loud noise conditions while in service.  VA has already conceded a current tinnitus diagnosis and noise exposure for this Veteran in light of his service occupational specialty.

The Board also finds the Veteran's lay statements regarding the continuity of tinnitus symptoms to be credible.  The Board notes that the Veteran has consistently noted that the ringing in the ears began during service and that those symptoms have continued to the present.  The Veteran provided those contentions in written statements to VA.  The Board finds the Veteran credible with regard to the assertions of continuity of tinnitus symptomatology since service.

The Board acknowledges that there may be medical evidence of record contrary to the Board's findings.  However, the Board assigns substantial probative weight to the Veteran's lay statements of record because the Veteran, as a layperson, may competently state that he perceives ringing in his ears and when that condition began.  The Board finds that the evidence is in equipoise as the favorable and unfavorable evidence has approximately equal evidentiary weight.

Accordingly, based on the evidence and arguments presented, the Board finds that the Veteran's tinnitus was as likely as not present during service and has a continuity of symptomatology since service.  As the Board finds that the Veteran's lay statements have competently and credibly established continuity of symptomatology, and resolving reasonable doubt in favor of the Veteran, the claim for service connection for tinnitus is granted.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

 

 

Scott W. Dale

Acting Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	T. Gernand, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.