Citation Nr: A25034985
Decision Date: 04/16/25	Archive Date: 04/16/25

DOCKET NO. 240410-431445
DATE: April 16, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a right foot disability, to include right foot metatarsalgia, is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served in the Navy and Naval Reserves with periods of active duty from September 1985 to December 1985, and April 1987 to May 1990.

This matter comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an April 2024 rating decision issued by a VA Regional Office (RO).  

In the April 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Hearing docket.  However, in a July 2024 VA Form 10182 Notice of Disagreement, the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket effectively switching dockets as was confirmed in an October 2024 Docketing Letter from the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board).  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the April 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of service connection for right foot disability, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

The Board notes that in April 2024, in addition to the issue noted above, Veteran filed a 10182 Notice of Disagreement with an April 2024 rating decision which denied service connection for right ankle disability selecting the Hearing Review Docket.  In a July 2024 10182 Notice of Disagreement, he elected the Direct review docket.  As such, this appeal has been docketed separately and will be addressed in a separate Board decision.  

Entitlement to service connection for a right foot disability, to include right foot metatarsalgia, is remanded.

The Board finds remand appropriate to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error in this case.  Namely, and as will be discussed further, the March 2024 VA examination and medical opinion provided in connection with this appeal did not fully resolve all theories reasonably raised in the record and did not appear to consider all relevant, and accurate factual premises.  

Accordingly, the AOJ should have sought a clarification opinion, a pre-decisional duty-to-assist error.

The Veteran's service treatment records reflect that he entered service with a preexisting foot disability.  Specifically, his May 1985 enlistment examination reflects moderate asymptomatic pes planus. Aside from the preexisting condition, his service records further confirm that in June 1987 he was treated for a right ankle/foot sprain with the Veteran favoring his right foot. Specifically, the June 1987 record reflects the Veteran complaining of hurting his right ankle after falling approximately 5 feet off a ladder.  There was no discoloration, edema, crepitus, or deformity at the time and the Veteran was able to put weight on both feet - albeit with pain on his right ankle. Nonetheless, he was instructed to follow-up in one week, and his records are thereafter silent as to any right ankle or foot complaints.  Indeed, in May 1990, the Veteran's exit examination is normal with regard to his feet and lower extremities with the Veteran noting that he is in good health and not taking medications on his May 1990 medical history report.

After service, VA outpatient treatment records indicate the Veteran self-treated right foot / ankle pain for years with over-the-counter medication.  While early records dated in 2003 indicate no known condition of the foot, his foot pain complaints are noted sporadically from 2018.  On or around May 2019, surgical records indicate the Veteran underwent surgery for his left foot status-post a fracture 10 to 14 years ago.  X-rays were taken bilaterally and, significantly, the x-rays of the right ankle revealed "fixation in place with progressive fusion across the ankle joint." May 2020 VA treatment podiatry records indicate that the Veteran reported difficulty fitting into his footwear, but pain is much reduced and tolerable although swelling builds up when he is on his feet.

The VA examiner, in March 2024, diagnosed the Veteran with right foot metatarsalgia, but found no other significant foot condition at that time.  The examiner noted the Veteran's contentions as well as the 1987 records documenting the Veteran's fall off a ladder where he twisted his right ankle, with no documented residuals thereafter and no further complaints found in service or for many years after service. As such, the examiner found the Veteran's Metatarsalgia was not likely related to service in light of the lack of chronicity of care.  Therein, the examiner explained that "sometimes a single factor [such as the ankle sprain] can lead to Metatarsalgia, [but] more often, several factors are involved." The examiner then proceeded to list various factors such as intense training or activity, poor-fitting shoes, certain foot shapes, foot deformities, and obesity. 

The examiner, however, did not specify as to which of these factors were likely involved in the Veteran's specific case.  This is significant because the entirety of the evidentiary record shows the Veteran claimed in-service intense training/activity and poor-fitting shoes. As for foot shapes/foot deformities, although there was no found pes planus found on this examination, it is relevant that moderate pes planus was noted on the Veteran's entrance examination into the military.  This factor was not mentioned by the examiner at all. 

In short, it is entirely unclear as to whether all correct facts were considered by the examiner in forming the cursory opinion. As such, a corrective opinion is warranted. Cf. Reonal v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 458, 460-61 (1993) (medical opinion based on inaccurate factual premise may properly be rejected as non-probative). 

It is worth emphasizing that the Veteran is entitled to the presumption of soundness as to the right ankle and right foot metatarsalgia, as these conditions / defects were not noted on his entrance to service.  In contrast, the Veteran's moderate pes planus was noted on his entrance examination and as to that condition, the presumption of soundness does not attach, but only insofar as the specific pes planus condition. See 38 U.S.C. § 1111 (indicating every veteran shall be taken to have been in sound condition when examined, accepted, and enrolled for service, except as to defects, infirmities, or disorders noted at the time of examination).  

Thus, the examiner needed to not only resolve whether the Veteran had pes planus at any time during the period on appeal, but to the extent pes planus is found, the examiner also failed in opining as to whether the preexisting disability increased in severity in service (particularly in light of the right ankle sprain and the Veteran's contentions describing in-service duties) and, if so, whether there is clear and unmistakable evidence (i.e., undebatable evidence) that such increase during service was due to the natural progression of the disease. See 38 U.S.C. § 1153; Horn v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 231, 234-35 (2012).

Again, it is unclear whether the Veteran's current right foot / right ankle claims is in any way related to the preexisting pes planus as the examiner did not address this relevant evidence at all. The examiner noted various factors that may play a role in developing metatarsalgia, but then did not clarify which factors were likely in the Veteran's specific case and the likelihood that those factors were due to service versus some non-service factor. 

As the examiner did not likely consider all the relevant facts or provide sufficient rationale, the AOJ should have obtained an addendum clarification opinion. As such, remand here is appropriate. 

While the Board is remanding this issue for corrective development, the Board is mindful of the holding in Smith v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 332 (2020) and the impact of implicit credibility determinations within remand orders.  The Board does not at this time make any determinations regarding the credibility of any evidence currently of record, to include those described in this remand.

The matter is REMANDED for the following actions:

1. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination with an appropriate clinician to determine the etiology of his claimed right foot disability, to include, but not limited to right foot metatarsalgia.  The claims folder should be made available to and be reviewed by the examiner.  All indicated tests and studies should be performed.  Following a review of the record, the examiner is asked to render a decision on the following:

(a.) Identify any and all current right foot / right ankle disabilities found during the pendency of this appeal (even if resolved at the time of the examination).

NOTE: "Pain" even without a specified diagnosis can be considered a disability for VA purposes if such pain causes objective functional impairment. 

NOTE: Pes Planus was noted on the Veteran's entrance examination. If such condition is not found on examination, the examiner must reconcile the conflicting evidence.

(b.) As to the bilateral pes planus condition only:  Determine whether moderate, asymptomatic pes planus noted at service entrance in June 1987 was aggravated by service to include as due to the documented fall in service and, if so, whether it is "clear and unmistakable" (i.e., undebatable) that any such increase was the result of the natural process of the condition.

(c.) For any all other right foot conditions found on examination, to include pain causing a functional impairment, determine whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the foot conditions found (to include right foot metatarsalgia) was due to any incident of service, to include the June 1987 right ankle strain after falling off a ladder and twisting it and in light of the post-service records indicative of pain and trouble fitting in shoes. 

In considering any lay statements of record, the examiner should note that the Veteran is competent to attest to matters of which he had first-hand knowledge, including observable symptomatology.  If there is a medical basis to support or doubt the history provided by the Veteran, the examiner should provide a fully reasoned explanation.

If medical literature is relied upon, the examiner should identify and specifically cite each reference material used and discuss how it relates to the Veteran's particular medical history.  The examiner should specifically discuss any contradictory evidence in the claims file and reconcile that evidence with their findings.

All opinions should be accompanied by supporting rationale explaining how the examiner arrived at the conclusions expressed.

If the examiner determines that s/he cannot provide an opinion without resorting to speculation, s/he should explain the inability to provide an opinion, identifying precisely what facts could not be determined.  In particular, he/she should comment on whether an opinion could not be provided because the limits of medical knowledge have been exhausted or whether additional testing or information could be obtained that would lead to a conclusive opinion.

2. After the above development, and any other indicated development, has been completed, readjudicate the claim.

 

SHEREEN M. MARCUS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Maddox, Rolen

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.