Citation Nr: A25034909
Decision Date: 04/16/25	Archive Date: 04/16/25

DOCKET NO. 241002-511342
DATE: April 16, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to special monthly compensation based on aid and attendance, or at the housebound rate, is denied.

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran's service-connected disabilities do not render him so helpless as to be in need of regular aid and attendance of another person, and he is not substantially confined to his house as a result of a service-connected disability. 

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to special monthly compensation based on aid and attendance or at the housebound rate have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1114; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.350, 3.352.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran had active duty service in the U.S. Army from February 1984 to November 1986.

This matter is before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal of a July 2024 rating decision of a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO), the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ). 

In the October 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the July 2024 AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim[s], considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

As noted, the Veteran selected the Direct Review Docket. Pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 20.202(c)(2), an appellant may modify a NOD to change the Board docket being requested. The time limit for such modification is "within one year from the date that the [AOJ] mails notice of the decision on appeal, or within 60 days of the date that the Board receives the [NOD], whichever is later." 38 C.F.R. § 20.202(c)(2). The Board ordinarily may not decide an appeal before this time period is up. See Williams v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 305 (2024). As a result of Williams, supra, the Board could normally be precluded from adjudicating this claim until July 30, 2025, which is the later choice of date between (a) one year after the rating decision to be appealed, and (b) 60 days after receipt of the NOD. Notably, the Veteran submitted evidence on February 25, 2025 along with his NOD. See February 2025 VA 10182, at 13-18 (e.g., VHA HCBS Case Mix & Budget Tool). Here however, the contention summary lists previously submitted evidence without adding new evidence or testimony, reviewing the Veteran's position without raising new theories of entitlement not already under review. The Board accordingly finds that the filing does not require clarification of the requested docket, as it does not proffer any new evidence not already of record at the time of the rating decision on appeal. The Veteran is accordingly not prejudiced by the Board's failure to consider these filings. The Board may proceed with adjudication of this appeal.

Entitlement to special monthly compensation based on aid and attendance, or at the housebound rate, is denied.

On appeal, the Veteran seeks entitlement to special monthly compensation based on aid and attendance/housebound status. The Veteran maintains that he needs assistance with his activities of daily living. See February 2025 VA 10182. 

"Special monthly compensation" (hereafter SMC) is payable to a person who is permanently bedridden or so helpless as a result of service-connected disability that he is in need of the regular aid and attendance of another person. 38 U.S.C. § 1114(l); 38 C.F.R. § 3.350(b).

The following will be accorded consideration in determining the need for regular aid and attendance: Inability of a claimant to dress or undress him or herself, or to keep him or herself ordinarily clean and presentable; frequent need of adjustment of any special prosthetic or orthopedic appliances which by reason of the particular disability cannot be done without aid (this will not include the adjustment of appliances which normal persons would be unable to adjust without aid, such as supports, belts, lacing at the back, etc.); inability of a claimant to feed him or herself through loss of coordination of the upper extremities or through extreme weakness; inability to attend to the wants of nature; or incapacity, physical or mental, which requires care or assistance on a regular basis to protect a claimant from the hazards or dangers incident to his or her daily environment. 38 C.F.R. § 3.352(a).

It is not required that all of the disabling conditions enumerated in 38 C.F.R. § 3.352(a) be found to exist before a favorable rating may be made. The particular personal functions which the veteran is unable to perform should be considered in connection with his or her condition as a whole. It is only necessary that the evidence establish that the veteran is so helpless as to need regular aid and attendance, not that there is a constant need. See Turco v. Brown, 9 Vet. App. 222 (1996).

"Bedridden" will be that condition which, through its essential character, actually requires that the claimant remain in bed. The fact that claimant has voluntarily taken to bed or that a physician has prescribed rest in bed for the greater or lesser part of the day to promote convalescence or cure will not suffice. 38 C.F.R. § 3.352(a).

If the veteran does not qualify for increased benefits for aid and attendance, increased compensation benefits may still be payable if the veteran has a single service-connected disability rated as 100 percent and: (1) has additional service-connected disability or disabilities independently ratable at 60 percent, separate and distinct from the 100 percent service-connected disability and involving different anatomical segments or bodily systems, or (2) is permanently housebound by reason of service-connected disability or disabilities. This requirement is met when the veteran is substantially confined as a direct result of service-connected disabilities to his or her dwelling and the immediate premises or, if institutionalized, to the ward or clinical areas, and it is reasonably certain that the disability or disabilities and resultant confinement will continue throughout his or her lifetime. 38 U.S.C. § 1114(s); 38 C.F.R. § 3.350(i).

In its July 2024 rating decision, the RO found that the Veteran does require aid and attendance for osteoarthritis of the hips, type 2 diabetes, and anxiety. However, these disabilities are not service-connected. See July 2024 Rating Decision - Narrative, at 2. 

The critical question to be determined in this case is whether the Veteran's service-connected disabilities have resulted in the need for regular aid and attendance of another person because of resultant helplessness due to mental and/or physical impairment and/or whether the Veteran is substantially confined as a direct result of service-connected disabilities to his dwelling and the immediate premises.

Service connection is currently in effect for left shoulder rotator cuff tear and tendinopathy, with degenerative arthritis evaluated as 40 percent disabling; right shoulder degenerative joint disease associated with left rotator cuff tear and tendinopathy, with degenerative arthritis evaluated as 20 percent disabling; and right shoulder degenerative joint disease evaluated as 10 percent disabling. See July 2024 Rating Decision - Codesheet.

Based on review of the record, the Board concludes that the evidence does not support a finding that the criteria have been met for SMC due to the regular need of aid and attendance caused by a service-connected disability nor have the criteria been met for SMC based on housebound status. 

In March 2015 VA, the Veteran was afforded a VA shoulder examination. Here, the VA examiner indicated that the Veteran's shoulder disabilities did not impact his ability to perform any type of occupational tasks. See March 2015 Shoulder C&P, at 9.

In May 2015, the Veteran's wife reported that she was the caretaker for the Veteran when his nurse was not scheduled. She reported that she helped the Veteran with bathing and dressing, prepared meals, managed the finances, reminded him to take his medications, and accompanied him outside the house. See May 2015 Correspondence.

In May 2015, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination for housebound status or permanent need for regular aid and attendance. Here, the VA examiner reported that the Veteran's diagnoses were osteoarthritis and schizoaffective disorder. See May 2015 VA 21-2680, at 1. The VA examiner indicated that the Veteran was able to feed himself, was not legally blind, and did not require nursing home care. The VA examiner reported that the Veteran had a decreased ability to ambulate due to osteoarthritis pain. The VA examiner reported that the Veteran was unable to prepare his own meals and needed assistance with dressing. The Veteran reported that he was also diagnosed with a left hip total replacement, dyspepsia, chronic pain syndrome, depression, MRSA, cervical spine arthritis, pelvic and hip pain, hypertension, polyneuropathy, and diabetes. Id., at 2. 

In October 2017, the Veteran was afforded another VA shoulder examination. Here, the VA examiner noted that the Veteran's right shoulder disability impacted his ability to perform occupational tasks in that he had limitations with heavy lifting, heavy carrying, and overhead lifting. See October 2017 Shoulder C&P, at 22.

In January 2018, the Veteran was afforded another VA shoulder examination. Here, the VA examiner found that the Veteran's shoulder disabilities did not impact his ability to perform occupational tasks. See January 2018 Shoulder C& P, at 17.

In January 2020, the Veteran was afforded another VA shoulder examination. Here, the VA examiner found that the Veteran's shoulder disabilities impact his ability to perform occupational tasks due to prolonged sitting causing shoulder pain. See January 2020 Shoulder C&P, at 18.

In March 2024, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination for household status or permanent need for regular aid and attendance. The VA examination report was received on April 11, 2024. Here, the VA examiner stated that the Veteran does experience decreased range of motion and strength due to shoulder pain. See April 2024 VA 21-2680, at 3. However, the VA examiner opined that the Veteran required aid and attendance based only on his osteoarthritis of the hips, hip joint prosthesis, hyperlipidemia, anxiety and type 2 diabetes, which the VA examiner considered to be permanent and totally disabling. Id., at 2.

With regard to SMC based on housebound status, the Veteran does not have a single service-connected disability rated as 100 percent disabling. Furthermore, the evidence does not show that the Veteran has been permanently housebound by reason of his service-connected disabilities at any point during the appeal period. The March 2024 VA examiner indicated that the Veteran is able to leave his home to attend weekly appointments. Id., at 4.

While the Board is sympathetic to the fact that the Veteran's service-connected, and non-service-connected, disabilities undoubtedly affect his activities of daily living and perhaps his service-connected disabilities require assistance, the Board does not find that the evidence of record consistently reflects that the Veteran's service-connected disabilities render him so helpless as to be in need of regular aid and attendance throughout the period on appeal. Further, the Board has fully reviewed the electronic claims file and finds no other competent evidence to the contrary.

Because the Veteran's need for aid and attendance is due to non-service connected disabilities, entitlement to SMC is not warranted at this time. Additionally, the Board concludes that the evidence does not support a finding that the criteria have been met for SMC based on housebound status. Therefore, the appeal is denied.

 

R. Bisignani

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Loy, T., Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.