Citation Nr: A25034669
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 240624-452049
DATE: April 15, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to a total disability rating due to individual unemployability (TDIU) is denied.

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran's service-connected disabilities did not prevent him from obtaining and maintaining substantially gainful employment during the period on appeal.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to a total disability rating due to individual unemployability (TDIU) have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.340, 3.341, 4.16.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Navy from October 1969 to July 1973.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a March 2024 rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In the June 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Evidence Submission docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran with, or within 90 days from receipt of, the VA Form 10182.  38 C.F.R. § 20.303.  If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal and prior to the date the Board received the VA Form 10182, or (2) more than 90 days following the date the Board received the VA Form 10182, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.303, 20.801.

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim[s], considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

TDIU

Total disability is considered to exist when there is any impairment which is sufficient to render it impossible for the average person to follow a substantially gainful occupation. 38 C.F.R. § 3.340 (a)(1). The Board must consider if the Veteran can obtain employment of more than marginal income (outside of a protected environment) as determined by the U.S. Department of Commerce to be the poverty threshold for one person.  See Ray v. Wilkie, 31 Vet. App. 58 (2019).

Further, the Board should also consider whether given the Veteran's history, education, skill, and training, in conjunction with the Veteran's physical ability and mental ability, he can perform the type of activities required by the occupation at issue.  Id.  Moreover, the Board must evaluate whether there are circumstances in the Veteran's case, apart from any non-service-connected conditions and advancing age, which would justify TDIU. 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.341 (a), 4.19; See Van Hoose v. Brown, 4 Vet. App. 361 (1993).  The Veteran's service-connected disabilities, employment history, educational and vocational attainment, and all other factors having a bearing on the issue must be addressed.  38 C.F.R. § 4.16(b).

Entitlement to a TDIU is a legal determination, not a medical one.  See Geib v. Shinseki, 733 F.3d 1350 (Fed. Cir. 2013).  Medical examiners may provide evidence regarding functional and occupational impairment, but the Board must decide whether a veteran may "secure and follow a substantially gainful occupation" based on all evidence of record.  See Delrio v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 232, 243 (2019).

Under 38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a), "employment in a protected environment" means a lower income position that, due to the veteran's service-connected disability or disabilities, is shielded in some respect from competition in the employment market.  See LaBruzza v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 111, 123-24 (2024).

Entitlement to a total disability rating due to individual unemployability (TDIU).

The Veteran seeks TDIU contending his service-connected disabilities prevented him from obtaining and maintaining substantially gainful employment.

As an initial matter, the Veteran is service connected for major depressive disorder associated with tinnitus (70 percent effective December 19, 2023), migraine headaches associated with tinnitus (50 percent, effective December 19, 2023), tinnitus (10 percent, effective September 14, 2012), and bilateral hearing loss (noncompensable, effective September 14, 2012).  His total combined rating was 10 percent prior to December 19, 2023, and 90 percent thereafter.  Thus, he has met the schedular criteria from December 19, 2023.

The remaining and dispositive question is whether the Veteran is unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation due to his service-connected disabilities.  See 38C.F.R. §4.16(a).  After a review of the evidence of record, the Board finds TDIU is not warranted.

First, the Veteran has significant experience in a wide range of business, logistics, assessment, and management processes.  Specifically, he has worked as a machine operator, managed several different commercial ventures, has experience in logistics and government purchasing, managed government housing, worked procurement for a government agency, worked as a commercial truck driver and as a government motor operator, and as a benefit claims processor.  Most recently, from 2015 to 2023, he owned and operated an online business.  He closed his business in 2023.  Regarding his education, he completed high school, completed a year of college, and earned his Commercial Driver's License (CDL).

Overall, the evidence of record establishes that the Veteran's service-connected disabilities, both physical and psychiatric, cause some impairment in employment. Specifically, his acquired psychiatric disorder causes disturbances of motivation and mood and difficulty with focus and concentration and his physical disabilities result in difficulties in irritability, difficulties focusing, pain, light sensitivity and nausea.

Regarding his acquired psychiatric disorder, in November 2023, the Veteran submitted an undated private examination and was afforded VA examinations in December 2023 and February 2024 in which he reported he was depressed most of the time, has difficulty with focus and concentration, experiences low energy and motivation, is sometimes irritable and can be short tempered.  Furthermore, he related instances in which his depression made it difficult to maintain order in his home, a tendency to self-isolate, and not maintain his hygiene all the time.  However, he reported he had started treatment, his psychiatric symptoms had improved since January 2022, he has a close friend he meets with every two weeks, regularly plays poker, and maintains relationships with his daughter and grandchildren.

The examiners all noted symptoms of depressed mood, chronic sleep impairment, disturbances of motivation and mood, intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living, including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene.  However, all three examiners specifically noted his appearance, grooming, and hygiene as tidy or adequate, observed socially appropriate behavior, logical speech patterns, maintained good eye contact, presented linear and logical thought processes, his memory and cognition were intact, and his mood was mildly depressed with a moderately flat affect, though present and cooperative.  Furthermore, none of the examiners noted he had total occupational and social impairment.  Specifically, the private examiner noted his acquired psychiatric disability was of moderate severity with treatment, that he had found a treatment plan that moderated his symptoms and characterized his impairment as occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.

Regarding his physical impairments, in the private examination and the December 2023 VA examination, the Veteran reported his tinnitus increases his irritability, sometimes impacts his ability to focus, and at times hinders his ability to hear, which contributes to his avoidance of social settings with noise.  The Board notes that the three mental health examiners specifically considered his irritability, lack of focus, and social avoidance symptoms in their assessments of his psychiatric impairment.

Next, in a May 2023 private and a February 2024 VA examination he reported that he was unable to travel to attend coin shows due to the headaches he experiences which sometimes require him to lay down, cause sensitivity to light and nausea. Furthermore, in his November and December 2023 statements, he reported his headaches gradually worsened around August 2022 and reiterated the inability to travel which prevented him from performing some of his critical business functions and he submitted a headache log which indicates the duration of his headaches are less than a day.  The May 2023 examiner noted he experiences three prostrating attacks per month and concluded he shows severe economic inadaptability due to his inability to conduct his online business with regularity.

Regardless, the Board emphasizes that while medical opinions can be probative in a TDIU determination, the determination of unemployability is for the adjudicator.  See Geib v. Shinseki, 733 F.3d 1350, 1354 Fed. Cir. 2013).

The Board further recognizes an August 2024 report prepared by a vocational specialist who argues that the Veteran has not been able perform in or maintain employment in any capacity due to his physical and mental limitations since 2013.  The Board finds the opinion of limited probative value as it is based on several of the VA examination opinions previously discussed, indicated the Veteran stopped working in 2013 due to his inability to perform his duties many years prior to the period on appeal, and in support of their argument, the specialist determined that the business he ran since 2015 was not substantial and gainful employment.

However, this is inconsistent with the Veteran's own reports of the scope of his responsibilities and involvement with his business.  Here, in his November 2023 TDIU application he indicated he worked 53 hours a week, that he had been employed in a coin and precious metal business from November 2015 to August 2022, and his highest monthly gross earning was 3,150 dollars.  Furthermore, he described his business as lucrative, he regularly traveled to coin shows, estate sales, auctions, and garage sales to acquire his inventory, he maintained business records, controlled inventory and supplies, and networked to maintain his inventory, and was involved with his website and sales.  He sometimes worked 30 hours in a weekend, though his schedule was flexible when not traveling.  Moreover, he successfully ran his online business for over 7 years, utilized and further developed his management, business, and logistics skills from his previous employment history, and demonstrated he could obtain and maintain substantial employment.

The Board has also considered the Veteran's September 2024 statement that he sought and obtained a part-time evening job with a company in 2020 and asserts he experienced a headache near the end of his first shift and did not return to his job.  However, the evidence of record shows he remained fully engaged with his business well after 2020.

While limitations to his ability to concentrate and focus and prostrating headaches and have been shown, these do not prevent him from obtaining and maintaining substantial employment.  While the evidence both lay and medical indicate that the demands of being a sole proprietor who was required to travel and perform all functions of his business became too much to manage, nothing suggests that the skills he acquired cannot be utilized in a less active environment or that other areas of employment are beyond his capabilities.  Indeed, given his experience, it would seem like that there are alternatives.

The Board recognizes that the Veteran is competent to report his symptoms and what causes him pain.  He consistently and credibly addressed the limitations his service-connected disabilities imposed related to the travel requirements of his business.  However, these complaints are specific to the business he had been running since 2015.  Furthermore, his statements indicate that he performed all aspects of closing his business, including closing out financial obligations throughout 2023.  His ability to manage these financial matters also weighs in favor of finding that he is capable of securing or following a substantially gainful occupation because it shows his aptitude to perform non-travel related requirements of a job.

In making this determination, the Board acknowledges the Veteran's argument relating his inability to work due to his service-connected conditions.  While he is competent to testify as to the symptoms he experiences, he is similarly not competent to make a determination as to his unemployability.

It may be true that he may no longer be able to travel and perform all business functions as a sole proprietor.  However, such statements are insufficient to establish that he is unable to obtain work in a job involving logistics, scheduling, or other business functions which, given his experience, is reasonably feasible. Furthermore, while he has indicated that he avoids noisy environments and has a tendency to self-isolate, he has maintained social contacts and does regularly engage in social activities.  Moreover, it is not certain in the evidence of record that accommodations cannot be made to help him work if he so wishes.

To the extent that the VA examiners indicate the Veteran would face some functional limitations, the Board finds that such pain or difficulties do not substantially affect his ability to work in a job.

As a result, the Board finds the evidence is persuasively against the Veteran's TDIU claim.  As such, the claim is denied.  See Owens v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 429, 433 (1995).  The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided.  This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability.  38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.

 

 

B.T. KNOPE

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	K. Miller, Associate Counsel