Citation Nr: A25034509
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 230814-369708
DATE: April 15, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for left hip condition is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for right hip condition is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for right shoulder condition is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for neck condition is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for right knee condition is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for left knee condition is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for left shoulder condition is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND 

The Veteran served honorably on active duty from January 1992 to January 1996. 

These matters come before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a July 2023 rating decision of a Regional Office (RO) of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA). 

In April 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR), and requested review of a March 2023 decision.  In July 2023, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the HLR decision on appeal, which considered the evidence of record at the time of the prior March 2023 decision.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2023 decision and any evidence submitted during an applicable evidentiary window. 

In the August 2023 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

1. Entitlement to service connection for left hip condition is remanded.

2. Entitlement to service connection for right hip condition is remanded.

The Veteran contends that he injured both hips during physical training exercises during active-duty service, a training accident, and a boating accident. See December 2022 VA 21-4138 Statement in Support of Claim.  Further, the Veteran asserts that he has experienced pain, limited movement, weakness, and muscle fatigue in his hips ever since service. 

The Veteran's service treatment records (STRs) are silent for any explicit complaints, treatment, or diagnosis of hip conditions, although they do reflect that the Veteran endorsed joint pain and swollen joints upon separation from service.  VA treatment records reflect a diagnosis of left hip internal fixation and repeated complaints of bilateral hip pain. 

The Veteran has not been afforded a VA examination for his bilateral hip conditions. VA must provide a medical examination if the evidence indicates the existence of a current disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability that may be associated with an event, injury, or disease in service, and the record does not contain sufficient medical evidence to decide the claim. 38 U.S.C. § 5103A (d)(2) (2012); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159 (c)(4)(i); McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006). The threshold to trigger the need for an examination is low. The Board finds the Veteran's statements regarding having hip pain since service, the nature of his military physical duties, and his diagnosed hip disability and pain satisfies the McLendon criteria. Thus, a remand is necessary to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error and provide the Veteran appropriate VA examinations.

3. Entitlement to service connection for right shoulder condition is remanded.

The Veteran contends that he injured both shoulders during a training accident while serving on active duty. See December 2022 VA 21-4138 Statement in Support of Claim.  

The Veteran underwent a VA shoulder examination in December 2022. The VA examiner diagnosed the Veteran with a rotator cuff tear and degenerative arthritis of the right shoulder. During the examination, the Veteran reported that he injured his right shoulder when the boat he was in beached at a high rate of speed and he was thrown forwards towards the bow of the boat and hit his shoulder on the chain locker. He indicates that he did not seek treatment for his injury. 

The VA examiner was asked to opine whether the Veteran's right shoulder condition (which clearly and unmistakably existed prior to service) was aggravated beyond its natural progression by any in-service incidents. The VA examiner opined, "[a]fter a thorough review of the Veteran's electronic file. On Veteran's entrance exam: September 27, 1991, there is mention of a scar right shoulder. Also, the Veteran did state on his separation report of medical history dated July 28, 1995, Veteran checked yes to # 18 stating dislocation of right shoulder seven years ago, (prior to service).  There are no entries in his records that show he was treated for his right shoulder while in active service.  However medical evidence is not sufficient to support a determination of a baseline level of severity.  It is beyond capability to predict without speculation how severe his right shoulder condition would be and if his service in the [omitted] aggravated his right shoulder condition.  It has been 27 years since his separation from service and his lifestyle and habits, along with his work may have contributed.  Therefore, it is as less as likely as not (less than 50 percent probability) that the Veteran's right shoulder condition aggravated beyond its natural progression by service treatment records (STRs) during service." 

Since the Veteran is contending aggravation of a pre-existing disability while in service, the questions of preexistence and in-service aggravation should be addressed in terms of clear and unmistakable evidence, rather than under the more likely than not standard. 38 U.S.C. § 1111; 38 C.F.R. § 3.304(b). For this reason, the Board finds the December 2022 VA examination not adequate for adjudication of the Veteran's claim. 

As such, based on the lack of an adequate VA opinion to determine whether the Veteran's right shoulder disability preexisted service, and if it did, whether it was aggravated beyond its natural progression, a remand is necessary to ensure due process and fulfill VA's duty to assist. 38 U.S.C. § 5103A; Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120 (2007).

4. Entitlement to service connection for neck condition is remanded.

5. Entitlement to service connection for right knee condition is remanded.

6. Entitlement to service connection for left knee condition is remanded.

The Veteran contends he has been diagnosed with degenerative disc disease of the cervical spine, which was exacerbated by the rough boating conditions and by the boating accident he was involved in while on active-duty service. The Veteran asserts he now must see a chiropractor and is in constant pain since service. See June 2019 VA 21-4138 Statement in Support of Claim.

Regarding the Veteran's claimed knee conditions, the Veteran contends that his entire active-duty service was spent on small boats in generally rough conditions, which resulted in issues in both of his knees, including pain, since his active service. See id. 

The Board finds that the October 2019 and January 2021 bilateral knee and cervical spine examinations and opinions are inadequate because the VA examiner failed to consider the Veteran's lay statements regarding continuity of symptoms and treatment during and after discharge. See Dalton v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 23 (2007) (an examination is inadequate when the examiner does not consider the Veteran's competent lay history). Furthermore, the examiner appears to have relied solely on the lack of contemporaneous medical evidence that corroborates an in-service injury or in-service treatment of the disabilities in the Veteran's STRs to form the nexus opinions. The lack of contemporaneous medical records does not render the Veteran's lay statements not credible. Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331, 1337 (Fed. Cir. 2006). New examinations and adequate opinions are needed.

7.  Entitlement to service connection for a left shoulder condition is remanded.

The Veteran contends service connection is warranted for his left shoulder disability.  

The Board notes that the record reflects that the Veteran's VA treatment records reflect a history of left shoulder surgery post motor vehicle accident in 1998 (after service). Additionally, the record reflects that the December 2022 VA examination for the Veteran's claimed right shoulder indicates that the Veteran's left shoulder is damaged. Thus, a current disability has been demonstrated. 

The Veteran submitted statements in December 2022 wherein he indicated that during his active-duty service, he injured both shoulders during a training accident. The Veteran stated that he has experienced pain, limited range of motion, weakness, and muscle fatigue in his left shoulder since service. See December 2022 VA 21-4138 Statement in Support of Claim. 

The Veteran has not been afforded a VA examination or medical opinion for his claim of service connection for a left shoulder disability. VA is obliged to provide an examination or obtain a medical opinion in a claim when the record contains competent evidence that the claimant has a current disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a current disability, the record indicates that the disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of disability may be associated with active service, and the record does not contain sufficient information to make a decision on the claim. 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(d); McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006).

The threshold for triggering VA's duty to assist by affording the Veteran a VA examination or opinion is low. Locklear v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 410 (2006); McLendon, 20 Vet. App. at 83. The Veteran's reports of a continuity of symptomatology can satisfy the requirement for evidence that the claimed disability may be associated with service. McLendon, 20 Vet. App. at 83.

Given the evidence of a current diagnosis of the left shoulder described above, and lay statements regarding an in-service injury to his left shoulder during and issues since active duty, a remand is necessary for a VA examination to determine the etiology of this disability and to correct this pre-decisional duty to assist error.

These matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for an appropriate VA examination in order to determine the nature and etiology of his bilateral hip conditions. The record, to include a copy of this Remand, must be made available to the examiner, and any indicated evaluations, studies, and tests should be conducted. The examiner should opine as to the following: 

(a.) whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's bilateral hip conditions had their onset in, or is otherwise related to, his military service, to include his reports that he injured both hips during physical training exercises during active-duty service, a training accident, and a boating accident. See VBMS, document labeled VA 21-4138 Statement in Support of Claim, receipt date 12/01/2022. 

The examiner is asked to explain the reasons behind any opinions expressed and conclusions reached. The examiner is reminded that the term "as likely as not" does not mean "within the realm of medical possibility," but rather that the likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher.

Note that the lack of documented treatment in service or for a period after is not an adequate reason on its own for a negative opinion.  The Veteran's lay statements must also be considered.

2. Obtain an addendum opinion from an appropriate clinician to address the etiology of the Veteran's right shoulder disability. The examiner should have access to the entire claims file and should review such, including a copy of this Remand. The examiner is asked to provide an opinion on the following:

(a.) Whether the Veteran's right shoulder disabilities, clearly and unmistakably pre-existed his active service? 

(b.) If so, whether the disability was clearly and unmistakably NOT aggravated beyond its natural progression by active service? 

(c.) If the current right shoulder disability did not clearly and unmistakably preexist service, and was clearly and unmistakably not aggravated by service, the examiner should provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (the likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's right shoulder disability is either directly related to active military service OR was aggravated by service.

A preexisting disease will be considered aggravated by active military service where there is an increase in disability during such service, unless there is a finding that the increase in disability is due to the natural progression of the disease. 38 U.S.C. § 1156.

Clear and unmistakable evidence includes medical facts and principles which may be considered to determine whether the increase in disability is due to the natural progress of the condition.

3. Obtain an addendum opinion from an appropriate clinician regarding the Veteran's cervical spine disability. An in-person examination is not required unless deemed necessary by the clinician. The clinician should then answer the following question:

(a.) Is it at least as likely as not that the cervical spine disability, diagnosed as degenerative arthritis of the spine, began during service, within one year of separation of service, or is otherwise etiologically related to active service?

The examiner is advised that the Veteran is competent to report that he injured his neck in service and has experienced pain since. See VBMS, document labeled VA 21-4138 Statement in Support of Claim, receipt date 06/25/2019, page 3 of 4.

Note that the lack of documented treatment in service, or a long period after, while probative, cannot serve as the sole basis for a negative finding. The Veteran's lay contentions must be considered and weighed in making the determination.

The examiner is asked to explain the reasons behind any opinions expressed and conclusions reached. The examiner is reminded that the term "as likely as not" does not mean "within the realm of medical possibility," but rather that the likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher.

4. Obtain an addendum opinion from an appropriate clinician regarding the Veteran's bilateral knee disabilities. An in-person examination is not required unless deemed necessary by the clinician. The clinician should then answer the following question:

(a.) Is it at least as likely as not that the bilateral knee disabilities, diagnosed as degenerative arthritis bilaterally, began during service, within one year of separation of service, or is otherwise etiologically related to active service?

The examiner is advised that the Veteran is competent to report that he injured his knees in service and has experienced pain since. See VBMS, document labeled VA 21-4138 Statement in Support of Claim, receipt date 06/25/2019, page 3 of 4.

Note that the lack of documented treatment in service, or a long period after, while probative, cannot serve as the sole basis for a negative finding. The Veteran's lay contentions must be considered and weighed in making the determination.

The examiner is asked to explain the reasons behind any opinions expressed and conclusions reached. The examiner is reminded that the term "as likely as not" does not mean "within the realm of medical possibility," but rather that the likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher.

5. Schedule the Veteran for an appropriate VA examination in order to determine the nature and etiology of his left shoulder disability. The record, to include a copy of this Remand, must be made available to the examiner, and any indicated evaluations, studies, and tests should be conducted. The examiner should address following: 

(a.) Identify any diagnoses associated with the Veteran's left shoulder. The examiner is directed to review the record, wherein it was reported that the Veteran's left shoulder is a "damaged joint" and that he has a surgical history for his left shoulder following a motor vehicle accident. See VBMS, document labeled C&P Exam, receipt date 12/21/2022, page 3 of 11; see VBMS, document labeled CAPRI, receipt date 09/13/2019, pages 18-20 of 95. 

(b.) After identifying any current diagnoses, opine whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's left shoulder condition had its onset in, or is otherwise related to, his military service, to include his reports that he injured his left shoulder during a training accident during active service. See VBMS, document labeled VA 21-4138 Statement in Support of Claim, receipt date 12/01/2022. 

The examiner is asked to explain the reasons behind any opinions expressed and conclusions reached. The examiner is reminded that the term "as likely as not" does not mean "within the realm of medical possibility," but rather that the likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher.

 

 

Bethany L. Buck

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	R. M. Lowman, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.