Citation Nr: A25034074
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 240807-462335
DATE: April 11, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a dental abscess condition is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from August 1980 to November 1986.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an April 2024 rating decision by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).  The decision was issued on April 3, 2024.

In response to the April 2024 rating decision, in August 2024, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 10182 Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) where she selected the Direct Review docket.  Under that docket, the Board considers the claim based on the evidence of record at the time of the issuance of the rating decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Thus, the Board's review is limited to the evidence of record at the time of the issuance of the April 2024 rating decision.

However, because the Board is remanding this claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) in the adjudication of the claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

?

Entitlement to service connection for a dental abscess condition is remanded.

The Veteran served on active duty from August 1980 to November 1986.  

The Veteran claims her dental abscess condition is related to service.  She underwent VA examination in January 2024 and the examiner diagnosed partial loss of teeth and dental caries.  The examiner opined that the condition was less than likely related to service because the Veteran had dental problems before service, during service and after service and no nexus could be established because the condition existed prior to service and has likely progressively worsened regardless of service.  The Board notes that additional laws and regulations apply when there is evidence that a disability preexisted service.  

Every veteran is presumed to have been in sound condition at entry into service, except as to defects, infirmities, or disorders noted at the time of such entry, or where clear and unmistakable evidence demonstrates that the injury or disease existed before entry and was not aggravated by such service.  Only such conditions as are recorded in examination reports are to be considered as noted.  38 U.S.C. § 1111; 38 C.F.R. § 3.304(b).

Determination of the existence of a preexisting condition may be supported by contemporaneous evidence, or recorded history in the record, which provides a sufficient factual predicate to support a medical opinion, see Miller v. West, 11 Vet. App. 345, 348 (1998), or a later medical opinion based upon statements made by the Veteran about the pre-service history of the condition.  Harris v. West, 203 F.3d 1347 (Fed. Cir. 2000).  The burden is on VA to rebut the presumption of soundness by clear and unmistakable evidence that the Veteran's disability was both preexisting and not aggravated by service.  Wagner v. Principi, 370 F.3d 1089, 1094-96 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

In this case, the Veteran's June 1980 enlistment examination does not note any dental condition.  Consequently, the presumption of soundness as to a dental condition on entry to service attaches.  Thus, VA must find clear and unmistakable evidence that the condition preexisted service and was not aggravated by service.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.304(b).  To this extent, the January 2024 VA examiner's opinion is inadequate because it does not address the correct legal standard.  See Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439 (1995) (en banc).  In this regard, the examiner failed to address whether any dental disability clearly and unmistakably preexisted service or whether such was clearly and unmistakably not aggravated (i.e., a non-temporary increase in severity) by service and, if so, whether any increase in severity was clearly and unmistakably due to its natural progress.

The Board finds the failure to obtain an adequate medical opinion addressing whether the Veteran's dental abscess condition preexisted service and if so, whether such was not aggravated by service and whether any increase in severity was due to its natural progress constitutes a pre-decisional duty-to-assist error.  Accordingly, development for an adequate VA opinion is necessary.  See El-Amin v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 136, 140-41 (2013); Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 293, 303 (2008).  

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

1. Send the Veteran's claims file to an appropriate VA examiner to obtain an addendum opinion to determine to whether the Veteran's dental condition is possibly related to service, to include whether any dental condition preexisted service.  Following review of the claims file, the examiner should:

(a.) Determine if the Veteran's dental condition clearly and unmistakably (undebatably) preexisted service.  The examiner should address the Veteran's service treatment records, to include her June 1980 enlistment report of medical history where she responded affirmatively to having severe tooth or gum trouble which she described as dental caries.  See Service treatment records. 

(b.) With respect to a dental condition determined to have clearly and unmistakably preexisted service, the examiner should state whether such disability clearly and unmistakably (undebatably) underwent no increase in severity beyond its normal progression (aggravated) during or as a result of service.  The examiner should address the in-service dental treatment from December 1980 to October 1986.  See service treatment records. 

Clear and unmistakable evidence is evidence that is obvious, manifest, and undebatable.

The term "aggravated" in this context refers to a permanent worsening of the underlying condition beyond the natural progress of the disease, as contrasted to temporary or intermittent flare-ups of symptomatology that resolve with a return to the baseline level of disability.

If clear and unmistakable evidence is found, the VA examiner should cite to factual data contained in the record or medical literature to support such a conclusion.

2. If it is the examiner's opinion that there is no clear and unmistakable evidence that any dental condition was not aggravated by service, the Veteran is presumed sound at service entrance, and the question becomes one of direct service connection.

(a.) In this case, with respect to any dental condition the examiner determines did not preexist service, the examiner should state whether such disability at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) originated during or is otherwise etiologically related to service.  

(b.) Please explain why or why not, to include addressing the Veteran's lay contentions and the various documented in-service dental treatment from December 1980 to October 1986.  See Service treatment records. 

A complete rationale should be provided for any opinion expressed.  (By law, the Board is not permitted to rely on any conclusion that is not supported by a thorough explanation.  Providing an opinion or conclusion without a thorough explanation will delay processing of the claim and may also result in a clarification being requested.)

 

 

S. CHARLES NEILL

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Medina, Sara

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.