Citation Nr: A25034964
Decision Date: 04/16/25	Archive Date: 04/16/25

DOCKET NO. 241007-479394
DATE: April 16, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for right hip labral tear is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran honorably served on active duty in the United States Navy from September 2005 to February 2011. 

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal of a May 2023 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO). The Veteran requested a higher-level review and in February 2024 the RO issued a higher-level review decision. In October 2024, the Veteran filed a VA Form 10182. In the October 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the May 2023 decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the RO issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of service connection for right hip labral tear, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the RO in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

This matter is now properly before the Board.

1. Entitlement to service connection for right hip labral tear.

The Veteran contends that she should be service connected for right hip labral tear, secondary to service-connected conditions to include lumbosacral strain and left and right patellofemoral syndrome. 

The Board has carefully and sympathetically reviewed the Veteran's claims file within the evidentiary window. In April 2023, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination. The medical examiner provided an opinion regarding secondary service connection, indicating that the Veteran's condition was less likely than not proximately due to or the result of service-connected condition. The examiner's rationale indicated that there is no clear evidence from review of orthopedic literature to suggest that an injury to one joint would have any significant impact on another or opposite uninjured joint or limb, unless the injury resulted in a major muscle or nerve damage causing partial or complete paralysis, or shortening of the injured limb resulting in length discrepancy of more than 5 centimeters (cm) so that the individual's gait pattern has been altered to the extent that clinically there is no obvious Trendelenburg gait. The examiner indicated that the level of severity is not supported based on the record review, history, or examination. The examiner noted that it is not unusual for two joints to share properties in the same person, but one joint's disease does not 'spread' to another or cause damage to it. Therefore, the right hip condition secondary to service-connected knees and lumbar spine is less likely than not related to the left patellofemoral syndrome. The examiner noted that anterior labrum tears have a typical etiology of repetitive use activities, not referred from another injury or condition in another body area. 

The Board notes that the examiner generally discussed the orthopedic literature, but did not discuss the Veteran's specific contention that the condition is related to the lumbosacral strain and right and left patellofemoral syndrome. The Board finds that the April 2023 VA examiner did not adequately address the Veteran's specific claimed conditions and did not specifically address the nature and etiology of the Veteran's right hip labral tear. The Board further notes that the examiner only addressed service-connection as to the left patellofemoral syndrome, and did not directly address the Veteran's other service-connected conditions. The Board finds that an opinion that specifically discusses each service-connected condition and the Veteran's symptoms associated with that condition and how that condition may have impacted the Veteran's claimed right hip condition is needed. A generalized discussion regarding the relationship of joints does not adequately address the Veteran's contentions in this matter. Therefore, the Board finds that the RO made a predicational duty to assist error when it relied on an inadequate VA examination to deny the Veteran's claim.

One of the effects of the AMA is to narrow the set of circumstances in which the Board must remand appeals to the RO or further development instead of immediately deciding them directly.  Nevertheless, even under the AMA, the Board still has the duty to remand issues when necessary to correct a pre-decisional duty-to-assist error.  See Pub L. No. 115-55 section (2)(d); 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).  

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for a new VA examination with an appropriately qualified clinician to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's right hip labral tear. 

The examiner should be provided a copy of the Veteran's medical record CAPRI from March 2023 and May 2023. The examiner should also be provided a copy of this Remand and a copy of all prior VA examinations. 

The examiner must address the following:

(a)	Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's right hip labral tear was caused by or aggravated by a service-connected condition? 

The examiner must specifically address causation and aggravation as to the Veteran's service-connected lumbosacral strain and right and left patellofemoral syndrome.

(b)	Provide an opinion as to the nature and etiology of the Veteran's right hip labral tear. 

If any requested opinion cannot be offered without resorting to speculation, the examiner should indicate such in the examination report and explain why a non-speculative opinion cannot be offered. The examiner should also identify what, if any, additional information, or evidence would allow for a more definitive opinion. 

The medical opinion must support the conclusions reached with an analysis that is adequate to consider and weigh against other evidence of record; medical opinions must contain not only clear conclusions with supporting data, but also a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two. 

(Continued on the next page)

?

A complete rationale should be given for all opinions and conclusions expressed. If the examiner cannot provide an opinion without resort to speculation, the examiner should provide an explanation as to why this is so and note what, if any, additional evidence would permit such an opinion to be made. 

2. Thereafter, readjudicate the claim.

 

 

B. MULLINS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Counsel, H. Hailu

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.