Citation Nr: A25034694
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 241028-486835
DATE: April 15, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for tinnitus is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from August 1972 to July 1975, with additional service in the Reserve.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal of a December 2023 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).  

In November 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, and requested readjudication of the claim of service connection for tinnitus most recently addressed in a November 1996 rating decision.  In December 2023, the AOJ issued the supplemental claim rating decision on appeal, which found that new and relevant evidence had been received and denied the claim based on the evidence of record at the time of that decision.  

In the October 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the December 2023 supplemental claim rating decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  If evidence was submitted after the AOJ issued the December 2023 rating decision, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  However, because the Board is remanding the claim of service connection for tinnitus any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of that claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103.

Entitlement to service connection for tinnitus is remanded.

The Veteran asserts that her tinnitus began in 1975 due to military noise exposure, including from weapons and vehicles.  See October 2022 VA Form 21-526EZ.

The Board notes that while the Veteran was afforded a VA examination in August 1996, no opinion was provided.  Although the Veteran's service treatment records (STRs) are silent as to tinnitus, there is a threshold shift between her July 1972 entrance examination and her September 1981 separation examination.  Additionally, military personnel records reflect a commendation for her participation in a combat arms exercise in August 1981.  As the August 1996 VA examination did not include an opinion that considered the Veteran's entire medical history, to include her lay statements, personnel records, and STRs, and was not supported by an analysis that the Board can weigh, the Board finds the examination to be inadequate.  Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008).  As such, remand is necessary to obtain a medical opinion regarding the Veteran's tinnitus.  Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 312 (2007).

The Board acknowledges the July 1996 private treatment records relied upon by the AOJ stating that the onset of the Veteran's tinnitus was in 1985 resulting for her work in a shipyard.  However, those same records indicate that she was on active duty from 1978 to 1980 and served on the shooting range three times during that time.  

The Board notes that the record reflects Reserve service, but the claims file does not show that VA requested the Veteran's complete military file, to include dates and records for periods of active duty for training (ACDUTRA) and inactive duty for training (INACDUTRA).  VA has a duty to assist the claimant in obtaining all relevant records pertaining to the claimant's active military service that are held or maintained by a governmental entity, if adequately identified by a claimant.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5103A; Sullivan v. McDonald, 815 F.3d 786, 790 (Fed. Cir. 2016).  Thus, the Board finds that VA has not made sufficient efforts to assist the Veteran in obtaining these records, and remand is necessary to correct this error.  Id.

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

1. Determine all dates of active duty, ACDUTRA, and INACDUTRA during the Veteran's Reserve service.  The AOJ should prepare a summary of such dates or document for the record why the production such summary is not possible.  Ensure all service personnel and STRs relating to her Reserve service are of record.  

2. After record development, obtain an opinion from an appropriately qualified clinician to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's tinnitus.  The evidentiary record, including a copy of this remand, must be made available to, and reviewed by the clinician.  If the clinician determines that a new examination of the Veteran is necessary to provide an adequate opinion, one should be scheduled.  

The clinician should be provided a breakdown of all dates of active duty, ACDUTRA, and INACDUTRA during the Veteran's Reserve service.

The reviewing clinician must opine on whether it is at least as likely as not (at least an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence) that the Veteran's tinnitus had its onset in, manifested within a year of separation from, or is otherwise related to a period of active duty, ACDUTRA, or INACDUTRA service.

The examiner must address the threshold shift between her July 1972 entrance examination and her September 1981 separation examination, and military personnel records reflect that reflect a commendation for her participation in a combat arms exercise in August 1981.

The clinician is advised that the Veteran is competent to attest to factual matters of which she has first-hand knowledge, including observable symptomatology.  These reports must be acknowledged and considered in formulating any opinion (to include the Veteran's lay statements described in the body of this remand).  If the clinician finds any medical reason to reject the lay reports, then an explanation must be provided.

The clinician is reminded that a lack of evidence or medical documentation cannot be corroborating to conclude that there is no relationship between the Veteran's tinnitus and her military service, and that the absence of a diagnosis in service is not fatal to a service connection claim and is insufficient as a rationale.

(Continued on the next page)

?

If an opinion cannot be provided without resorting to speculation, the clinician must provide a complete explanation for why an opinion cannot be rendered.  In so doing, the clinician must explain whether the inability to provide a more definitive opinion is the result of a need for additional information, or that the limits of current medical knowledge in providing an answer to that particular question have been exhausted.

 

 

A. J. Spector

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Garcia, M. A.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.