Citation Nr: A25034081
Decision Date: 04/14/25	Archive Date: 04/14/25

DOCKET NO. 240624-450148
DATE: April 14, 2025

ORDER

Service connection for a left hip disorder is denied.

Service connection for a right hip disorder is denied.

An initial rating of 30 percent, but no higher, for asthma is granted, subject to the laws and regulations governing the payment of monetary awards.

A rating in excess of 10 percent for bilateral hearing loss is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) is remanded.

Entitlement to a total disability rating based on individual unemployability due to service-connected disabilities (TDIU) is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. A left hip disorder is not shown to be causally or etiologically related to any disease, injury, or incident during service.

2. A right hip disorder is not shown to be causally or etiologically related to any disease, injury, or incident during service.

3. Resolving all doubt in favor of the Veteran, for the entire appeal period, his asthma required daily inhalation or oral bronchodilator therapy, but was not manifested by Forced Expiratory Volume (FEV-1) of 40 to 55 percent predicted, FEV-1/Force Vital Capacity (FVC) of 40 to 55 percent, required at least monthly visits to a physician for required care of exacerbations, or intermittent (at least three per year) courses of systemic (oral or parenteral) corticosteroids.

4. For the entire appeal period, the Veteran demonstrated no worse than Level V hearing in the right ear and Level II hearing in the left ear.  

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for service connection for a left hip disorder have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

2. The criteria for service connection for a right hip disorder have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

3. The criteria for an initial rating of 30 percent, but no higher, for asthma have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.7, 4.96, 4.97, Diagnostic Code (DC) 6602.

4. The criteria for a rating in excess of 10 percent for bilateral hearing loss have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.7, 4.85, 4.86, DC 6100.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from April 1969 to October 1970. This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a rating decision issued in May 2024 by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office under the modernized appeals system known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA). In June 2024, the Veteran filed a Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) (VA Form 101820) and requested a hearing before a Veterans Law Judge, which was held in November 2024. A transcript of the hearing is associated with the record.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the May 2024 AOJ decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or his representative at the hearing or within 90 days following the hearing. 38 C.F.R. § 20.302(a). If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal and prior to the Board hearing, or (2) more than 90 days following the hearing, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.302(a), 20.801. 

In this regard, the Board notes that additional evidence, to include VA treatment records and VA examination reports, was received within the 90-day evidence window after the November 2024 Board hearing. However, as such evidence was not submitted by the Veteran or his representative, but rather generated by VA, the Board may not consider such evidence in the adjudication of the claims on appeal. 38 C.F.R. §20.302 (a)(3). 

Nonetheless, with respect to the claims adjudicated herein, if the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, he may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. However, as the Board is remanding the claims of entitlement to service connection for GERD and a TDIU, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of such claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

1. Entitlement to service connection for a left hip disorder.

2. Entitlement to service connection for a right hip disorder.

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by service.  38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a).  Service connection may also be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge, when all of the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).  Direct service connection may not be granted without evidence of a current disability; in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and a nexus between the claimed in-service disease or injury and the present disease or injury.  Id.; see also Caluza v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 498, 506 (1995) aff'd, 78 F.3d 604 (Fed. Cir. 1996).  

The Veteran is seeking service connection for a bilateral hip disorder. Specifically, during his November 2024 Board hearing, he testified that he hurt his right and left hips when he was removing heavy parts from a turbine engine and a part came loose and knocked him to the ground. However, based upon a review of the evidence, the Board finds that service connection for left and right hip disorders is not warranted.

In this regard, the Veteran's service treatment records (STRs) are silent for any complaints, treatment, or diagnoses referable to a bilateral hip disorder. Additionally, while the Veteran is competent to report his current symptomatology  and his post-service treatment records reflect a history of bilateral hip replacements, they do not suggest a relationship between such disorders and his military service. 

In this regard, the Board notes the Veteran was not afforded a VA examination and/or opinion in connection with his claims for service connection for left and right hip disorders. However, at the time of the May 2024 rating decision, there was no credible evidence of an event, injury, or disease in service, or an indication that such disorders may be related to service. Bardwell v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 36 (2010); Waters v. Shinseki, 601 F.3d 1274, 1278 (2010); McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006). Rather, the Veteran first claimed that his left and right hip disorder had its onset in service after he was knocked down while removing heavy parts from a turbine engine during his November 2024 Board hearing, which was after the issuance of the May 2024 rating decision on appeal. Therefore, the Board finds that there was no pre-decisional duty to assist error in the AOJ's determination not to afford him a VA examination and/or opinion. Moreover, there is no medical opinion of record demonstrating that the Veteran's left and/or right hip disorder is related to his military service.

The Board has also considered the Veteran's assertions as to the etiology of his left and right hip disorders. While he is competent to report relevant symptomatology as a lay person, he does not have the requisite training and experience necessary to offer an opinion addressing the etiology of such disorders as such is a complex medical question. See Jandreau, v. Nicholson,?491 F.3d 1372?(Fed. Cir. 2007) (noting general competence to testify as to symptoms but not to provide medical diagnosis). In this regard, the etiology of a left and right hip disorder involves a medical subject concerning an internal physical process extending beyond an immediately observable cause-and-effect relationship. Therefore, such matter may not be competently addressed by lay statements. See Woehlaert v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 456, 462 (2007) (explaining that while the claimant is competent in certain situations to provide a diagnosis of a simple condition such as a broken leg or varicose veins, the claimant is not competent to provide evidence as to more complex medical questions). Accordingly, the Veteran's opinion as to the etiology of his left and right hip disorders is not competent evidence and, consequently, is afforded no probative weight. 

Thus, based on the foregoing, the Board finds that the Veteran's left and right hip disorders are not shown to be causally or etiologically related to any disease, injury, or incident during service. Consequently, service connection for left hip and right hip disorders is not warranted. 

In reaching this decision, the Board has considered the applicability of the benefit of the doubt doctrine. However, as the weight of the probative evidence is against the Veteran's claims for service connection for left hip and right hip disorders, such doctrine is not applicable in the instant appeal and his claims must be denied. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

Increased Ratings

Disability ratings are determined by applying a schedule of ratings that is based on average impairment of earning capacity. Separate diagnostic codes identify the various disabilities. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R., Part 4. Each disability must be viewed in relation to its history and the limitation of activity imposed by the disabling condition should be emphasized. 38 C.F.R. § 4.1. Examination reports are to be interpreted in light of the whole recorded history, and each disability must be considered from the point of view of the veteran working or seeking work. 38 C.F.R. § 4.2. All reasonable doubt will be resolved in the claimant's favor. 38 C.F.R. § 4.3. Where there is a question as to which of two disability evaluations shall be applied, the higher evaluation is to be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating. Otherwise, the lower rating is to be assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7.

Separate ratings can be assigned for separate periods based on the facts found - a practice known as "staged" ratings. Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119 (1999); Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007). Staged ratings are appropriate whenever the factual findings show distinct periods where the service-connected disability exhibits symptoms that would warrant different ratings. Id. 

3. Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 10 percent for asthma. 

For the entire appeal period, stemming from November 29, 2023, the date of service connection, the Veteran's asthma is rated as 10 percent disabling pursuant to DC 6602. In this regard, the Board notes that, in a March 2025 rating decision, an increased rating of 30 percent for such disability was awarded as of December 27, 2024; however, the propriety of such rating is not properly before the Board and will not be addressed herein.

Under DC 6602, a 10 percent rating is assigned for asthma manifested by FEV-1 of 71- to 80-percent predicted, or; FEV-1/FVC of 71 to 80 percent, or; intermittent inhalational or oral bronchodilator therapy. A 30 percent rating is assigned for asthma manifested by FEV-1 of 56- to 70-percent predicted, or; FEV-1/FVC of 56 to 70 percent, or; daily inhalational or oral bronchodilator therapy, or; inhalational anti-inflammatory medication. A 60 percent rating is assigned for asthma manifested by FEV-1 of 40- to 55-percent predicted, or; FEV-1/FVC of 40 to 55 percent, or; at least monthly visits to a physician for required care of exacerbations, or; intermittent (at least three per year) courses of systemic (oral or parenteral) corticosteroids.  inhalational anti-inflammatory medication. A 100 percent rating is assigned for asthma manifested by FEV-1 less than 40-percent predicted, or; FEV-1/FVC less than 40 percent, or; more than one attack per week with episodes of respiratory failure, or; requires daily use of systemic (oral or parenteral) high dose corticosteroids or immuno-suppressive medications.  

In applying the foregoing criteria, VA regulations provide that post-bronchodilator studies are required when pulmonary function tests (PFTs) are done for disability evaluation purposes except when the results of pre-bronchodilator pulmonary function tests are normal or when the examiner determines that post-bronchodilator studies should not be done and states why. 38 C.F.R. § 4.96(d)(4). Additionally, when evaluating based on PFTs, post-bronchodilator results are used in applying the evaluation criteria in the rating schedule unless the post-bronchodilator results were poorer than the pre-bronchodilator results. In those cases, the pre-bronchodilator values are to be used for rating purposes. 38 C.F.R. § 4.96(d)(5). Finally, when there is a disparity between the results of different pulmonary function tests (FEV-1, FVC, etc.), so that the level of evaluation would differ depending on which test result is used, the adjudicator should use the test result that the examiner states most accurately reflects the level of disability. 38 C.F.R. § 4.96(d)(6).

After a review of the record, the Board finds that an initial rating of 30 percent, but no higher, is warranted for the Veteran's service-connected asthma.

In this regard, the Veteran's VA treatment records reveal that he was prescribed albuterol and was instructed to inhale it 4 times a day as needed for breathing, and he used it as needed before bedtime. See May 2023 and June 2023 VA treatment records. Such records also reveal that the Veteran was prescribed Ipratropium nasal spray and Loratadine for his allergy symptoms. In June 2023, it was also noted that he was stable on his current inhaler.  

At a February 2024 VA examination, the Veteran reported worsening shortness of breath and wheezing, and such examiner noted that an albuterol inhaler was used as needed for treatment. In this regard, the examiner noted that the Veteran's asthma required the use of inhaled medications as he used inhalational bronchodilator therapy intermittently. However, she found that the Veteran's asthma did not require the use of parenteral corticosteroid medications, oral bronchodilators, antibiotics, or outpatient oxygen therapy. She also noted that the Veteran did not have any asthma attacks with episodes of respiratory failure in the past 12 months nor did he have any physician visits for required care of exacerbations. The Veteran's chest X-ray revealed no active disease. No other pertinent physical findings, complications, conditions, signs, or symptoms were noted. PFTs showed the Veteran's pre-bronchodilator FVC was 112 percent predicted, FEV-1 was 127 percent predicted, and FEV-1/FVC was 114 percent predicted. The examiner noted that post-bronchodilator testing was not completed as the Veteran's pre-bronchodilator results were normal. The examiner also determined that the Veteran's asthma impacted his ability to work as he was not able to tolerate strenuous activity. 

During his November 2024 Board hearing, the Veteran testified that his asthma was triggered by spices and perfume/cologne and he used his inhaler no more or less than 4 times per day. He also stated that he was given a nebulizer for his asthma, which he used once every other week. The Veteran's spouse also stated that he could barely walk around the yard without an inhaler. 

Therefore, based on the foregoing, the Board finds that, for the entire appeal period, a 30 percent rating, but no higher, is warranted for the Veteran's asthma. In this regard, while the February 2024 VA examiner noted that his asthma required the use of intermittent, rather than daily, inhalational bronchodilator therapy, his VA treatment records and Board hearing testimony indicates that he used daily inhalational bronchodilator therapy. Specifically, such reveal that he was prescribed albuterol to inhale 4 times a day and he reported he used his inhaler daily. His spouse also testified that he could barely walk around the yard without an inhaler. However, the evidence of record does not show, nor does the Veteran contend, that his asthma resulted in FEV-1 of 40- to 55-percent predicted, FEV-1/FVC of 40 to 55 percent, required at least monthly visits to a physician for required care of exacerbations, or intermittent (at least three per year) courses of systemic (oral or parenteral) corticosteroids, which is required for the next higher rating of 60 percent. 

Thus, given the foregoing, the Board resolves all doubt in favor of the Veteran and finds that his asthma is most approximately manifested by daily inhalational therapy. Thus, an initial 30 percent rating, but no higher, is warranted for the entire appeal period. 

In reaching the foregoing determination, the Board recognizes the Veteran's sincerely held belief that his asthma is more severe than as reflected by the currently assigned rating. The Board must consider the entire evidence of record when analyzing the criteria laid out in the rating schedule. While the Board recognizes that the Veteran is competent to describe his symptomatology, he is not competent to provide an opinion regarding the severity of his symptomatology in accordance with the rating criteria. Woehlaert, supra. The Board finds the medical evidence in which professionals with medical expertise examined the Veteran in regard to his asthma, acknowledged his reported symptoms, and described the manifestations of such disability in light of the rating criteria to be more persuasive than his own reports regarding the severity of such disability.

4. Entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent for bilateral hearing loss.

The appeal period before the Board begins on November 29, 2023, the date VA received the Veteran's claim for an increased rating of his bilateral hearing loss, plus the one-year look back period. Gaston v. Shinseki, 605 F.3d 979, 982 (Fed. Cir. 2010). For the entire appeal period, he is in receipt of a 10 percent rating for his service-connected bilateral hearing loss pursuant to DC 6100. 38 C.F.R. § 4.85. 

Ratings of hearing loss range from noncompensable to 100 percent based on organic impairment of hearing acuity as measured by the results of speech discrimination tests combined with the average hearing threshold levels as measured by pure tone audiometry tests in the frequencies 1000, 2000, 3000, and 4000 cycles per second. To rate the degree of disability for service-connected hearing loss, the Rating Schedule has established eleven auditory acuity levels, designated from level I, for essentially normal acuity, through level XI, for profound deafness. 38 C.F.R. § 4.85(h), Table VI. In order to establish entitlement to a compensable rating for hearing loss, it must be shown that certain minimum levels of the combination of the percentage of speech discrimination loss and average pure tone decibel loss are met. The assignment of disability ratings for hearing impairment is derived by a mechanical application of the Rating Schedule to the numeric designations assigned after audiometric evaluations are rendered. Lendenmann v. Principi, 3 Vet. App. 345, 349 (1992).

The criteria for rating hearing impairment use controlled speech discrimination tests (Maryland CNC) together with the results of pure tone audiometry tests. These results are then charted on Table VI, or Table VIA in exceptional cases as described in 38 C.F.R. § 4.86, and Table VII, as set out in the Rating Schedule. 38 C.F.R. § 4.85. An exceptional pattern of hearing loss occurs when the pure tone threshold at 1000, 2000, 3000, and 4000 Hertz is 55 decibels or more, or when the pure tone threshold is 30 decibels or less at 1000 Hertz and 70 decibels or more at 2000 Hertz. 38 C.F.R. § 4.86(a). In the latter case, the rating specialist will determine the Roman numeral designation for hearing impairment from either Table VI or Table VIA, whichever results in the higher numeral, and that numeral will then be elevated to the next higher Roman numeral. 38 C.F.R. § 4.86(b).

In this regard, at his November 2024 Board hearing, the Veteran testified that he has to turn the volume up on the television, has difficulty hearing with background noise and speech discrimination, and avoids conversation.

However, a June 2023 VA treatment record noted a review of systems that revealed no hearing loss. At a March 2024 VA examination, the Veteran reported that his bilateral hearing loss impacted his daily life, including his ability to work, as he had trouble hearing in groups and had to read people's lips. Pure tone thresholds in decibels at the tested frequencies of 1000, 2000, 3000, and 4000 Hertz were 40, 50, 70, and 85, respectively, in the right ear and 30, 40, 45, and 65, respectively, in the left ear. The examiner noted that the pure tone threshold average in the right ear was 61 decibels and the average in the left ear was 45 decibels. Word recognition testing revealed speech recognition ability of 70 percent in the right ear and 84 percent in the left ear. No exceptional pattern of hearing loss was shown. These audiometric test results equate to Level V hearing in the right and Level II hearing in the left ear, which equates to a 10 percent rating for bilateral hearing loss. Thus, the Board finds that a rating in excess of 10 percent for bilateral hearing loss is not warranted.

To the extent that the Veteran contends that his bilateral hearing loss is more severe than currently evaluated, the Board observes that he, while competent to report symptoms capable of lay observation, to include difficulty hearing and understanding speech, he is not competent to report that his hearing acuity is of sufficient severity to warrant a compensable rating under VA's tables for rating hearing loss disabilities because such an opinion requires medical expertise (training in evaluating hearing impairment), which he has not been shown to possess. See Davidson v. Shinseki, 581 F.3d 1313 (Fed. Cir. 2009); Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372 (Fed. Cir. 2007); Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331 (Fed. Cir. 2006); Charles v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 370 (2002); Woehlaert v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 456 (2007). 

Despite the foregoing, the Board acknowledges the Veteran's aforementioned reports of the difficulties associated with his bilateral hearing loss.  However, even after considering such contentions as to the effects of the disability on his daily life, the Board finds that the criteria for a higher rating are not met.  Lendenmann, supra.  In this regard, in Doucette, supra, the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims held that the rating criteria for hearing loss contemplate the functional effects of decreased hearing and difficulty understanding speech in an everyday work environment as these are the effects that VA's audiometric tests are designed to measure.  The Veteran has not otherwise described functional effects that are considered exceptional, or that are not otherwise contemplated by the assigned evaluation. Id.  Thus, his complete disability picture is compensated under the rating schedule.  

Other Considerations

The Board has also considered whether staged ratings under Fenderson, supra, and Hart, supra, are appropriate for the Veteran's service-connected asthma and bilateral hearing loss; however, the Board finds that his symptomatology has been stable throughout the appeal period. Therefore, assigning additional staged ratings is not warranted. Further, neither the Veteran nor his representative have raised any other issues, nor have any other issues been reasonably raised by the record, in connection with the initial and increased rating claims adjudicated herein. Doucette v. Shulkin, 28 Vet. App. 366 (2017).

In reaching the foregoing determination, the Board has resolved all doubt in the Veteran's favor, which has resulted in a partial award of a higher initial rating for his asthma. However, insofar as the Board has denied higher ratings for such disability, and bilateral hearing loss, the weight of the probative evidence is against such aspects of the Veteran's claims. Therefore, the benefit of the doubt doctrine is not applicable and such initial and increased rating claims must otherwise be denied. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7.

REASONS FOR REMAND

5. Entitlement to service connection for GERD.

The Veteran contends his GERD is directly related to his military service. In this regard, at his February 2024 VA examination, he reported that he began to have heartburn, reflux, and regurgitation that was treated with over the counter medications over the years. During his November 2024 Board hearing, the Veteran testified that his GERD could be related to exposure to burning waste during his service in Vietnam. 

In this regard, the Veteran's STRs are negative for any complaints, treatment, or diagnoses referrable to GERD. Nonetheless, in January 2024, a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA) memorandum reflects that he was exposed to herbicide agents coincident with his service in Vietnam and fuel, diesel, JP8, JP4, industrial solvents, paint fumes, benzene, mono ammonium phosphate, carbon monoxide, and possible asbestos coincident with his military occupational specialty (MOS) as aircraft maintenance. 

Additionally, at a February 2024 VA examination, the examiner diagnosed GERD with a date of diagnosis in 1972. However, she opined that such disorder was less likely than not caused by the indicated TERA, after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all TERA of the Veteran. As rationale, she noted that GERD occurs when the stomach acid backs up into the esophagus due to a weakened sphincter and/or excess stomach acid production. However, she found that there was no evidence to support that any sort of environmental exposure could cause GERD. Thus, she concluded that after reviewing a VA web article regarding Agent Orange exposures, it was less likely than not that the Veteran's GERD was caused by his MOS of maintenance aircraft after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic combined effective of all TERA of the Veteran. 

However, while the examiner noted that the Veteran's GERD onset in 1972, she did not address his reports of having an onset of heartburn, reflux, and regurgitation during service with a continuity of symptomatology thereafter. Thus, the Board finds that a remand is necessary to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error by obtaining an addendum opinion to address such concern.

6. Entitlement to a TDIU.

As the outcome of the Veteran's claim for service connection for GERD remanded herein could affect his claim for a TDIU, such claims are inextricably intertwined. Consequently, adjudication of the latter matter must be deferred pending the development and readjudication of the former matter. Tyrues v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 166, 177 (2009) (en banc) (explaining that claims are inextricably intertwined where the adjudication of one claim could have a significant impact on the adjudication of another claim); Harris v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 180, 183 (1991) (where a claim is inextricably intertwined with another claim, the claims must be adjudicated together in order to enter a final decision on the matter). 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Forward the record, to include a copy of this remand, to an appropriate VA examiner in order to obtain an opinion addressing the etiology of the Veteran's GERD.

Following a review of the record, the examiner should offer an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's currently diagnosed GERD had its onset in, or is otherwise related to, his military service, to include his reported exposure to burning waste and/or his acknowledged exposure to herbicide agents and/or fuel, diesel, JP8, JP4, industrial solvents, paint fumes, benzene, mono ammonium, phosphate, carbon monoxide, and possible asbestos coincident with his service in Vietnam and his MOS as maintenance aircraft.  

In offering such opinion, the examiner should consider the Veteran's report that he began experiencing heartburn, reflux, and regurgitation during service, which have continued to the present time. 

The examiner is advised that the absence of evidence of complaints, treatment, or a diagnosis referable to GERD in the Veteran's STRs, or a lack of post-service treatment records demonstrating a continuity of care, cannot serve as the sole basis for a negative opinion. 

In this regard, if the examiner rejects the Veteran's lay statements as to onset and/or a continuity of symptomatology, he or she should provide a reason for doing so beyond the mere lack of corroborating records.

In offering such opinion, the examiner is also advised that an opinion finding no relationship between GERD and the Veteran's acknowledged in-service exposure to herbicide agents may not be based solely on the fact that such disease has not been presumptively related to exposure to herbicide agents.

A rationale for any opinion offered should be provided.

 

 

A. JAEGER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	K. Clark

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.