Citation Nr: A25034926
Decision Date: 04/16/25	Archive Date: 04/16/25

DOCKET NO. 240531-444289
DATE:  April 16, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to a compensable rating for nephrolithiasis (kidney stones) is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran had active duty training (ADT) from July 1980 to November 1980, with additional service in the Army National Guard.

This case comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal of a February 2024 rating decision by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In the May 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the February 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of entitlement to an initial compensable rating for nephrolithiasis, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Increased Rating - Nephrolithiasis

The Veteran has asserted that he should have a higher rating for his service-connected nephrolithiasis, to include separate compensable ratings for kidney cancer, status post nephrectomy, and residual surgical scar. 

In an October 2023 statement, the Veteran reported that he first was told he had three kidney stones while he was in active service. He reported that while he had passed two of the three, the remaining stone was reportedly "stuck to the wall" of the right kidney. He reported that he continued to have blood in his urine ever since that time and in June 2023, was ultimately informed that what he had been told was a kidney stone, had actually developed into cancer.

In December 2023, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination. At that time, it was noted that the Veteran had nephrolithiasis, kidney cancer, and kidney removal. However, additional details regarding when and where the kidney cancer was diagnosed and ultimately treated were not solicited by the December 2023 VA examiner. In a December 2023 rating decision, the Veteran was granted entitlement to service connection for nephrolithiasis and assigned a noncompensable rating and told that final disability evaluation was being deferred pending medical documentation. 

In February 2024, an addendum opinion was sought regarding the nature and etiology of the Veteran's kidney cancer and subsequent nephrectomy. Neither an in-person examination nor an interview with the Veteran was conducted by the examiner providing the requested medical opinion. At that time, the VA examiner found that it was less likely as not that the kidney cancer and subsequent nephrectomy were related to the Veteran's kidney stones in service. The examiner did not provide a sufficient rationale for the conclusion reached.

Based on the February 2024 medical opinion, the noncompensable rating for the Veteran's nephrolithiasis was continued in the February 2024 rating decision on appeal.

The Board finds that the development conducted in this case is inadequate. First and foremost, efforts to assist the Veteran in obtaining identified treatment records were not made. In this regard, the Veteran informed VA that he had been diagnosed with kidney cancer and had undergone a nephrectomy. However, there was no development conducted in an effort to identify and obtain those medical records. With regard to the February 2024 VA medical opinion, the opinion was rendered without interview with the Veteran so as to afford the examiner to ask questions of the Veteran regarding his kidney condition, and his history of treatment for such. Further, the examiner was unable to review records related to the diagnosis and treatment. 

Failure to assist the Veteran in obtaining identified medical records and failure to obtain an adequate examination and medical opinion constitute a pre-decisional duty-to-assist error. Accordingly, remand is required for corrective action.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Conduct the appropriate development to identify and obtain medical records pertaining to the diagnosis and treatment of the Veteran's kidney cancer, to include the medical records documenting the Veteran's nephrectomy. All efforts in this regard must be documented in the claims file. If attempts to obtain the records are unsuccessful, the Veteran must be informed of that fact and allowed the opportunity to submit the records on his own behalf. 

2. Schedule the Veteran for an examination by an examiner with appropriate expertise to determine the nature and etiology of the claimed kidney cancer and subsequent nephrectomy. The claims file must be made available to and reviewed by the examiner. Any indicated tests and studies must be performed. 

Based on the examination results and review of the record, the examiner must provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the claimed kidney cancer had its onset during the Veteran's service or is otherwise etiologically related to such service, to specifically include the Veteran's in-service nephrolithiasis. 

The examiner must also provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the claimed kidney cancer was caused by, aggravated by, or would not have occurred but for the Veteran's service-connected nephrolithiasis. 

A complete and detailed rationale for all opinions expressed must be provided.

 

 

Kristin Haddock

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	UmezEronini, Ikechukwu

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.