Citation Nr: A25034144
Decision Date: 04/14/25	Archive Date: 04/14/25

DOCKET NO. 240725-458257
DATE: April 14, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for erectile dysfunction to include as secondary to diabetes mellitus type II is remanded. 

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral lower extremity peripheral neuropathy to include as secondary to diabetes mellitus type II is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for diabetes mellitus type II is remanded. 

Entitlement to service connection for stroke residuals is remanded. 

Entitlement to service connection for coronary artery disease is remanded. 

Entitlement to service connection for hypertension is remanded. 

Entitlement to service connection for actinic keratosis claimed as skin cancer is remanded. 

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from June 1971 to August 1977. This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeal (Board) on appeal from an August 2023 rating decision from a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO). 

The August 2023 rating decision found that new and relevant evidence had been received to readjudicate the claims of actinic keratosis claimed as skin cancer, coronary artery disease, and diabetes mellitus type II. These are favorable findings by the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) and the Board will proceed to the address the claims on the merits.  See 38?U.S.C. § 5104A; 38?C.F.R. § 3.104(c).

In the July 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal, the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Based upon the selection of the Direct Review option, the Board may only consider the evidence of record as of August 18, 2023-the date of the rating decision on appeal.  See 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If the Veteran submitted evidence that was added to the record after August 18,2023, the Board did not consider it. If the Veteran wishes to have VA consider any evidence that was not considered, a supplemental claim should be submitted identifying such evidence.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.

1. Entitlement to service connection for erectile dysfunction is remanded. 

2. Entitlement to service connection for bilateral lower extremity peripheral neuropathy is remanded.

In his July 2023 VA 21-526EZ, the Veteran filed for entitlement to service connection for erectile dysfunction and bilateral lower extremity peripheral neuropathy. Both conditions were claimed as secondary to his nonservice connected diabetes mellitus type II. The Board now finds a remand is necessary here, as explained next. 

The August 2023 rating decision did not address those issues because the RO erroneously sent a letter in August 2023 to the Veteran informing him that he filed the claims on the wrong form. A review of the record shows that the claims were first filed for service connection in his July 2023 VA 21-526EZ, and therefore they were filed on the correct form.

Since the RO did not adjudicate these matters in the first instance, the Board will remand these claims back to the RO for adjudication and issuance of a rating decision as adjudication on the merits may lead to substantiating these issues. See 38 C.F.R. §20.802(a) ("The Board may remand for correction of any other error by the agency of original jurisdiction in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty, if correction of the error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the appellant's claim.").

3. Entitlement to service connection for actinic keratosis claimed as skin cancer is remanded.

4. Entitlement to service connection for hypertension is remanded.

The Veteran contends that he is entitled to service connection for actinic keratosis claimed as skin cancer (skin condition) and hypertension due to exposure during his service. In support of both claims, the Veteran submitted articles that provided evidence that chemicals such as Polychlorinated Biphenyl (PCB), Volatile Organic Compounds, (VOC), Benzene, Arsenic, Benzo (b) fluoranthene, and Carbon Disulfide were found at MCAS El Toro. Alternatively, the Veteran argues that both conditions were caused by his exposure to the Contaminated Waters at Camp Lejeune (CWCL). 

The Board finds that a pre-decisional duty to assist error occurred in not providing the Veteran with a VA examination and medical opinion for his claims for service connection for hypertension and a skin condition. 

First, the Board finds that the record supports the Veteran's exposure to the CWCL since the Veteran served at Camp Lejeune in 1971 for at least 30 days as his Record of Assignments confirms. Therefore, he is considered exposed to its contaminated waters. 38 C.F.R. §3.307(a)(7)(iii). Additionally, the RO made the favorable finding in the August 2023 rating decision that the Veteran had a current diagnosis of a skin condition, basal cell carcinoma, and hypertension. Lastly, the Veteran was not provided a VA examination for either claim, nor a medical opinion on whether his exposure to the CWCL caused his skin condition or hypertension. 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(d); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159 (c). 

Accordingly, the Board finds that the VA was required to assist the Veteran in supporting his claim by providing a VA examination and medical opinion on whether his conceded exposure to the CWCL is related to his hypertension and skin condition. Since no VA examination nor medical opinion is of record, a remand to correct the pre-decisional duty to assist error is required. See 38 C.F.R. §20.802(a) ("[T]he Board shall remand the appeal to the agency of original jurisdiction for correction of an error on the part of the agency of original jurisdiction to satisfy its duties under 38 U.S.C. 5103A, if the error occurred prior to the date of the agency of original jurisdiction decision on appeal."). 

5. Entitlement to service connection for diabetes mellitus type II is remanded.

In correspondence, the Veteran's representative argued that the RO did not adequately develop the Veteran's claim of exposure to Agent Orange during his service in Marine Corps Air Station El Toro. Alternatively, the Veteran's representative contended that the Veteran was exposed to industrial solvents during service at El Toro MCAS because he removed chemical substances that were used to kill plants. The Board observes that the Veteran had an MOS as an Aviation Supply Man. Additionally, the representative also argued that the RO did not consider whether his exposure to the Contaminated Waters at Camp Lejeune (CWCL) caused his diabetes mellitus type II on a direct basis. 

The Board finds that there was a pre-decisional duty to assist error in not providing the Veteran with a VA examination and medical opinion given his exposure to the CWCL. The Veteran's Military Personnel Records shows that he served in Camp Lejeune in 1971 and served at least 30 days at Camp Lejeune. Therefore, he is considered exposed to its contaminated waters. 38 C.F.R. §3.307(a)(7)(iii). 

Although diabetes mellitus type II is not a condition for which presumptive service connection is afforded under 38 C.F.R. §3.309(f), the exposure to CWCL would nevertheless be an event during service that can meet the second element of service connection. Additionally, though his November 2012 DBQ did diagnose a condition, impaired fasting glucose, a medical opinion on whether the condition was related to service was never provided. Since the RO is required to assist the Veteran with the development of his claim where the evidence in the record is insufficient to decide the claim, a remand is required to correct the pre-decisional duty to assist error. See 38 C.F.R. §20.802(a). 

6. Entitlement to service connection for stroke residuals is remanded. 

7. Entitlement to service connection for coronary artery disease is remanded. 

The Veteran has applied for service connection for stroke residuals and coronary artery disease. In a November 2012 Disability and Benefits Questionnaire (DBQ), the Veteran's VA physician, Dr. P.K.G. opined that his stroke residuals and coronary artery disease (CAD) were at least as likely as not due to his diabetes mellitus type II. This is a positive nexus opinion that may entitle the Veteran to secondary service connection for these conditions if his remanded claim for service connection for diabetes mellitus type II is granted. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310.  

Accordingly, a decision on the remanded issue of  entitlement to service connection for diabetes mellitus type II could significantly impact a decision on the issues of entitlement to service connection for stroke residuals and coronary artery disease (CAD), and thus the issues are inextricably intertwined. See Harris v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 180, 183 (1991) (holding that where a decision on one issue would have a "significant impact" upon another, and that impact in turn could render any appellate review meaningless and a waste of judicial resources, the two claims are inextricably intertwined). As such, a remand of the claims for stroke residuals and coronary artery disease (CAD) are necessary. 

These matters are REMANDED for the following actions:

1. Issue the Veteran and authorized representative a rating decision that addresses the issues of entitlement to service connection for erectile dysfunction and bilateral lower extremity peripheral neuropathy, both to include as secondary to service-connected disability or disabilities. 

2. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination for the actinic keratosis claimed as skin cancer.  The examiner must review the claims file to become familiar with the Veteran's relevant medical history.

If a diagnosis cannot be provided but the Veteran's condition manifests in symptoms that cause functional impairment, then the examiner should consider them a "disability" for the purpose of providing the requested opinions below. Please complete the functional impact section of the report.

The examiner is asked to provide a response to the following:

(a)	Is the Veteran's actinic keratosis claimed as skin cancer at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) related to service, including service and any exposures at Marine Corps Air Station El Toro?  

(b)	Is actinic keratosis claimed as skin cancer at least as likely as not related to contaminants in the water during service at Camp Lejeune? 

The examiner is advised that a negative opinion cannot be based solely on the fact that actinic keratosis claimed as skin cancer is not on the list of diseases that are presumptively associated with exposure to contaminants in the water supply at Camp Lejeune.

3. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination for hypertension.  The examiner must review the claims file to become familiar with the Veteran's relevant medical history.

If a diagnosis cannot be provided but the Veteran's condition manifests in symptoms that cause functional impairment, then the examiner should consider them a "disability" for the purpose of providing the requested opinions below. Please complete the functional impact section of the report.

The examiner is asked to provide a response to the following:

(a)	Is the Veteran's hypertension at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) related to service, including service and any exposures at Marine Corps Air Station El Toro?  

(b)	Is hypertension at least as likely as not related to contaminants in the water during service at Camp Lejeune?

The examiner is advised that a negative opinion cannot be based solely on the fact that hypertension is not on the list of diseases that are presumptively associated with exposure to contaminants in the water supply at Camp Lejeune.

4. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination for diabetes mellitus type II.  The examiner must review the claims file to become familiar with the Veteran's relevant medical history.

If a diagnosis cannot be provided but the Veteran's condition manifests in symptoms that cause functional impairment, then the examiner should consider them a "disability" for the purpose of providing the requested opinions below. Please complete the functional impact section of the report.

The examiner is asked to provide a response to the following:

(a)	Is the Veteran's diabetes mellitus type II at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) related to service, including any exposures during his service at Marine Corps Air Station El Toro?  

(b) Is the Veteran's diabetes mellitus type II at least as likely as not related to contaminants in the water during service at Camp Lejeune?

The examiner is advised that a negative opinion cannot be based solely on the fact that diabetes mellitus type II is not on the list of diseases that are presumptively associated with exposure to contaminants in the water supply at Camp Lejeune.

(Continued on the next page)

?

5. Inform EACH examiner that a comprehensive rationale for all opinions is to be provided.  All pertinent evidence, including both lay and medical, should be considered.  If an opinion cannot be given without resorting to speculation, the examiner should explain why and state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training).

 

 

Paul Sorisio

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	S. Dixon

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.