Citation Nr: A25034560
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 240116-408256
DATE: April 15, 2025

REMANDED

The issue of whether the character of the Appellant's discharge from service is a bar to entitlement to VA benefits, exclusive of health care and related benefits authorized under Chapter 17, Title 38, United States Code, is remanded.

The issue of entitlement to compensation for a psychiatric disorder, to include adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood, is remanded. 

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Appellant served on active duty from August 26, 2013 to April 5, 2017; the character of this service is the subject of the instant appeal. 

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a May 2023 rating decision by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office.  In the January 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal, the Veteran elected the direct review docket. As such, the Board's review is limited to the evidence of record at the time of the issuance of the decision on appeal (May 17, 2023). 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was associated with the claims file during a period of time when additional evidence was not allowed, the Board has not considered it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. § 20.300. Because these matters are being remanded, any evidence that is not considered by the Board at this time will be considered by the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) upon readjudication of this claim.

As an initial matter, the Board notes that the Appellant's January 2024 VA Form 10182 identified three dates for decisions he wished to appeal: May 17, 2023, October 10, 2023, and December 12, 2023. However, no decision documents related to the Veteran's character of service were issued in that time period. As such, the Board will address only the May 2023 rating decision. 

As a final initial matter, the Board notes that the May 2023 decision on appeal denied service connection, for treatment purposes only under 38 U.S.C. Chapter 17, for posttraumatic stress disorder. This decision noted that service connection, for treatment purposes only under 38 U.S.C. Chapter 17, for adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood was granted in March 2018. Given this posture and the Appellant's assertion that his service was honorable, the Board has recharacterized the issues on appeal as noted on the title page.

It appears that there are service personnel and treatment records that have not been obtained and associated with the claims file. Specifically, a March 2017 Preliminary Inquiry Report states that the investigation report is attached. However, no such report is in the claims file. The claims file also indicates that the Appellant received mental health treatment at Naval Hospital Bremerton. However, there are no records from Naval Hospital Bremerton and no formal finding of unavailability. Therefore, a remand is warranted for the AOJ to obtain the Appellant's entire personnel record, including the investigative report, and his complete service treatment records. 

The Appellant seeks "veteran" status as defined by VA regulations. 

A discharge or release from active service under conditions other than dishonorable is a prerequisite to entitlement to VA pension or compensation benefits. 38?U.S.C. §?101(18); 38?C.F.R. §?3.12(a). The designation of a discharge as honorable by a service department is binding on VA as to the character of discharge. Id. VA has no authority to alter the discharge classification, and the claimant's recourse is with the service department. 38?C.F.R. §?3.203(a); Spencer v. West, 13. Vet. App. 376, 380 (2000); Venturella v. Gober, 11?Vet. App.?240, 241 (1997); Cahall v. Brown, 7?Vet. App.?232, 237 (1994); Duro v. Derwinski, 2?Vet. App.?530, 532 (1992).

There are two types of bars to establishing entitlement to VA benefits: (1) statutory bars and (2) regulatory bars. 38 U.S.C. § 5303(a); 38?C.F.R. § 3.12(c), (d).

A statutory bar precludes the payment of VA benefits when a former service member was discharged or released under one of the following conditions: (1) as a conscientious objector who refused to perform military duty, wear the uniform, or comply with lawful order of competent military authorities; (2) by reason of the sentence of a general court-martial; (3) resignation by an officer for the good of the service; (4) as a deserter; (5) as an alien during a period of hostilities, where it is affirmatively shown that the former service member requested his or her release; and (6) by reason of a discharge under other than honorable conditions issued as a result of an AWOL for a continuous period of at least 180 days, with certain exceptions. 38 U.S.C. § 5303(a); 38 C.F.R. § 3.12(c).

Regulatory bars are discharges or releases due to one of the following offenses: (1) acceptance of a discharge under other than honorable conditions or its equivalent in lieu of trial by general court-martial; (2) mutiny or spying; (3) offenses involving moral turpitude, which includes, generally, conviction of a felony; and (4) willful and persistent misconduct.? 38 C.F.R. § 3.12(d). 

If?the appellant is shown to have been "insane" under VA regulations at the time of the offense leading to his discharge, the bar to payment of benefits imposed by the nature of the Appellant's discharge will be lifted.?38 U.S.C. § 5303(b);?38 C.F.R. § 3.12(b).

Under VA regulations, an insane person is one who, while not mentally defective or constitutionally psychopathic, except when a psychosis has been engrafted upon such basic condition, exhibits, due to disease, a more or less prolonged deviation from his normal method of behavior; or who interferes with the peace of society; or who has so departed (become antisocial) from the accepted standards of the community to which by birth and education he belongs as to lack the adaptability to make further adjustment to the social customs of the community in which he resides. 38 C.F.R. § 3.354(a).

The U.S. Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) has held that the insanity need only exist at the time of the commission of the offense leading to the person's discharge, and that there is no requirement of a causal connection between the insanity and the misconduct. Struck v. Brown, 9?Vet. App.?145 (1996). There still must be competent evidence, though, establishing the appellant was insane at the time of the offenses in question leading to the other than honorable discharge. Zang v. Brown, 8?Vet. App.?246, 254 (1995). In addition, the Court held that "a determination of whether a person is insane is, in effect, a determination of whether the person's actions were intentional, and, thus, the result of willful misconduct." Id. at 254. The Court further indicated such a determination is not warranted when the record does not reflect that a veteran suffered from insanity due to disease or that he or she did not know or understand the nature or consequences of his or her acts, or that what he or she was doing was wrong. Id. Significantly, the burden is on the appellant to submit competent medical evidence that the servicemember was insane at the time of the offenses. Stringham v. Brown, 8?Vet. App.?445, 449 (1995).? Furthermore, mental illness is not identical to "insanity." Beck v. West, 13?Vet. App.?535, 539 (2000). 

In May 1997, VA General Counsel discussed the intended parameters of the types of behavior, which were defined as insanity under 38 C.F.R. § 3.354(a). It was indicated that behavior involving a minor episode or episodes of disorderly conduct or eccentricity does not fall within the definition of insanity in that regulation. It was further indicated that a determination of the extent to which an individual's behavior must deviate from his or her normal method of behavior could be best resolved by adjudicative personnel on a case-by-case basis in light of the authorities defining the scope of the term insanity. VAOPGCPREC 20-97 (May 22, 1997).?

Following a review of the record, particularly the Appellant's statements that his mental health medications impacted his decision-making ability and the Appellant's diagnoses of adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood and attention deficit and hyperactivity disorder, the Board finds that a remand is necessary to obtain a medical opinion regarding the Appellant's mental state at the time of his misconduct. 

This remand is required to cure pre-decisional duty to assist errors.

The matter of entitlement to VA compensation for a psychiatric disorder is inextricably intertwined with the issue of whether the character of the Appellant's discharge from service is a bar to entitlement to VA benefits. See Harris v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 180, 183 (1991) (two or more issues are inextricably intertwined if one claim could have significant impact on the other). Therefore, this claim must also be remanded.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Request and associate with the claims file any service personnel records that have not been associated with the claims file, including any preliminary inquiry report associated with the March 2017 Captain's Mast. If these records do not exist or are otherwise unavailable, issue a formal finding of unavailability. 

2. Obtain the Appellant's complete service treatment records, to include any records from Naval Hospital Bremerton. All efforts to obtain these records must be documented in the claims file. If any such records are determined to be unavailable, issue a formal finding of unavailability and notify the Appellant of this fact.

3. ONLY AFTER DIRECTIVES 1 AND 2 ARE COMPLETE: Schedule the Appellant for a VA psychiatric examination to assess the Appellant's mental state leading up to his discharge from service. The examiner should review the entire claims file, including a copy of this remand. 

The examiner should be advised that 38 C.F.R. § 3.354(a) defines "insanity" as "one who, while not mentally defective or constitutionally psychopathic, except when a psychosis has been engrafted upon such basic condition, exhibits, due to disease, a more or less prolonged deviation from his normal method of behavior; or who interferes with the peace of society; or who has so departed (become antisocial) from the accepted standards of the community to which by birth and education he belongs as to lack the adaptability to make further adjustment to the social customs of the community in which he resides." The term "insanity" refers to a condition involving conduct which deviates severely from the social norm or interferes grossly with the capacity to meet the ordinary demands of life. See VAOPGCPREC 20-97. 

The examiner should also be informed that VA's General Counsel has held that behavior which is generally attributable to a particular substance-abuse disorder does not exemplify the severe deviation from the social norm or gross nature of conduct which is generally considered to fall within the scope of the term insanity, and therefore, does not constitute insane behavior under 38 C.F.R. § 3.354(a). 

The examiner should be informed that disorders that are not subject to service connection may be considered in determining the issue of insanity. Therefore, the examiner should consider and address the Appellant's diagnosed attention deficit and hyperactivity disorder.

After a review of the claims file the examiner must answer the following:

(a.) Does the evidence, either lay or medical, indicate the Appellant exhibited mental or cognitive impairment at the time of the in-service misconduct? If so, to what extent? Please explain why or why not. 

In providing this opinion, the examiner should specifically address the Appellant's contention that his psychiatric medication impacted his decision making ability. 

(b.) Discuss the Appellant's mental state during service, to include consideration of his age, cultural background, educational level, and judgmental maturity at the time of the offenses that resulted in his other than honorable discharge.

(c.) At the time of the offenses underlying his other than honorable discharge, did the Appellant exhibit a more or less prolonged deviation from his normal method of behavior?

(d.) At the time of the offenses underlying his other than honorable discharge, did the Appellant, due to disease interfere with the peace of society?

(e.) At the time of the offenses underlying his other than honorable, was the Appellant, due to disease, so departed (become antisocial) from the accepted standards of the community to which by birth and education he belongs as to lack the adaptability to make further adjustment to the social customs of the community in which he resides?

(f.) Was the Appellant otherwise insane at the time of the offenses underlying his other than honorable discharge?

For the purposes of the opinion, the examiner should assume the Appellant's statements about his symptoms are credible, unless they are inconsistent with the medical evidence or with medical principles concerning her condition. The Board emphasizes that this does not constitute a positive credibility determination, as VA will weigh the evidence upon adjudication.

The examiner should specifically consider the lay statements submitted on the Appellant's behalf.

In providing the requested opinions, the examiner may identify any discrepancies, inconsistencies, or contradictions contained in the evidence of record, and may state whether the Appellant's lay statements are supported by medical or other evidence. The examiner may not dismiss the Appellant's statements about his symptoms solely because they are not documented in contemporaneous treatment records.

All findings must be reported in detail and all opinions must be accompanied by a clear rationale.

 

 

MARTIN B. PETERS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Stricker, Katherine M.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.