Citation Nr: A25034005
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 210810-177988
DATE: April 11, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to secondary service connection for gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD), to include as secondary to service-connected adjustment disorder, is granted.

Entitlement to secondary service connection for obstructive sleep apnea, to include as secondary to service-connected adjustment disorder, is granted.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The evidence is at least in approximate balance as to whether the Veteran's gastroesophageal reflux disease was worsened by his service-connected adjustment disorder. 

2. The evidence is at least in approximate balance as to whether the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea was worsened by his service-connected adjustment disorder.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for gastroesophageal reflux disease have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.310.

2. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.310.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Navy from July 1998 to December 1998.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a July 2021 rating decision.  The rating decision on appeal constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.  

In the August 2021 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the July 2021 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

The Board notes that the Veteran was sent correspondence in January 2025, informing him that he had submitted additional documents with his August 2021 VA Form 10182 which could not be considered based upon the Veteran's docket selection.  He was informed that if he wished to switch dockets, he would need to submit another VA Form 10182, indicating his new docket selection.  He was also informed that typically, requests to switch dockets must be filed at the Board within 60 days of the date the Board received the Form 10182 that was already submitted or within one year of the VA decision being appealed, whichever is later.

The Veteran submitted an additional Form 10182 in February 2025 which indicated that he wished to appeal the issues of service connection for obstructive sleep apnea and GERD, among other issues, on the Evidence Submission docket.  However, the Veteran's representative also indicated in February 2025 correspondence that he wished to appeal the issues on the Hearing docket.  Given the inconsistent docket selections, the Board cannot proceed with any decision on the Veteran's request to switch dockets.  Moreover, the Board notes that the time period to request to switch dockets has elapsed as the Veteran's docket switch request was received more than a year after the rating decision on appeal and more than 60 days after the initial Form 10182 was received.  However, as discussed below, the Veteran's claims are being granted in full.  Accordingly, there is no prejudice to the Veteran in proceeding with adjudication on the Direct Review docket.  

Service Connection

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by service. 38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a). Service connection may also be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge, when the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d). Generally, service connection for a disability requires evidence of: (1) the existence of a current disability; (2) the existence of the disease or injury in service; and (3) a relationship or nexus between the current disability and any injury or disease during service. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

Service connection may also be granted on a secondary basis for disability which is proximately due to or the result of a service-connected disease or injury. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.310 (a); Spicer v. McDonough, 61 F.4th 1360 (Fed. Cir. 2023) (Fed. Cir. 2023) (holding that, under the causation standard of 38 U.S.C. § 1110, secondary service connection is warranted where a nonservice-connected disability would have been less severe but-for a service-connected disability, either because there is an etiological link (to include worsening of functionality) between the two, or because the service-connected disability resulted in the inability to treat the non-service-connected disability). The Federal Circuit has held that 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(b) is inconsistent with 38 U.S.C. § 1110. Id.

In adjudicating these claims, the Board must assess the competence and credibility of the Veteran. Washington v. Nicholson, 19 Vet. App. 362 (2005). Lay testimony is competent to establish the presence of observable symptomatology and "may provide sufficient support for a claim of service connection." Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 469 (1994); see also Falzone v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 398, 405 (1995) (lay person competent to testify to pain and visible flatness of his feet).

Except as otherwise provided by law, a claimant has the responsibility to present and support a claim for benefits. VA shall consider all information and lay and medical evidence of record in a case and when there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, VA shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (benefit-of-the-doubt rule not for application when evidence persuasively favors one side or the other).

Gastroesophageal Reflux Disease (GERD)

Initially, the Board notes that the Veteran has not asserted that he is entitled to direct service connection for his gastroesophageal reflux disease.  The Veteran contends that his diagnosed gastroesophageal reflux disease is secondary to his service-connected adjustment disorder with chronic mixed anxiety and depressed mood, and panic disorder without agoraphobia.  See June 2021 VA Form 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim.  In addition, the Veteran was diagnosed with gastroesophageal reflux disease in May 2021.  Accordingly, the Board finds that a direct service connection claim is not reasonably raised by the record and will address only the Veteran's claim of entitlement to secondary service connection.

The AOJ made multiple favorable findings in the July 2021 rating decision. The AOJ found the Veteran had been diagnosed with gastroesophageal reflux disease in a July 2021 VA examination. Thus, the first element of secondary service connection has been met. The AOJ also found the Veteran was service connected for adjustment disorder with chronic mixed anxiety and depressed mood, and panic disorder without agoraphobia. Thus, the second element of secondary service connection has been met. 

In a May 2021 private medical opinion submitted by a physician, the physician confirmed the Veteran's diagnosis of gastroesophageal reflux disease. The physician opined that the Veteran's gastroesophageal reflux disease was as least as likely as not aggravated beyond the normal degree of worsening by the Veteran's service-connected adjustment disorder with anxiety, depression, and panic. The physician noted that certain medications, lifestyle choices, and physical conditions can cause gastroesophageal reflux disease. The physician noted there were likely both structural and functional components at play when it came to the Veteran's gastroesophageal reflux disease. The physician cited to medical literature, noting "[t]he association between functional GERD and psychological health has been identified in many studies. A close connection may exist between the GI tract and the brain. For instance, the occurrence of emotional distress and tension can affect GI function leading to GI diseases. In the same way, GI distress can affect mental and emotional well-being." The physician noted studies have long noted a bidirectional relationship, meaning anxiety and depression increase the risk of gastroesophageal reflux disease, while gastroesophageal reflux disease's negative effect on quality of life increases anxiety and depression. The physician noted that while there was no scientific evidence that linked anxiety to increased stomach acid, psychological distress did impact esophageal motility and the functioning of the lower esophageal sphincter. The physician noted the Veteran's condition likely started off mild and simply worsened over the years. 

The Board affords the May 2021 opinion significant probative weight because it addresses the Veteran's contentions and includes a review of his medical history, and the relationship between gastroesophageal and psychological health.  The opinion is also supported by rationale that was substantiated with references to relevant medical literature.  See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008) (most of the probative value of a medical opinion comes from its reasoning).

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in July 2021. The VA examiner diagnosed the Veteran with gastroesophageal reflux disease. The Veteran asserted that his condition began approximately one year prior to the VA examination. The VA examiner opined that the Veteran's gastroesophageal reflux disease was less likely as not due to or the result of the Veteran's service-connected adjustment disorder with chronic mixed anxiety and depressed mood, and panic disorder without agoraphobia. The VA examiner noted adjustment disorder with chronic mixed anxiety and depressed mood, and panic disorder without agoraphobia was not a known cause of gastroesophageal reflux disease. The examiner indicated that the two are separate and distinct entities. The VA examiner noted that gastroesophageal reflux disease was caused by a weakened lower esophageal sphincter, or when the lower esophageal sphincter relaxes abnormally, it allows acid to reflux into the esophagus. 

The Board affords the July 2021 VA opinion little probative weight because the VA examiner's rationale focused solely upon the purported causal relationship between the Veteran's gastroesophageal reflux disease and his service-connected adjustment disorder, failing to acknowledge or address wither his gastroesophageal reflux disease was worsened by his service-connected condition. VA examinations and corresponding opinions are adequate when they contain clear conclusions, supporting data, and a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two. See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008) ("It is the factually accurate, fully articulated, sound reasoning for the conclusion... that contributes probative value to a medical opinion"). See also El-Amin v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 136 (2013) (finding that a VA opinion addressing secondary service connection was inadequate as it did not address the issue of aggravation).

Resolving the evidence in a light most favorable to the Veteran, the Board finds the May 2021 private medical opinion to be probative evidence that the Veteran's gastroesophageal reflux disease is secondary to the Veteran's service-connected adjustment disorder with chronic mixed anxiety and depressed mood, and panic disorder without agoraphobia. The Board assigns significant probative weight to the May 2021 private clinician's medical opinion, as the opinion was supported by a fully articulated rationale with consideration of the Veteran's medical history and established medical literature. See Prejean v. West, 13 Vet. App. 444 (2000); see also Guerrieri v. Brown, 4 Vet. App. 467 (1993).

The Board recognizes the negative nexus opinion regarding the Veteran's gastroesophageal reflux disease provided in the July 2021 VA examination. However, the Board finds that, given the May 2021 private medical opinion establishing the Veteran's gastroesophageal reflux disease was likely worsened by his service-connected adjustment disorder, the evidence is at least in approximate balance on this matter.  When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, the benefit of the doubt shall be given to the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; see also Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021). Thus, in the present case, the benefit of the doubt must be resolved in favor of the Veteran.

As the competent, probative medical evidence of record demonstrates the Veteran's gastroesophageal reflux disease is secondary to the Veteran's service-connected adjustment disorder with chronic mixed anxiety and depressed mood, and panic disorder without agoraphobia, the criteria for service connection have been met; and the Veteran's claim is granted. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.310. 

Obstructive Sleep Apnea 

Initially, the Board notes that the Veteran has not asserted that he is entitled to direct service connection for his obstructive sleep apnea.  The Veteran contends that his diagnosed sleep apnea is secondary to his service-connected adjustment disorder with chronic mixed anxiety and depressed mood, and panic disorder without agoraphobia.  See June 2021 VA Form 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim.  In addition, the Veteran was diagnosed with sleep apnea in March 2021.  Accordingly, the Board finds that a direct service connection claim is not reasonably raised by the record and will address only the Veteran's claim of entitlement to secondary service connection.

The AOJ made multiple favorable findings in the July 2021 rating decision. The AOJ found the Veteran had been diagnosed with obstructive sleep apnea in the July 2021 VA examination. Thus, the first element of secondary service connection has been met. The AOJ also found the Veteran was service connected for adjustment disorder with chronic mixed anxiety and depressed mood, and panic disorder without agoraphobia. Thus, the second element of secondary service connection has been met.

In a May 2021 private medical opinion submitted by a nurse practitioner, the practitioner confirmed the diagnosis of obstructive sleep apnea. The practitioner opined that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea was at least as likely as not secondary to his service-connected mental health condition. The practitioner noted that ongoing researched showed that mental health disorders such as depression and anxiety were frequently found in patients with sleep disorders. The physician noted the relationship between the two conditions was complex. However, the underlying problem had been identified as a disruption of biochemical processes in the brain which were essential for mood stabilization and sleep homeostasis. In the case of depression, the disrupted neurotransmission of serotonin caused decreases levels of serotonin in the brain which led to mood disturbances, sleep alterations, and even decreased muscle ton in the upper respiratory track. The practitioner reported that the relationship between obstructive sleep apnea and depression was bidirectional, meaning worsening of one condition led to a worsening in the other. The symptoms of the two conditions were so similar that the coexistence of them in patients was often overlooked. The practitioner noted that patients who have depression may also have obstructive sleep apnea, but a definitive diagnosis is lacking because it is assumed that the sleep issues are due to the depression. 

In a second May 2021 private medical opinion submitted by a physician, the physician confirmed the diagnosis of obstructive sleep apnea. The physician opined that it was at least as likely as not the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea was aggravated beyond the normal degree of worsening by the Veteran's service-connected adjustment disorder with anxiety, depression, and panic. The physician noted that research showed that more than half of patients diagnosed with sleep disorders have some degrees of depression and anxiety. One study noted that sleep apnea was not associated with the severity of anxiety, only the presence of it. Anxiety may also intensify sleep disturbance. The physician noted that compared with patients not yet diagnosed with sleep apnea, those who were diagnosed experienced a "significantly greater prevalence" for "mood disorders, anxiety, posttraumatic stress disorder, psychosis, and dementia in patients with sleep apnea." The physician noted that while anxiety and sleep apnea are often found together, one does not necessarily cause the other. However, the relationship is bidirectional, and one diagnosis can exacerbate the other beyond natural progression. As the anxiety, depression, and panic symptomatology associated with the adjustment disorder holds steady or increases, the breathing related sleep disorder will continue to be exacerbated. Stress, anxiety, and feelings of tension commonly associated with mental health disorders also exacerbate sleep apnea. The physician noted that obstructive sleep apnea can be manifested by a wide spectrum of psychiatric symptoms such as increased irritability and impulsivity, anxiety syndromes, and depression. The physician noted that the Veteran suffered from all of those symptoms. 

The Board affords the May 2021 opinions significant weight because they address the Veteran's contentions and include a review of his medical history, and the relationship between obstructive sleep apnea and psychological health.  The opinions are also supported by rationale that were substantiated with references to relevant medical literature.  See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008) (most of the probative value of a medical opinion comes from its reasoning).

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in July 2021. The VA examiner diagnosed the Veteran with obstructive sleep apnea. The Veteran asserted that the onset of his symptoms began in 2020. The VA examiner opined that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea was less likely as not due to or the result of the Veteran's service-connected adjustment disorder with chronic mixed anxiety and depressed mood, and panic disorder without agoraphobia. The VA examiner noted that though there was an association with increased percentage of sleep apnea with mental illness, there had been no etiologic causation. The VA examiner stated there had been no study that demonstrated that mental illness caused or worsened obstructive sleep apnea. The VA examiner noted that sleep apnea was caused by the muscles that support the soft tissues in the throat, such as the tongue and soft palate, which temporarily relax. When these muscles relax, the airway is narrowed or closed, and breathing is momentarily cut off.  

The Board affords the July 2021 VA examination little probative weight because the VA examiner's rationale primarily focused upon the purported causal relationship between the Veteran's sleep apnea and adjustment disorder, but did not adequately address whether his obstructive sleep apnea was worsened by his service-connected condition.  Notably, the July 2021 VA examiner indicated there was no study that demonstrated that mental illness caused or worsened obstructive sleep apnea, however, the examiner failed to address the medical literature and studies referenced in the two May 2021 private opinions submitted. VA examinations and corresponding opinions are adequate when they contain clear conclusions, supporting data, and a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two. See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008) ("It is the factually accurate, fully articulated, sound reasoning for the conclusion... that contributes probative value to a medical opinion"). See also Reonal v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 458, 461 (1993) ("An opinion based upon an inaccurate factual premise has no probative value.").

Resolving the evidence in a light most favorable to the Veteran, the Board finds the May 2021 private medical opinions to be probative evidence that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea is secondary to the Veteran's service-connected adjustment disorder with chronic mixed anxiety and depressed mood, and panic disorder without agoraphobia. The Board assigns significant probative weight to the May 2021 private clinicians' medical opinions, as the opinions were supported by a fully articulated rationale with consideration of the Veteran's medical history and established medical literature. See Prejean v. West, 13 Vet. App. 444 (2000); see also Guerrieri v. Brown, 4 Vet. App. 467 (1993).

The Board recognizes the negative nexus opinion regarding the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea provided in the July 2021 VA examination. However, the Board finds that, given the Veteran's private medical opinions establishing the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea was likely caused or worsened by the Veteran's service-connected adjustment disorder, the evidence is at least in approximate balance on this matter. When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, the benefit of the doubt shall be given to the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; see also Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021). Thus, in the present case, the benefit of the doubt must be resolved in favor of the Veteran, as the probative medical evidence of record establishes a nexus between the Veteran's current disability and his service-connected adjustment disorder with chronic mixed anxiety and depressed mood, and panic disorder without agoraphobia. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.

(Continued on the next page)

?

As the competent, probative medical evidence of record demonstrates the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea is secondary to his service-connected adjustment disorder with chronic mixed anxiety and depressed mood, and panic disorder without agoraphobia, the criteria for service connection have been met; and the Veteran's claim is granted. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.310.

 

 

J. SAIKH

Acting Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	H. Glass, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.