Citation Nr: A25034796
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 240318-426319
DATE: April 15, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to a disability rating higher than 70 percent for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is denied.

FINDING OF FACT

During the entire period on appeal, the Veteran's PTSD manifested as occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, and/or mood, but not total impairment. 

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for a disability rating higher than 70 percent for PTSD have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.126, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from February 2012 to October 2012.

The rating decision on appeal was issued in October 2023 and constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.  

In June 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR), and requested review of a September 2022 decision.  In October 2023, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the HLR decision on appeal, which considered the evidence of record at the time of the prior September 2022 decision.  

In the March 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the September 2022 AOJ decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

The Board notes that VA medical records were associated with the claims file after the September 2022 rating decision. While ordinarily the Board may not consider evidence received outside the evidentiary window in its decision, see 38 C.F.R. § 20.300, when implementing the AMA, VA incorporated the constructive possession concept set forth in Turner in the drafting of § 3.103(c)(2)(iii) for determining when constructive receipt occurs. See 84 Fed. Reg. 138, 141 (Jan. 18, 2019); see Turner v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 207, 218 (2018) (holding, in part, that constructive receipt requires "knowledge by VA adjudicators at the [Veterans Benefits Administration (VBA)] of the existence of those VA treatment records.").  Therefore, 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(iii) explicitly states VA will not consider any evidence associated with the file after the AMA decision, to include evidence constructively received, unless VBA had knowledge of the existence of the records.  Here, to the extent the VA medical records received after the September 2022 decision included records dated prior to that decision, VA was aware of such, as the Veteran had been receiving ongoing VA treatment for years, which was evident in the records contained within the claims file at the time of the September 2022 rating decision. These later-associated records are therefore considered constructively received prior to the decision on appeal under 38 C.F.R. § 3.103 (c)(2)(iii) and may be considered. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

The Veteran seeks a rating in excess of 70 percent for her PTSD. The period on review currently before the Board under the AMA is limited to the period considered by the AOJ (i.e., ends at the issuance of the AOJ decision on appeal). The review period and the evidentiary windows are distinct concepts in AMA that are not interchangeable (the review period is the time which VA is assigning a rating for the issue on appeal; the evidentiary window is the time which evidence may be submitted and considered for the issue on appeal). An August 2021 rating decision increased the Veteran's disability rating for PTSD from 50 percent to 70 percent effective October 13, 2020. The Veteran then filed a claim for an increased rating via submission of VA Form 21-526EZ in January 2022. Although that claim was received within one year of the August 2021 decision, there was no continuous pursuit of the prior claim. An increased rating claim filed on a VA Form 21-526EZ is an "initial claim" requesting a higher rating based on a change or worsening of the condition and does not constitute a request for review of a rating assigned in a prior decision, as it is not listed in VA's regulations as one of the available review options following an adverse decision. Thus, a VA Form 21-526EZ establishes the start of a new review and evidentiary period and does not establish continuous pursuit of any prior claim. Conversely, a supplemental claim (VA Form 21-0995) can establish continuous pursuit of the underlying increased rating claim, if filed within a year of VA's decision. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2500(c). Consequently, the applicable rating period here is from January 3, 2022, the date the Veteran applied for a higher rating, through September 6, 2022, the date of the rating decision that was subsequently subject to Higher-Level Review. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.400. The Board will generally review evidence from that period and during the one year "look back period" preceding the submission of the claim. See 38 U.S.C. § 5110(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.400(o)(2); Gaston v. Shinseki, 605 F.3d 979, 982 (Fed. Cir. 2010).

The Veteran's service-connected posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is currently rated as 70 percent disabling under Diagnostic Code 9411, 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, which is rated using the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders. Pursuant to the General Rating Formula, a 70 percent rating is assigned when symptoms such as suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant speech; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a worklike setting); or inability to establish and maintain effective relationships cause occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood.

A 100 percent rating is assigned for total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting oneself or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; or memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation or own name.

When determining the appropriate disability evaluation to assign, the Board must conduct a "holistic analysis" that considers all associated symptoms, regardless of whether they are listed as criteria. Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 10, 22 (2017); 38 C.F.R. § 4.130. The Board's primary consideration is a Veteran's symptoms, but it must also make findings as to how those symptoms impact a Veteran's occupational and social impairment. Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 118 (Fed. Cir. 2013); Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436, 442 (2002). Because the use of the term "such as" in the rating criteria demonstrates that the symptoms after that phrase are not intended to constitute an exhaustive list, the Board need not find the presence of all, most, or even some, of the enumerated symptoms to award a specific rating. Mauerhan, 16 Vet. App. at 442; see also Sellers v. Principi, 372 F.3d 1318, 1326-27 (Fed. Cir. 2004). Nevertheless, all ratings in the general rating formula are also associated with objectively observable symptomatology and the plain language of the regulation makes it clear that the Veteran's impairment must be "due to" those symptoms, a Veteran may only qualify for a given disability by demonstrating the particular symptoms associated with that percentage, or others of similar severity, frequency, and duration. Vazquez-Claudio, 713 F.3d at 118.

During the period on appeal, the Veteran was offered one VA examination to assess her psychiatric condition. In the January 2022 VA examination, the VA examiner opined that the Veteran experienced occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, and/or mood. At the time of the VA examination, the Veteran stated she was going through a divorce. She reported that she was attempting to date but had trouble trusting people. The Veteran reported that her brother had recently moved in with her to assist her with her medication and remind her to eat and shower. The Veteran did not leave home frequently and though she had a couple of close friends, she did not spend much time with them. She maintained contact with her parents and brother. The Veteran stated that she held various jobs since leaving the military. She has a master's degree in criminal justice and has worked as a pharmacy technician and police dispatcher since separation from service. The Veteran reported that she had not worked since October 2018.  

During the January 2022 VA examination, the Veteran reported hopelessness, depression, impaired sleep, nightmares, anxiety, neglected hygiene, as well as requiring assistance with medication management and requiring reminders for various daily tasks, such as eating. The Veteran stated that she did not go into stores, had groceries delivered, and only drove when necessary. Apart from a pending divorce, the Veteran denied having a significant legal, behavioral, or substance abuse history. In the January 2022 VA examination, the VA examiner found that the Veteran exhibited the following symptoms related to her PTSD: depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately, and effectively, chronic sleep impairment, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, neglect of personal hygiene, and intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living. The January 2022 VA examiner reported that the Veteran was polite and cooperative, well-groomed and dressed, and oriented in all spheres. The examiner further noted that the Veteran's speech was logical and coherent, her insight and judgment were adequate, and she did not exhibit any signs of hallucinations and/or delusions. 

In the January 2022 VA examination, the Veteran denied suicidal and homicidal ideation and reported that she sees her psychiatrist every two weeks. VA treatment records reflect that the Veteran was closely followed by VA mental health providers (approximately twice per month) during the period on appeal. In the mental status examinations done as a part of these visits, the Veteran was consistently noted as having at least adequate presentation (grooming, clothing), clear and coherent speech, good memory, fair concentration, intellectual insight, and good judgment, as well as being attentive, properly oriented, and without observable problems with thought. See, e.g., April 2022 and July 2022 VA Treatment Records. For the period on appeal, there was no evidence in the VA treatment records of hallucinations or delusions and the Veteran routinely denied homicidal and suicidal ideation. See, generally, January 2022 to August 2022 VA Treatment Records. During the period on appeal, the Veteran's PTSD consistently manifested with the following symptoms: intrusive memories, nightmares, decreased interest, hypervigilance, exaggerated startle response, poor concentration, sleep disturbance, irritability, anxiety, excessive worry, muscle tension, feeling on edge, restlessness, decreased energy, depressed mood, low appetite, avoidance, detachment, and low self-esteem. See, e.g., January 2022, April 2022, June 2022 and August 2022 VA Treatment Records. 

In July 2022, the Veteran identified her boyfriend as her live-in caregiver in an application for caregiver assistance. As part of this application, VA conducted a detailed assessment of the Veteran's functioning with respect to activities of daily living (ADLs). See July 2022 VA Treatment Records. The assessment found that the Veteran was able to independently perform all ADLs except carrying something in both hands. With regard to supervision, protection, and instruction, the assessment found that she needed reminders to take medications, was at risk of self-neglect (hygiene) and was easily agitated, angered, or frustrated. During the assessment process, the Veteran's caregiver (her boyfriend) was interviewed. In his interview, he reported that he cooked all meals, reminded the Veteran to eat, shower, and brush her teeth, and monitored her medications. The caregiver also reported that, on occasion, the Veteran would accompany him to the grocery store. In the assessment, the Veteran was also interviewed and stated that she last worked in June 2022, her divorce remained pending, and she rarely drove or left home. 

The Veteran's brother submitted a statement in January 2022. See January 2022 VA Form 21-10210. In this statement, the Veteran's brother indicated that the Veteran's family talked to her several times per week; that the Veteran had trouble sleeping and her apartment was untidy; and that he had moved in with the Veteran in December 2021 to assist her in caring for her dog, performing chores, shopping for groceries, and maintaining her personal hygiene. See id. The Board notes that an August 2022 VA treatment record indicated that the brother was no longer living with the Veteran. See August 2022 VA Treatment Record ("lives by herself, boyfriend stays over regularly"). Per the July 2022 VA treatment records discussed above, the Veteran's boyfriend assumed many of the tasks described in the brother's statement, which indicates that these needs persisted throughout the entirety of the period on appeal. 

During the period on appeal, the Veteran's VA treatment records reflect that she increased participation in events outside of the home, began dating, sought employment, and worked (briefly). See, e.g., VA Treatment Records: May 2022 (Veteran starting new job, socializing more, traveled to another state for a wedding); April 2022 (went paddleboarding, attended job interview). Compare January 2022 VA Examination (attempting to date) with July and August 2022 VA Treatment Records (boyfriend staying over frequently, applying for caregiver support).   

The evidence of record shows that the Veteran's PTSD was manifested by symptoms associated with a 70 percent rating (near-continuous panic, difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, irritability) or lower (depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, chronic sleep impairment, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships), and a symptom associated with a 100 percent rating (intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living).  The Veteran also had symptoms that are not listed with a specific rating, such as intrusive memories, nightmares, decreased interest, hypervigilance, exaggerated startle response, poor concentration, excessive worry, muscle tension, feeling on edge, restlessness, decreased energy, low appetite, avoidance, detachment, and low self-esteem. 

The Board finds the severity, frequency, and duration of the Veteran's unlisted symptoms more closely approximate the symptoms contemplated by a 70 percent rating, which are less severe, less frequent, and shorter in duration than those contemplated by a 100 percent rating.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.126.  The Veteran's unlisted symptoms are most similar to symptoms such as disturbances in motivation and mood, anxiety, depression, sleep impairment and near continuous panic, which are contemplated by the assigned 70 percent rating.

The Board also finds the level of impairment caused by the Veteran's symptoms does not more closely approximate the level associated with a 100 percent rating.  The Veteran experienced occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, not total social and occupational impairment.  Mental status examinations in VA treatment records and the January 2022 VA examination indicate that the Veteran did not have impairment in thought or communication; rather the Veteran had consistently clear and logical thought and communication. The Veteran did not exhibit any signs of hallucinations or delusions and routinely denied suicidal and homicidal ideation. She was never disoriented to time or place and always recalled her own name, as well as those of her family and friends. 

While the Veteran did experience symptoms contemplated by a 100 percent rating, namely, intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living, the evidence overall does not demonstrate the level of impairment associated with a 100 percent rating.  As noted above, the Veteran's other remaining symptoms were either contemplated by or more consistent with a 70 percent rating.  Further, during the period on appeal the Veteran interviewed and obtained at least one job and, also, began a dating relationship, which indicates that she was able to establish and/or maintain social and occupational relationships. This is the antithesis of the total occupational and social impairment contemplated by a 100 percent rating. Additionally, the Veteran was consistently recorded as being oriented, logical, cooperative, and possessing intellectual insight and good judgment. These attributes are diametrically opposed to the symptoms of disorientation, illogical thought, and persistent threat attributed to a 100 percent rating. 

The Board concludes that the Veteran's symptoms did not cause the level of impairment required for a disability rating of 100 percent. A disability rating of 100 percent is reserved for total occupational and social impairment. Here, the Veteran had no demonstrated issues with inappropriate behavior and no obvious impairment of thought or communication. Moreover, she was oriented to time and place and denied delusions, hallucinations, and suicidal ideation. Finally, the Veteran did not demonstrate any lapse in recall or memory related to herself or her close relatives or friends. The Board finds the severity, frequency, and duration of the Veteran's symptoms are less severe, less frequent, and shorter in duration than those contemplated by a 100 percent rating.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.126. 

In short, the evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that the severity, frequency, and duration of the Veteran's symptoms resulted in the level of impairment required for a 100 percent rating.  The criteria for a 100 percent rating are not met and the appeal must be denied.

The Board acknowledges the argument made by the Veteran's representative that the Veteran's symptoms include intermittent inability to perform ADLs, which is one symptom associated with a 100 percent disability rating and, therefore, the Veteran should be awarded a 100 percent disability rating. The Board agrees that this symptom is listed as an example of the type of symptom associated with a 100 percent rating; however, the Board does not solely consider whether the Veteran's symptoms check each box in the rating criteria. Rather, the Board's focus is on the level of occupational and social impairment evidenced by these observable symptoms. See Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 118 (Fed. Cir. 2013). See also Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436, 442 (2002). As previously discussed, despite the presence of this symptom, the Veteran's level of social and occupational impairment does not more closely approximate the level of impairment associated with a 100 percent rating. The Veteran states, as do her brother and boyfriend, that she needs reminders to bathe and eat; however, the Veteran's VA treatment records for the period on appeal reflect that she is adequately groomed or well-groomed, she interviewed for and was hired for least one job, and she began and has maintained a romantic relationship during the period on appeal. Thus, this symptom did not result in, nor was it indicative of, total occupational and social impairment.    

The Board further acknowledges that, separately, the Veteran also requested a total disability rating for individual unemployability (TDIU) based, at least in part, on the functional impact of her service-connected PTSD. The AOJ denied entitlement to TDIU in a June 2023 rating decision. The Veteran could have appealed the denial of TDIU, which was adjudicated separately, when submitting the March 2024 VA Form 10182, but did not do so. As she is represented by a private attorney presumably well-versed in VA's appeals system, the Board concludes the choice to not appeal TDIU was an intentional one and therefore will not address TDIU as part of the instant appeal.   

As the evidence of record persuasively weighs against a rating in excess of 70 percent for service-connected PTSD, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply.  

 

MICHELLE L. KANE

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	L.C. Reader, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.