Citation Nr: A25034645
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 240702-452517
DATE: April 15, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an initial rating of 20 percent, but no higher, for non-displaced right great toe fracture residuals (hereinafter, right foot disability) is granted, subject to the laws and regulations governing the payment of monetary benefits.

FINDING OF FACT

Throughout the period on appeal, the Veteran's right foot disability has been manifested by, at most, moderately severe impairment.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for an initial rating of 20 percent, but no higher, for right foot disability have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.3, 4.7, 4.40, 4.45, 4.59, 4.71a, 4.118, Diagnostic Code (DC) 5284.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from September 2011 to October 2012. This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an April 2024 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office.

In the July 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal, the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal.  38?C.F.R. § 20.301.  The Board cannot consider evidence submitted after the AOJ issued the April 2024 decision on appeal.  Id.

If evidence was associated with the claims file during a period of time when additional evidence was not allowed, the Board has not considered it in its decision on the initial rating claim.  38 C.F.R. § 20.300.  If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was added to the claims file that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 10 percent for right foot disability.  

The Veteran asserts that he is entitled to a higher initial rating for his service-connected right foot disability.  

Disability ratings are determined by applying the criteria set forth in VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities, which is based on the average impairment of earning capacity.  Individual disabilities are assigned separate diagnostic codes.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1.  The basis of disability ratings is the ability of the body as a whole, or of the psyche, or of a system or organ of the body, to function under the ordinary conditions of daily life, including employment.  38 C.F.R. § 4.10.

Where there is a question as to which of two ratings shall be applied, the higher rating will be assigned if the disability more nearly approximates the criteria required for that particular rating.  Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7.  When a reasonable doubt arises regarding the degree of disability, that reasonable doubt will be resolved in favor of the Veteran.  38 C.F.R. § 4.3.

When rating musculoskeletal disabilities on the basis of limited motion of a joint, VA must consider functional loss due to limited or excess movement, pain, weakness, excess fatigability, or incoordination.  38 C.F.R. §§ 4.40, 4.45; DeLuca v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 202 (1995).  The provisions of 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.40 and 4.45 are to be considered only in conjunction with diagnostic codes predicated on limitation of motion.  Johnson v. Brown, 9 Vet. App. 7 (1996).

Generally, disabilities of the feet are evaluated pursuant to DCs 5276 to 5284.  These pertain to flatfoot (5276), weak foot (5277), claw foot (5278), metatarsalgia (5279), hallux valgus/rigidus (5280 & 5281), hammer toe (5282), malunion of or nonunion of the tarsal or metatarsal bones (5283) and other foot injuries (5284).  38 C.F.R. § 4.71a.

Throughout the period on appeal, the Veteran's service-connected right foot disability has been rated pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 4.118, DC 5284, which provides rating criteria for other foot injuries.  Under DC 5284, a moderate foot injury warrants a 10 percent disability evaluation.  A moderately severe foot injury warrants a 20 percent disability evaluation, and a severe foot injury is assigned a 30 percent disability evaluation.  A 40 percent disability evaluation will be assigned for actual loss of use of the foot.  38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, DC 5284.

The words "moderate," "moderately severe," and "severe" as used in the various DCs are not defined in the VA Schedule for Rating Disabilities.  Rather than applying a mechanical formula, the Board must evaluate all the evidence, to the end that its decisions are "equitable and just."  38 C.F.R. § 4.6.  The use of terminology such as "severe" by VA examiners and others, although an element of evidence to be considered by the Board, is not dispositive of an issue.  All evidence must be evaluated in arriving at a decision regarding an increased rating.  38 C.F.R. §§ 4.2, 4.6.  The Board does note, for reference and illustrative purposes, that the definition for "mild" includes gentle and not severe.  WEBSTER'S III NEW WORLD DICTIONARY at 860 (1988).  The definitions for "moderate" include within reasonable limits, avoiding excesses or extremes.  Id. at 871.  Finally, definitions for "severe" include extreme and intense.  Id. at 1229.  It is also noted that the term "moderately severe" indicates impairment that is considered more than "moderate" but not to the extent as to be considered "severe."  Additionally, the Board recognizes that actual loss of use of the foot would warrant a maximum rating of 40 percent.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, DC 5284, Note.  To this end, when the rating criteria is considered in view of the Note, extremely intense or disabling residuals that do not result in the actual loss of the use of foot would more closely approximate the criteria of "severe" foot injury residuals and would warrant a disability rating of 30 percent pursuant to DC 5284.

In March 2024, Veteran was afforded a VA foot conditions examination.  The examiner diagnosed non-displaced toe fracture of the right foot.  The Veteran's current reported symptoms were documented as pain with activities and discomfort with walking, running, and any weight-bearing activity.  His current treatment was reported as over the counter ibuprofen.  The Veteran reported pain of the right foot occurred with activities.  The Veteran then reported that flare-ups impacted the functioning of the right foot.  He described the flare-ups as sharp throbbing pain, discoloration, swelling, and painful to the touch and to walk on.  Flare-ups occurred once every three months and would last a month.  Characteristics of the impacted area during the flare-up were described as purple and blue with swelling.  A precipitating factor of the flare-up was weight bearing for long periods.  Alleviating factors were rest, elevation, heat and ice, and ibuprofen.  Severity of pain during the flare-ups was rated as a 9 out of 10, and it resulted in him being unable to walk due to the pain and swelling.  The Veteran reported having functional loss of the right foot resulting in difficulty with walking, running, and daily tasks.  He did not have symptoms due to hallux valgus or hallux rigidus.  There was no effect to toes due to pes cavus.  

Physical examination reflected cortical irregularity with 2 millimeter lucency and step-off at the first proximal phalanx medial third heard concerning for nondisplaced intraarticular fracture, which included mild surrounding soft tissue swelling and no dislocation.  The right foot was noted as mild in severity.  The foot condition chronically compromised weight-bearing.  The foot did not require arch supports, custom orthotic inserts, or medications.  The Veteran had not had any surgery on his right foot.  Pain was noted on physical examination, and the pain contributed to functional loss.  Contributing factors of disability included less movement than normal, swelling, disturbance of locomotion, and pain.  The procured evidence suggested that pain significantly limited functional ability during flare-ups and/or after repeated use over time.  There was evidence of pain on active and passive motion, and on weight bearing.  There were no scars and no other pertinent physical findings or complications related to the right foot disability.  The Veteran did not use any assistive devices as a normal mode of locomotion.  The examiner noted that while the Veteran was self-employed, his right foot disability impacted his ability to work because he had lost between two to four weeks work time in the last 12 months. 

Following a review of the evidence of record, the Board finds the evidence shows the Veteran's right foot disability was manifested by, at most, moderately severe symptoms throughout the period on appeal.  In particular, the Board finds the Veteran's reports of his symptoms during flare-ups reflect a severity that is closer to moderately severe as defined above.  Notably, the severity of pain during the flare-ups was rated as a 9 out of 10, and such resulted in the Veteran being unable to walk due to both pain and swelling.  The Veteran also reported having functional loss of the right foot resulting in difficulty with walking, running, and daily tasks.  The foot condition also chronically compromised weight bearing.  Notably, the Veteran had less movement than normal, swelling, disturbance of locomotion, and pain, and the procured evidence suggested that pain significantly limited his functional ability during flare-ups and/or after repeated use over time.  He also had lost between two to four weeks work time in the last 12 months.  Collectively, the Board finds these symptoms and resulting impairment reflect the Veteran's right foot disability to be better defined as moderately severe.  Given that the evidence is in relative equipoise, the Board will afford the Veteran the benefit of the doubt and find that a 20 percent rating, but no higher, is warranted for the right foot disability throughout the appeal period.   

With respect to a higher rating, however, the Board notes that the March 2024 VA examiner concluded that the Veteran's right foot disability was only mild in severity.  In addition, some findings indicate that the Veteran's symptomology is best characterized as mild or no more than moderate.  Notably, the medical evidence does not reflect that the Veteran seeks any treatment for his right foot disability.  There are no VA or private treatment records documenting that the Veteran sought regular care. Further, the Veteran was not prescribed any medication for his right foot disability, and he only took over the counter ibuprofen for self-medication.  He also did not have custom shoes or assistive devices.  Further, the Veteran has not had any surgery for his right foot disability.  These factors, when considered in the context of the defined terms, would render the Veteran's right foot disability as mild or moderate at most.

The Board has also considered whether any other applicable rating criteria may entitle the Veteran to a higher rating.  To this end, the Board notes that, absent objective evidence of flatfoot, weak foot, claw foot, metatarsalgia, hallux valgus/rigidus, hammer toe, or malunion of or nonunion of the tarsal or metatarsal bones, a higher or separate rating under DCs 5276, 5277, 5278, 5279, 5280, 8281, 5282, and/or 5283 is not warranted.  38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7, 4.71a.

In sum, resolving all doubt in the Veteran's favor, the evidence of record supports the assignment of an initial 20 percent rating, but no higher, for his right foot disability throughout the period on appeal.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7.

 

M. M. Celli

Acting Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Rasul, H.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.