Citation Nr: A25034847
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 240920-475958
DATE: April 15, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for asthma is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for hepatitis A is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for hepatitis B is remanded.

Entitlement to an initial compensable disability rating for hypertension is remanded.

Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 10 percent for diabetes mellitus type II is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran, who is the appellant in this case, served on active duty from March 1963 to February 1967.

In a January 2024 rating decision, the RO granted service connection for hypertension and assigned an initial noncompensable rating, effective February 24, 2023.  The RO also denied service connection for PTSD and denied entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 10 percent for diabetes mellitus type II.

In a February 2024 rating decision, the RO granted an earlier effective date of August 10, 2022, for the award of service connection for hypertension and assigned an initial noncompensable rating from that date.  The RO also denied service connection for asthma, hepatitis A, and hepatitis B.

In an April 2024 rating decision, the RO denied service connection for OSA.

In September 2024, the Veteran filed a VA Form 10182 (Decision Review Request: Board Appeal) and requested review by the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) based on evidence submission.  The Board notes that the Veteran specifically requested review of the January 2024 rating decision for his hypertension claim.

For the hypertension, diabetes mellitus type II, and PTSD claims, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the January 2024 rating decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or his representative with, or within 90 days from receipt of, the September 2024 VA Form 10182.  38 C.F.R. § 20.303.  For the asthma, hepatitis A, and hepatitis B claims, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the February 2024 rating decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or his representative with, or within 90 days from receipt of, the September 2024 VA Form 10182.  38 C.F.R. § 20.303.  For the OSA claim, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the April 2024 rating decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or his representative with, or within 90 days from receipt of, the September 2024 VA Form 10182.  38 C.F.R. § 20.303.  

If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the RO issued the decisions on appeal and prior to the date the Board received the VA Form 10182, or (2) more than 90 days following the date the Board received the VA Form 10182, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.303, 20.801.  However, because the Board is remanding the claims, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the RO in the adjudication of the claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

This appeal has been advanced on the Board's docket.  See 38 U.S.C. § 7107(b).

1. Entitlement to service connection for OSA is remanded.

The Veteran asserts he is entitled to service connection for OSA.  In the April 2024 rating decision on appeal, the RO made the following favorable findings: (1) the Veteran is currently diagnosed with OSA; (2) the Veteran was exposed to Agent Orange during his military service in the Republic of Vietnam; and (3) participation in a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA) is established based on the Veteran's service in the Republic of Vietnam.  Having found no clear and unmistakable error, the Board is bound by these favorable findings.  38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).  On review, the Board finds that remand is necessary to cure a pre-decisional duty to assist error.

In March 2024, the Veteran was provided a VA examination for his claimed OSA.  In describing the details of onset of his OSA, the Veteran stated "he's had poor quality of sleep ever since he came back from service.  His wife noticed he would also snore.  Veteran also noticed having unrefreshed sleep."  In a September 2012 Statement in Support of Claim, the Veteran endorsed "fitful sleep" during his active service, and treatment records tend to support the ongoing nature of the Veteran's sleep difficulties.  See January 2000 "Initial Internal Medicine Qualified Medical Evaluation"; October 2003 VA primary care note; private treatment records dated April 2021 and June 2022; VA treatment records dated April 2023 to December 2023.  However, no VA medical opinion as to direct service connection was obtained by the RO; the RO only requested a VA medical opinion as to whether the Veteran's OSA was caused by his in-service TERAs.  See February 2024 "Exam Request" document; March 2024 VA TERA medical opinion.

Based on the foregoing evidence, the Board finds that an opinion as to direct service connection for the Veteran's OSA should have been obtained by the RO prior to adjudicating the claim.  This must be accomplished on remand. 

2. Entitlement to service connection for asthma is remanded.

The Veteran asserts he is entitled to service connection for asthma.  In the February 2024 rating decision on appeal, the RO made the following favorable findings: (1) the Veteran is currently diagnosed with asthma; and (2) participation in a TERA is established based on the Veteran's service in the Republic of Vietnam.  Having found no clear and unmistakable error, the Board is bound by these favorable findings.  38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).  On review, the Board finds that remand is necessary to cure a pre-decisional duty to assist error.

In his August 2023 and January 2024 claim applications, the Veteran asserts he was exposed to burn pits during his active service.  Additionally, in August 2023, the Veteran submitted photographs purporting to show him performing "burn pit duty" while serving in the Republic of Vietnam.  

The RO did not provide a VA examination, medical opinion, or TERA opinion prior to adjudicating this claim.  While the Board acknowledges that a VA "Respiratory Conditions" examination was later provided in March 2024, this is outside the applicable evidentiary window in this appeal (which ended in February 2024), and the Board observes that no etiology opinions were obtained as to the Veteran's claimed asthma in connection with the March 2024 VA examination.  The Board also notes that in the February 2024 rating decision, the RO explained that it did not request a TERA examination or medical opinion for this claim because, per sub-regulatory guidance, the Secretary determined there is no positive association between asthma and herbicide exposure.  See VBA Letter 20-22-10, Processing Claims Involving the PACT Act, p.12-13 (Dec. 22, 2022).  However, the RO failed to consider the above evidence regarding the Veteran's other claimed TERA of burn pit exposure during service.

Based on the foregoing evidence, the Board finds that a TERA opinion is required pursuant to the Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxins Act of 2022 (PACT Act).  See 38 U.S.C. § 1168.  Therefore, a TERA opinion must be obtained on remand.

3. Entitlement to service connection for PTSD is remanded.

The Veteran asserts he is entitled to service connection for PTSD.  In the January 2024 rating decision, the RO made a favorable finding that the Veteran participated in a TERA based on his service in the Republic of Vietnam.  Having found no clear and unmistakable error, the Board is bound by this favorable finding.  38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).  On review, the Board finds that remand is necessary to cure a pre-decisional duty to assist error.

In October 2023, the Veteran was provided a VA examination for his claimed PTSD.  The VA examiner determined that the Veteran did not have a diagnosis of PTSD that conforms to the criteria under the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition, of the American Psychiatric Association (DSM-5), and that he did not have any mental disorder that conforms with the DSM-5 criteria.  The VA examiner provided a negative nexus opinion in October 2023, reasoning that although a stressor is conceded, the Veteran does not meet the diagnostic criteria for PTSD.  The VA examiner further explained, "[The Veteran] has no medical records for an extended period to confirm that time in the service caused a chronic mental health diagnosis for PTSD.  It is noted that he has seen teletherapy groups for PTSD, however there is no indication in the docu[me]n[t]ation that there is a direct discuss[]ion of PTSD and Viet[]nam events to what is addressed in the teletherapy groups."

However, review of the Veteran's VA treatment records confirms a current DSM-5 diagnosis of chronic PTSD by a VA psychiatrist, and that the Veteran was undergoing treatment in the "Combat PTSD Program."  See VA treatment records dated June 2023 to December 2023.  Notably, in a July 2023 VA psychiatry consultation record, the VA treatment provider included a detailed discussion of the Veteran's in-service stressor events and how his current symptoms satisfied each diagnostic criterion for PTSD under the DSM-5.  Accordingly, the Board finds the October 2023 VA PTSD examination report and medical opinion to be inadequate as the VA examiner did not address all relevant evidence.  See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 302-04 (2008).  Prior to adjudicating the claim, the RO should have obtained an adequate VA examination and medical opinion.  This must be accomplished on remand.

4. Entitlement to service connection for hepatitis A is remanded.

5. Entitlement to service connection for hepatitis B is remanded.

6. Entitlement to an initial compensable disability rating for hypertension is remanded.

7. Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 10 percent for diabetes mellitus type II is remanded.

The Veteran asserts he is entitled to service connection for hepatitis A and B, an initial compensable disability rating for hypertension, and a disability rating in excess of 10 percent for diabetes mellitus type II.  In the February 2024 rating decision, the RO made favorable findings that: (1) the Veteran was currently diagnosed with hepatitis A and B; and (2) the Veteran participated in a TERA based on his service in the Republic of Vietnam.  Having found no clear and unmistakable error, the Board is bound by these favorable findings.  38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).  On review, the Board finds that remand is necessary to cure a pre-decisional duty to assist error.

In his August 2023 claim application, the Veteran reported receiving private treatment from Dr. Winston Wong since 1985.  In a September 2023 "Subsequent Development Letter," the RO requested that the Veteran complete a VA Form 21-4142, Authorization for Release of Information, or a VA Form 21-4142a, General Release for Medical Provider Information, so that it could obtain the Veteran's private treatment records from various named providers and facilities.  However, the September 2023 "Subsequent Development Letter" did not list Dr. Winston Wong as one of the providers for which the RO was requesting completion of a VA Form 21-4142 or 21-4142a.  The Board observes that an April 2023 letter from Dr. Winston Wong was associated with the claims file in August 2023.  However, the record suggests that there may be additional outstanding private treatment records from Dr. Winston Wong, and/or from Dr. Alton Wong.  See December 2023 VA psychiatry note ("pt requested for this writer to cancel labs ordered at last appt, stating he has an outside PCP [primary care provider] 'Dr. Alton Wong at Joshua Medical Center in La Palma' who monitors labs for pt."); January 2024 private treatment record (noting Dr. Winston Wong was the referring provider for the Veteran's pulmonology treatment by Dr. T.P.).  

Prior to adjudicating the claims, the RO should have attempted to obtain these potentially relevant private primary care treatment records.  On remand, the RO should provide the Veteran a VA Form 21-4142, Authorization for Release of Information, so that VA may obtain these private treatment records.

Accordingly, the matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Provide the Veteran a VA Form 21-4142, Authorization for Release of Information, for completion, to obtain any outstanding private primary care treatment records from Drs. Winston Wong and/or Alton Wong.

2. Obtain an addendum VA medical opinion regarding the nature and etiology of the Veteran's claimed OSA.  The claims file, including a copy of this Remand, must be made available to, and be reviewed by, the examiner.  If another examination is indicated, one should be provided to the Veteran.

After a thorough review of the entire claims file, the examiner is asked to opine whether the Veteran's OSA at least as likely as not (at least an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence) had its onset during or is otherwise related to the Veteran's active service.

In providing this opinion, please consider the following evidence:

"	In a September 2012 Statement in Support of Claim, the Veteran endorsed "fitful sleep" during his active service.

"	Treatment records tend to support the ongoing nature of the Veteran's sleep difficulties.  See January 2000 "Initial Internal Medicine Qualified Medical Evaluation"; October 2003 VA primary care note; private treatment records dated April 2021 and June 2022; VA treatment records dated April 2023 to December 2023.  

"	In March 2024, the Veteran was provided a VA examination for his claimed OSA.  In describing the details of onset of his OSA, the Veteran stated "he's had poor quality of sleep ever since he came back from service.  His wife noticed he would also snore.  Veteran also noticed having unrefreshed sleep."  

3. Obtain an addendum VA medical opinion regarding the nature and etiology of the Veteran's claimed asthma.  The claims file, including a copy of this Remand, must be made available to, and be reviewed by, the examiner.  If another examination is indicated, one should be provided to the Veteran.

After a thorough review of the entire claims file, the examiner is asked to opine whether it is at least as likely as not (at least an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence) that there is a nexus between the Veteran's asthma and one or more of his TERAs, considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments and the synergistic, combined effect of all his TERAs.

In providing this opinion, please consider the following evidence:

"	In his August 2023 and January 2024 claim applications, the Veteran asserts he was exposed to burn pits during his active service.  

"	In August 2023, the Veteran submitted photographs purporting to show him performing "burn pit duty" while serving in the Republic of Vietnam.

4. Provide the Veteran an additional VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of his PTSD.  The claims file, including a copy of this Remand, must be made available to, and be reviewed by, the examiner.

After a thorough review of the entire claims file, the examiner is asked to opine whether the Veteran's PTSD at least as likely as not (at least an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence) had its onset during or is otherwise related to his active service.

In providing this opinion, please consider the following evidence: 

"	The Veteran's VA treatment records confirm a current DSM-5 diagnosis of chronic PTSD by a VA psychiatrist, and that the Veteran was undergoing treatment in the "Combat PTSD Program."  See VA treatment records dated June 2023 to December 2023.  

"	In a July 2023 VA psychiatry consultation record, the VA treatment provider included a detailed discussion of the Veteran's in-service stressor events and how his current symptoms satisfied each diagnostic criterion for PTSD under the DSM-5.  

"	In an October 2023 VA medical opinion, the VA examiner conceded the Veteran's PTSD stressor based on his active service in the Republic of Vietnam.

 

 

S. B. MAYS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	C. M. Gill, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.