Citation Nr: A25034814
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 221011-285589
DATE: April 15, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to Veteran Readiness and Employment (VR&E) benefits under the provisions of Chapter 31, Title 38, United States Code, is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. During the period here at issue, the Veteran had service-connected disabilities with a combined rating of 100 percent.

2. At the time of his application for VR&E benefits, the Veteran possessed a Master of Science, Bachelor of Science, and several professional certifications with marketable and transferable skills.

3. During the period under consideration, the Veteran is not shown to have had an employment handicap; he had overcome any impairment of employment to which his service-connected disabilities had substantially contributed.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to VR&E benefits pursuant to Chapter 31 are not met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 3100, 3101, 3102; 38 C.F.R. §§ 21.40, 21.50, 21.51, 21.52.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from August 1995 to August 2019.

The rating decision on appeal was issued in September 2022 and constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies. 

In May 2022, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR), and requested review of a March 2022 decision.  In September 2022, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the HLR decision on appeal, which considered the evidence of record at the time of the prior March 2022 decision.  

In the October 2022 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2022 AOJ decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim[s], considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Entitlement to VR&E benefits under the provisions of Chapter 31, Title 38, United States Code, is denied.

The Veteran seeks entitlement to VR&E benefits under the provisions of 38 U.S.C. Chapter 31, Title 38 of the United States Code.  Specifically, he asserts that his primary interest is to work in a career in the sciences, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM), and his current level of education and employment is not consistent with his interest.  See, March 2022 Rehabilitation Needs Inventory (RNI).

The provisions of Chapter 31, Title 38, United States Code, are intended to enable veterans with service-connected disabilities to achieve maximum independence in daily living and, to the maximum extent feasible, to become employable and to obtain and maintain suitable employment. 38 C.F.R. § 21.1. For a veteran with 20 percent disability, basic entitlement to Chapter 31 benefits requires that the veteran be found by VA to be in need of rehabilitation because of an employment handicap. 38 C.F.R. § 21.40 (b). An employment handicap means an impairment, resulting in substantial part from a service-connected disability rated at 20 percent or more, of a veteran's ability to prepare for, obtain, or retain employment consistent with such veteran's abilities, aptitudes, and interests. 38 U.S.C. § 3101 (7); 38 C.F.R. § 21.35 (g).

The determination of whether an employment handicap exists has been specifically delegated by regulation to the discretion of a VA counseling psychologist (CP) or vocational rehabilitation counselor (VRC). 38 C.F.R. §§ 21.50 (b), 21.51. An employment handicap will be found to exist when the individual has a vocational impairment; the individual has not overcome the effects of the impairment of employability through employment in, or qualifying for employment in, an occupation consistent with his abilities, aptitudes, and interests; and his service-connected disabilities have contributed in substantial part to the overall vocational impairment. 38 U.S.C. § 3102; 38 C.F.R. § 21.51. In the instant case, the Veteran's service-connected disabilities combine to a 100 percent evaluation, and therefore meets the threshold requirement for a program of vocational rehabilitation.  However, to meet the requirements for a program of vocational rehabilitation, he must also be determined by VA to be in need of rehabilitation because of an employment handicap.  38 U.S.C. § 3102; 38 C.F.R.   § 21.40.  As will be discussed below, the Board finds that the Veteran does not meet this second requirement because he does not have an employment handicap for VA vocational rehabilitation purposes.

Currently, the Veteran is employed on a full-time basis as the Commodities Chief for the Dallas VA Medical Center and has held this position since November 2020. Prior to working for VA, he worked for General Atomics Aeronautical Systems, Inc. and Northrup Grumman. During his time in the military, he worked as a Global Supply Chain/Logistics Manager and held other positions in logistics. See Resume, received March 2022. 

The Veteran contends that his medical problems are getting worse due to stress at his current work environment of being on his feet and walking. He also contends that his migraines and psychiatric disabilities are getting worse due to his work environment. See March 2022 RNI. 

In a March 2022 VA vocational evaluation, a VRC considered the Veteran's education and work history, as well as his symptoms and impairment due to service-connected disabilities, which had a combined rating of 100 percent, and determined that the Veteran did not have an employment handicap, as such, he was not entitled to receive VR&E services. 

The VRC thoroughly reviewed the Veteran's prior employment history and noted the limitations that he would likely experience based on his service-connected disabilities. Ultimately, the VRC found that the evidence did not show that the Veteran's disabilities contributed to a vocational impairment in a measurable, identifiable way. The VRC assessed that the Veteran had vocational impairment due to disabilities but had overcome his impairments through qualifying for employment in an occupation consistent with abilities, aptitudes, and interests. 

The Board acknowledges that the VRC checked "no" to the question of whether the Veteran had overcome the effects of his vocational impairment, however, the narrative portion made clear that the VRC found that the Veteran did overcome the effects of his vocational impairment.  The VRC noted that the Veteran was currently employed since 2020 and found that the Veteran had sufficient education and work experience to obtain employment. The VRC further noted that the Veteran was currently employed and detailed the Veteran's education and training. In the final analysis, the VRC found that the Veteran did not meet the criteria for an employment handicap because he had overcome the impairments to employability and qualified for employment that was consistent with his abilities, aptitudes, and interests.

The VRC then assessed that the Veteran did not have a serious employment handicap. The VRC found that there was no evidence that the Veteran had any of the factors for a serious employment handicap identified in 38 C.F.R. § 21.52.

Following review of all of the lay and medical evidence that can properly be considered, the Board finds that the criteria for entitlement to VR&E services under Chapter 31 were not met during the period here at issue. The greater weight of the evidence shows that based on the Veteran's transferrable skills, education, work experience, and training, he had overcome any impairment of employment to which his service-connected disabilities had substantially contributed. While the evidence reflects that his service-connected disabilities cause some difficulties with aspects of his employment, the VRC determined that his service-connected disabilities would not cause an impairment in his ability to obtain, maintain, or retain suitable employment. The VRC reached this conclusion in the specific context of addressing the Veteran's vocational and educational goals. The VRC had sufficient facts and data to support a determination that the Veteran did not have an employment handicap, and the VRC provided a sound rationale for the determination. See Black v. Brown, 10 Vet. App. 297 (1997). As noted previously, VRCs are specifically delegated the authority, by VA regulation, to determine whether a veteran has an employment handicap. On review, the Board finds that the March 2022 assessment by the VRC are entitled to significant probative weight.

The Veteran submitted a statement with his request for a Higher Level Review that he had been seeking employment for 10 months and had no job offers. In particular, he argues that he has an employment handicap because he has not overcome the effects of his impairment of employability.  However, the record demonstrates that the Veteran has been consistently employed since his discharge from the military that is consistent with his abilities, aptitudes, and interests. 

The Board finds that the statutory requirements for entitlement to Chapter 31 VR&E benefits have not been met because the Veteran does not have an employment handicap and is therefore not in need of rehabilitation. Because an employment handicap is a threshold requirement of having a serious employment handicap, the Veteran also does not have a serious employment handicap. 38 C.F.R. § 21.52 (a).

In conclusion, as the Veteran's service-connected disabilities do not result in an impairment of his ability to prepare for, obtain, or retain employment consistent with his abilities, aptitudes and interests, the benefits provided under Chapter 31 are simply not available to the Veteran in conjunction with his current appeal.  If the Veteran believes that any of his service-connected disabilities have reached a level of severity where he needs VR&E services to obtain suitable employment consistent with his aptitudes, interests, and abilities, he is encouraged to reapply for VR&E services at a future date.

The Board is grateful for the Veteran's honorable service.  However, given the record before it, the Board finds that the evidence in this case does not reach the level of being equally balanced both in favor and against the claim.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5107; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2022).

 

 

Melanie J. Mann

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Boal, Alan

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.