Citation Nr: A25034638
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 210720-173114
DATE: April 15, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to a total disability rating based on individual unemployability due to service-connected disabilities (TDIU) is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served in the United States Army from April 1992 to December 1998. See Form DD 214.

On August 23, 2017, the President signed into law the Veterans Appeals Improvement and Modernization Act, Pub. L. No. 115-55 (to be codified as amended in scattered sections of 38 U.S.C.), 131 Stat. 1105 (2017), also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA). This law creates a new framework for appellants dissatisfied with VA's decision on their claim to seek review.

In the timely July 2021 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran chose the Evidence Submission docket. By law, for claims appealed in this docket, the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the July 2020 Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or his representative with, or within 90 days from receipt of, the VA Form 10182. 38 C.F.R. § 20.303. If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal and prior to the date the Board received the VA Form 10182, or (2) more than 90 days following the date the Board received the VA Form 10182, then, by law, the Board was not permitted to consider that evidence in this decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.303, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim[s], considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.   

1. Entitlement to a TDIU is remanded. 

It is the established policy of VA that all veterans who are unable to obtain and maintain a substantially gainful occupation because of service-connected disabilities shall be rated as totally disabled. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.16, 3.340. Substantially gainful employment is work that is more than marginal and permits the individual to earn a living wage. Moore v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 356 (1991). The central inquiry is whether the Veteran's service-connected disabilities alone are severe enough to cause unemployability. Hatlestad v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 524, 529 (1993). VA must consider the veteran's level of education, special training, and previous work experience, but may not consider age or the effect of nonservice-connected disabilities. 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.341, 4.16, 4.19. 

In Ray v. Wilkie, the Court held that the analysis of a TDIU claim or appeal must include a complete discussion of (1) the Veteran's history, education, skill and training; (2) whether the Veteran has the physical ability to perform the type of activities required by the occupation at issue; and (3) whether the veteran has the mental ability to perform the activities required by the occupation in issue. Ray v. Wilkie, 31 Vet. App. 58, 73 (2019). The mere fact that a veteran is unemployed, underemployed, or has difficulty obtaining employment is not enough to warrant a TDIU. Van Hoose v. Brown, 4 Vet. App. 361, 363 (1993). SSA determinations are relevant but not binding on the Board because there are significant differences between SSA and VA criteria. See Collier v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 413, 417 (1991).

A schedular TDIU rating may be assigned when the unemployable veteran has (1) a single service-connected disability rated at 60 percent or more; or (if there are two or more service-connected disabilities), (2) one disability rated at 40 percent or more, and additional service-connected disabilities bring the combined rating to 70 percent or more. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.340, 3.341, 4.16(a).

If these percentage criteria are not met but a veteran is, nevertheless, unemployable because of a service-connected disability or disabilities, then an extraschedular rating must be assigned. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.16 (b) ("All veterans who are unable to obtain and maintain a substantially gainful occupation because of service-connected disabilities shall be rated as totally disabled.")

The Board does not have the authority to assign an extraschedular TDIU in the first instance. Bowling v. Principi, Vet. App. 1 (2001). Rather, the Board's sole inquiry is whether referral for extraschedular consideration is warranted in light of the evidence. If the Board finds "sufficient evidence" to substantiate a "reasonable possibility" that a veteran may be unemployable because of service-connected disabilities, then the proper course of action is to remand the claim for referral to the Undersecretary for Benefits or the AOJ's Director of Compensation Service for an advisory opinion for extraschedular consideration. 38 C.F.R. §4.16(b).

If the Board determines that a referral is not appropriate, the Court has held that a different analysis must be undertaken. To this point, the Court held in Snider v. McDonough, 35 Vet. App. 1 (2021) that if the Board denies a referral, it must make two determinations: (1) that a referral for extraschedular TDIU consideration is not warranted because there is insufficient evidence to substantiate a reasonable possibility that a veteran is unemployable because of service-connected disabilities; and (2) that TDIU benefits are not warranted because service-connected disabilities did not render the veteran unemployable.

On March 29, 2017, the Veteran filed an intent to file a claim for compensation. Subsequently, in May 2017, the Veteran filed a claim requesting an increased rating for his service-connected neck disability, as well as a request to reopen previously denied claims for tinnitus, and disabilities of the low back, left knee, and left shoulder. 

The evidence of record reflects that in June 2017 the Veteran underwent VA examinations regarding his tinnitus, shoulder, back, neck and left knee disabilities. In the neck examination report, the examiner noted that the Veteran had limited motion as well as pain and stiffness from sitting and with rotation to the right. In the knee examination report, the examiner noted that the Veteran had experienced interference with standing and locomotion, requiring constant use of a knee brace. The Veteran reported he was unable to perform labor intensive work due to knee pain and weakness. In the back examination report, the examiner noted that he experienced less movement due to "ankylosis and adhesions" as well as interference with sitting. In the hearing loss and tinnitus report, the Veteran reported functional impact from constant ringing in both ears. In the shoulder examination report, the Veteran reported chronic left shoulder aching.

In September 2017, the Veteran filed a Notice of Disagreement, appealing a June 2017 rating decision with regard to the Veteran's lower back, neck, left shoulder, left knee and tinnitus conditions. The Veteran also requested consideration for TDIU (as part and parcel of the pending appeal). See Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447(2009). See also September 2017 Correspondence. 

In September 2018, the Veteran submitted a lay statement. He reported that as a result of his combined service-connected conditions, he had been unable to secure and follow substantially gainful employment since 2001, which was when he last worked full-time. He explained that he had tried to work at many jobs but has not been able to maintain any position for an extended period of time. After he left service, he had a job in computer simulation that was very accommodating to his physical limitations and medical appointments. Unfortunately, that company closed in 2001, and he moved to Florida to start school. After he finished school, he could not find a company as accommodating of his physical limitations. He struggled at temporary jobs and a restaurant job due to his inability to perform physical labor or perform tasks fast enough. The Veteran stated that his pain from the combined service-connected conditions leaves him unable to move around without causing a flare-up. He struggles to find a comfortable position, leaving him unable to rest in bed for an extended period of time. He also requires an elevated chair to sit down.   

In October 2018, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 8940 (Veteran's Application for Increased Compensation Based on Unemployability), listing his employment and earnings from February 2001 to September 2017. The form also reflected that the Veteran has an Associate's Degree in General Studies with a focus in Computer Science. 

In February 2020, the Veteran was afforded additional VA examinations regarding his shoulder, back, neck and left knee conditions and his tinnitus. In the neck examination report, the examiner noted that activities involving the neck range of motion caused pain and decreased range of motion affected activities as well as the visual line of sight. In the knee examination report, the examiner noted that activities involving weight bearing and range of motion caused bilateral knee pain. The examiner also noted difficulties with ambulation and use of the lower extremity. In the back examination report, the examiner noted that bending, twisting, standing and walking caused lower back pain. The examiner also noted that decreased range of motion affected ambulation and other activities requiring use of the back. In the hearing loss and tinnitus report, the Veteran reported functional impact from the distraction of intense ear noise.  In the shoulder examination report, the examiner noted that activities such as reaching, lifting, carrying, pushing and caused bilateral shoulder pain and decreased range of motion affected use of the upper extremity.

In March 2020, a Statement of the Case was issued, denying TDIU based on a failure to meet schedular requirements. The AOJ did not submit the matter for extraschedular consideration and an advisory opinion prior to adjudicating the claim.

In April 2020, the Veteran filed a request for Higher Level Review of the March 2020 SOC with regard to entitlement to TDIU.  After a May 2020 Higher Level Review, the AOJ found a duty to assist error and returned the matter for additional development. The AOJ made a favorable finding that the Veteran was not currently employed.  After further development, the denial of TDIU was confirmed and continued in July 2020.  

In June 2021, a certified rehabilitation counselor performed a medical record review and vocational assessment interview of the Veteran. The Veteran reported that his left shoulder, neck, back and left knee disabilities caused physical limitations as well as extreme fatigue due to pain and discomfort. As for his left shoulder disability, the Veteran reported constant pain and limited range of motion. For his neck disability, the Veteran reported limited range of motion due to neck pian and stiffness. For his back disability, the Veteran described constant daily pain exacerbated by movement such as sitting, standing, walking, lifting carrying and bending. For his left knee disability, the Veteran reported constant pain and swelling as well as limitations in his ability to stand or walk, causing him to lie down for extended periods each day. His tinnitus causes constant distraction, impairing his ability to maintain concentration and interact with others. See June 2021 Vocational Assessment Report.

The counselor noted that the Veteran's highest gross monthly earnings from his 2017 restaurant job amounted to $200 and yielded income below the federal poverty threshold. Thus, the counselor opined that this phase of employment was unmaintained and not substantially gainful, only yielding marginal income. The counselor also noted that while the Veteran has an Associate's Degree with a focus on computer science, he has not worked in that capacity for over 18 years, and many skills would be obsolete. See Id. 

Regarding activities of daily living, the Veteran reported difficulty dressing, showering and bending to tie shoelaces. He also reported performing occasional household chores, completed piecemeal due to difficulty standing, walking, lifting, carrying, reaching and bending. He also had difficulty preparing food because of difficulty standing at the kitchen counter, reaching and lifting pots and pans. See Id.

The counselor opined that it was at least as likely as not that the Veteran has been unable to secure and follow substantially gainful employment (to include both skilled and unskilled sedentary work) due to his service-connected left shoulder, neck, back, left knee and tinnitus conditions since at least March 2017.  See Id.

In July 2021, the Veteran submitted a Notice of Disagreement appealing the July 2020 rating decision regarding TDIU. He asserted that while his service- connected lower back, cervical, left shoulder, left knee and tinnitus disabilities do not meet the schedular requirements for TDIU, they still resulted in functional impairment which have impacted his ability to secure and maintain substantially gainful employment since March 29, 2017. The Veteran asserted that his limitations were incompatible with physical and sedentary work. The Veteran submitted the vocational assessment report in support of his assertions. Thus, the Veteran requested consideration for TDIU under the extraschedular requirements, but in the first instance (without remand to the Director of Compensation under 38 C.F.R. 4.16(b). See July 2021 Argument. 

Further, the Veteran asserted that he had not participated in "substantially gainful" employment" since 2001 as a result of his service-connected disabilities impacting his ability to maintain steady employment. At that time, he worked as a computer simulation tester from February to November 2001. He performed some temporary work between 2002 and 2006. He was employed in as a retail clerk between August 2007 to January 2008, but claimed that he was assigned "simple easy tasks" and missed approximately two days of work a month due to chronic pain. He reported his last job in any capacity was as a part-time cook for a pizza restaurant in September 2017, but was unable to maintain this job for more than one month. See September 2018 VA Form 21-8940. See July 2021 Argument. His October 2018 Social Security Information profile and benefit data confirmed $0 income from 2009 to 2016.

The Veteran asserts that the functional impairment resulting from his service-connected disabilities in concert have prevented him from securing and maintaining a substantially gainful occupation since, at least, March 29, 2017.  Although the Veteran discusses his employment status and asserts he earned marginal income dating back to 2001, the appeal period for consideration in the present appeal begins on March 29, 2016, the date of VA's receipt of his intent to file (which was followed by a timely claim seeking at least one increased rating) plus the one-year look back period.  Gaston v. Shinseki, 605 F.3d 979, 984 (Fed. Cir. 2010)

The Veteran is service connected for the following disabilities (from March 29, 2017): (1) left shoulder degenerative arthritis with acromioclavicular joint separation at 20 percent; (2) left knee tendonitis at 10 percent; (3) lumbosacral strain with degenerative disc disease at 10 percent; (4) tinnitus at 10 percent; and (5) a noncompensable rating for bilateral hearing loss.

Based on the foregoing, from March 29, 2017, the Veteran's combined evaluation does not meet the percentage standards set forth in 4.16(a) for a schedular TDIU. Therefore, the Board may not consider the Veteran's claim for a TDIU in the first instance. 

However, the evidence of record reflects that the Veteran left his most recent employment as a restaurant worker on March 29, 2017. VA examination reports from June 2017 and February 2020, an October 2018 VA Form 8940, lay statements and a June 2021 vocational assessment report reflect that all of the Veteran's service-connected disabilities in concert negatively impacted his ability to secure and maintain a substantially gainful occupation. Here, the Board finds sufficient evidence to substantiate a reasonable possibility that a Veteran may be unemployable because of service-connected disabilities. 

With the above in mind, neither prong under Snider is sufficed. As such, the appeal must be considered on an extraschedular basis under 38 C.F.R. §4.16(b).  The Board acknowledges the Veteran's request to provide extraschedular consideration in the first instance, but the Board does not have the authority to do so under Bowling v. Principi, Vet. App. 1 (2001). A referral seeking a TDIU from March 29, 2016, to the Undersecretary for Benefits or the AOJ's Director of Compensation Service for actions under 4.16(b) is appropriate, and the AOJ's failure to undertake this procedural step represents a pre-decisional error in fulfilling VA's duty to assist the Veteran which must be corrected on remand.  

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

1. The AOJ must refer the matter of entitlement to a TDIU from March 29, 2016, to the Undersecretary for Benefits or the Director of Compensation Service for appropriate actions and issuance of an advisory opinion under 38 C.F.R. §4.16(b). 

2. Thereafter, the AOJ must readjudicate the Veteran's TDIU appeal based on the totality of the evidence. If the benefits sought on appeal are not granted to the fullest extent, the AOJ must provide the Veteran and his private attorney with a copy of the readjudication and afford them an appropriate period to respond.

 

 

Scott W. Dale

Acting Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	De Angelis, A.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.