Citation Nr: A25034359
Decision Date: 04/14/25	Archive Date: 04/14/25

DOCKET NO. 240513-439218
DATE: April 14, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for a left knee condition is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for a right knee condition is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for a traumatic brain injury (TBI) is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a low back condition is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a right shoulder condition is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for tendonitis is remanded. 

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran failed to report, without good cause, for a scheduled VA examination in conjunction with his claim for service connection for PTSD.

2. The evidence fails to establish that the Veteran's PTSD is related to active service.

3. The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran has had a left knee condition at any time during or approximate to the pendency of the claim.

4. The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran has had a right knee condition at any time during or approximate to the pendency of the claim.

5. The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran has had a TBI at any time during or approximate to the pendency of the claim.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for service connection for PTSD have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

2. The criteria for service connection for a left knee condition have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

3. The criteria for service connection for a right knee condition have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

4. The criteria for service connection for a TBI have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from May 2005 to January 2013.

The rating decision on appeal was issued in October 2023 and constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.

In a May 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the October 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim[s], considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of entitlement to service connection for a low back condition, right shoulder condition, and tendonitis, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

1. Entitlement to service connection for PTSD is denied.

Service connection for PTSD specifically requires the presence of three particular elements: (1) a current medical diagnosis of PTSD; (2) medical evidence of a causal nexus between current symptomatology and a claimed in-service stressor; and (3) credible supporting evidence that the claimed in-service stressor actually occurred.  38 C.F.R. § 3.304(f).  For the purposes of establishing service connection for PTSD, medical evidence diagnosing PTSD must be in accordance with the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders 5th Edition (DSM-5) as the source of criteria for the diagnosis of claimed psychiatric disorders.

Under 38 C.F.R. § 3.655, when a claimant fails to report for an examination scheduled in conjunction with an original compensation claim, the claim shall be rated based on the evidence of record.  However, when the examination was scheduled in conjunction with any other original claim, a reopened claim for a benefit which was previously disallowed, or a claim for increase, the claim shall be denied.  38 C.F.R. § 3.655(b).

A claimant has the responsibility to present and support a claim for benefits under laws administered by the VA, 38 U.S.C. § 5107(a).  While VA has a duty to assist the veteran in substantiating his claim, that duty is not a one-way street.  Woods v. Gober, 14 Vet. App. 214, 224 (2000).

Here, the Board notes that post-service treatment records reflect the Veteran has been diagnosed with PTSD.  Further, in its October 2022 rating decision, the AOJ conceded the element of a stressor based on the Veteran's combat service in Southwest Asia.  As such, the remaining question for the Board is whether the Veteran's PTSD is related to service. 

The Veteran was scheduled for a VA examination for his PTSD in October 2023.  However, he failed to appear for the examination without showing good cause.  As such, the Veteran's claim must be decided on the available record. 

Given the lack of a medical opinion or treatment records on the etiology of the Veteran's PTSD, the Board is unable to establish a nexus between the Veteran's in-service stressor and current psychiatric condition.  While the Board has considered the Veteran's contention that his PTSD is related to service, he is not competent to provide a nexus opinion in this case, as the issue is medically complex and falls outside the realm of common knowledge of a lay person.  Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 n.4 (Fed. Cir. 2007).

Accordingly, the Board finds that the benefit-of-the-doubt rule is not applicable as the evidence is not in approximate balance, and entitlement to service connection for PTSD is not warranted.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

2. Entitlement to service connection for a left knee condition is denied.

3. Entitlement to service connection for a right knee condition is denied.

4. Entitlement to service connection for a TBI is denied.

The Veteran is seeking to establish service connection for a bilateral knee condition and TBI.  

Following a review of the claims file, the Board concludes that the evidence does not establish the existence of a bilateral knee condition or TBI at any time during the pendency of the claim or recent to the filing of the claim.  Romanowsky v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 289, 294 (2013); McClain v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 319, 321 (2007).  In reaching this conclusion, the Board has considered Saunders v. Wilkie, which held that "pain alone, without an accompanying diagnosis of a present disease, can qualify as a disability" if it "reaches the level of a functional impairment of earning capacity."  886 F.3d 1356, 136769 (Fed. Cir. 2018).  However, here, post-service treatment records do not show complaints of, treatment for, or diagnosis of a left knee condition, right knee condition or TBI and there is no evidence of functional impairments caused by any of the Veteran's claimed disabilities. 

Accordingly, the Board finds that the benefit-of-the-doubt rule is not applicable as the evidence is not in approximate balance, and entitlement to service connection for a left knee condition, right knee condition, and TBI is not warranted.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to service connection for a low back condition is remanded.

2. Entitlement to service connection for a right shoulder condition is remanded.

3. Entitlement to service connection for tendonitis is remanded. 

The Veteran is seeking to establish service connection for a low back condition, right shoulder condition, and tendonitis.  Specifically, he contends his claimed conditions are related to in-service airborne operations, wearing 60-pounds of gear during deployments, explosions, and gunfire. 

38 U.S.C. § 1154(b) creates a presumption regarding the in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disability claimed to be the result of combat service.  Importantly, 38 U.S.C. § 1154(b) does not establish service connection for a combat veteran.  Rather, the statute aids him or her in relaxing the adjudicative evidentiary requirements for determining what happened in service.  See Clyburn v. West, 12 Vet. App. 296, 303 (1999).  Even when the combat presumption applies, a "Veteran seeking compensation must still show the existence of a present disability and that there is a causal relationship between the present disability and the injury...incurred during active duty."  Reeves v. Shinseki, 682 F.3d 988, 998-99 (2012). 

Review of the Veteran's service records show he served in Iraq from October 2006 to November 2007 and then in Afghanistan, a designated imminent danger pay area, from March 2009 to January 2010, and was awarded the Army Commendation Medal for service in support of Operation Enduring Freedom in a combat zone.  He served again in Afghanistan from December 2011 to October 2012 and received another Army Commendation Medal.  In the October 2023 rating decision, in connection with the Veteran's claim for PTSD, the AOJ conceded the element of a stressor based on his "combat service in Southwest Asia."  As such, the Board finds the incidents described by the Veteran are consistent with the circumstances of his combat service, and he is entitled to the combat presumption. 

VA is obliged to provide an examination or obtain a medical opinion in a claim for service connection when the record contains competent evidence that the claimant has a current disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability, the record indicates that the disability or symptoms of the disability may be associated with active service, and the record does not contain sufficient information to make a decision on the claim.  38 U.S.C. § 5103A(d); McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006).  The threshold for finding a link between a current disability and service is low.  Locklear v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 410 (2006); McLendon, 20 Vet. App. at 83.  

As the Veteran has not been afforded VA examinations for his low back condition, right shoulder condition, and tendonitis prior to the rating decision on appeal, the Board finds remand is warranted to correct pre-decisional duty to assist errors.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination for his low back condition.  The entire claims file should be made available to and be reviewed by the examiner.  The examiner is asked to respond to the following:

Is the Veteran's low back condition as least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) etiologically related to service, including his experiences in combat?  Please explain why or why not.

In forming his or her opinion, the examiner should address the Veteran's contentions regarding the onset and continuity of his condition.

The examiner is advised that a negative opinion cannot be based solely on the absence of treatment in service.

In providing the requested opinion, consider the Veteran's description of the in-service injury and symptoms as well as post-service symptoms.  If there is any medical reason to accept or reject the proposition that the Veteran's reported injury and symptoms in service and thereafter represented the onset of the current disability, this should be noted.  Stated another way, do the Veteran's reports about the symptoms align with how the currently diagnosed disability is known to develop or are the Veteran's reports generally inconsistent with medical knowledge or implausible?

A rationale must be provided in support of any opinion(s).

2. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination for his right shoulder condition.  The entire claims file should be made available to and be reviewed by the examiner.  The examiner is asked to respond to the following:

Is the Veteran's right shoulder condition as least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) etiologically related to service, including his experiences in combat?  Please explain why or why not.

In forming his or her opinion, the examiner should address the Veteran's contentions regarding the onset and continuity of his condition.

The examiner is advised that a negative opinion cannot be based solely on the absence of treatment in service.

In providing the requested opinion, consider the Veteran's description of the in-service injury and symptoms as well as post-service symptoms.  If there is any medical reason to accept or reject the proposition that the Veteran's reported injury and symptoms in service and thereafter represented the onset of the current disability, this should be noted.  Stated another way, do the Veteran's reports about the symptoms align with how the currently diagnosed disability is known to develop or are the Veteran's reports generally inconsistent with medical knowledge or implausible?

A rationale must be provided in support of any opinion(s).

3. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination for his tendonitis.  The entire claims file should be made available to and be reviewed by the examiner.  The examiner is asked to respond to the following:

Is the Veteran's tendonitis as least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) etiologically related to service, including his experiences in combat?  Please explain why or why not.

In forming his or her opinion, the examiner should address the Veteran's contentions regarding the onset and continuity of his condition.

The examiner is advised that a negative opinion cannot be based solely on the absence of treatment in service.

In providing the requested opinion, consider the Veteran's description of the in-service injury and symptoms as well as post-service symptoms.  If there is any medical reason to accept or reject the proposition that the Veteran's reported injury and symptoms in service and thereafter represented the onset of the current disability, this should be noted.  Stated another way, do the Veteran's reports about the symptoms align with how the currently diagnosed disability is known to develop or are the Veteran's reports generally inconsistent with medical knowledge or implausible?

(Continued on the next page)

?

A rationale must be provided in support of any opinion(s).

 

 

KRISTI L. GUNN

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	L. Silverblatt

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.