Citation Nr: A25034420
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 240214-416260
DATE: April 15, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMANDS

The Veteran has active service from May 1994 to May 1999.

These matters come before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In the February 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the December 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding all the claims, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Evidence was added to the claims file during a period of time when new evidence was not allowed.  As the Board is remanding the claims for further development, this additional evidence will be considered by the RO in the adjudication of those claims.

1. Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disability.

2. Entitlement to service connection for gastroesophageal reflux disease.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

BACKGROUND INFORMATION FOR RO ADJUDICATOR:

The issue is being remanded to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist errors. See 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a). 

The Veteran must be provided with a psychiatric examination that considers whether he has an acquired psychiatric disorder that is related to his reported incidents and stressors in service. The Veteran alleged that his current psychiatric disorder was due to the witnessing drill sergeants yelling and hollering as well as experiencing the unknown when he was deployed to South Korea in 1994. See August 2023 VA 21-0781, Statement in Support of Claim for PTSD. 

Also, the Veteran must be provided with an examination and opinion to determine whether the Veteran's current GERD is related to his in-service vomiting. The AOJ issued a formal finding in its December 2023 rating decision regarding an in-service vomiting incident and the Veteran's VA records show a current diagnosis of GERD.

Finally, appellants are entitled to a hearing at the AOJ before VA issues a decision on an initial or supplemental claim pursuant to 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.103 (d)(1) and 3.103(b)(1). Notice of this right to a hearing must be provided to the Veteran and the representative. This is to correct an error by the AOJ in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty.

THE REMAND DIRECTIVES FOLLOW

1. Schedule the Veteran for a new psychiatric examination and opinion regarding the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder from a qualified examiner. The examiner must note his or her review of the complete claims file, including this remand. 

The examiner must address the following, with a full supporting rationale:

(a.) Identify any acquired psychiatric disability consistent with the DSM-V.

(b.) For all disabilities found, as defined in (a) above, opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that such disability/disabilities had its onset in, or is otherwise etiologically related to active service to include as due to any adequately identified and corroborated stressor.  Why or why not?

"	The Veteran alleged that his current psychiatric disorder was due to the witnessing drill sergeants yelling and hollering as well as experiencing the unknown when he was deployed to South Korea in 1994.

The Board notes that the claims folder must be provided to and reviewed by the examiner for all post-remand cases per AOJ policy. See VBA Manual M21-1, Part IV.i.2.A.8.b. Thus, the examiner must specifically note that the claims folder was received and reviewed in the body of the examination report.

The examiner is informed that a positive opinion indicating a nexus to service does not require certainty. Rather, if the weight of the evidence is in approximate balance for and against a nexus to service, the examiner should make a determination favorable to the Veteran.

2. Schedule the Veteran for a new examination and opinion regarding the Veteran's GERD from a qualified examiner. The examiner must note his or her review of the complete claims file, including this remand. 

The examiner must address the following, with a full supporting rationale:

Is the Veteran's GERD at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) related to his military service including related to the Veteran's documented incident of vomiting during service? Why or why not?

The Board notes that the claims folder must be provided to and reviewed by the examiner for all post-remand cases per AOJ policy. See VBA Manual M21-1, Part IV.i.2.A.8.b. Thus, the examiner must specifically note that the claims folder was received and reviewed in the body of the examination report.

The examiner is informed that a positive opinion indicating a nexus to service does not require certainty. Rather, if the weight of the evidence is in approximate balance for and against a nexus to service, the examiner should make a determination favorable to the Veteran.

3.  Provide the Veteran and the representative notice of the right to participate in a pre-decisional RO hearing and allow a reasonable period to respond/request the hearing prior to readjudicating the claim.

4. Readjudicate.

 

 

Jennifer White

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	D. MacTavish, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.