Citation Nr: A25034154
Decision Date: 04/14/25	Archive Date: 04/14/25

DOCKET NO. 240930-475388
DATE: April 14, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an initial compensable disability evaluation for ischemic heart disease has been withdrawn.

Entitlement to an initial compensable disability evaluation for diabetes mellitus type II has been withdrawn.

An initial compensable disability evaluation of 20 percent, but no more, for voiding dysfunction associated with prostate cancer is granted.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. On January 6, 2025, prior to the promulgation of a decision in the appeal of the claim for entitlement to an initial compensable evaluation for ischemic heart disease, the Board received notification from the Veteran, along with his attorney, that a withdrawal of this appeal is requested.

2. On January 6, 2025, prior to the promulgation of a decision in the appeal of the claim for entitlement to an initial compensable evaluation for diabetes mellitus type II, the Board received notification from the Veteran, along with his attorney, that a withdrawal of this appeal is requested.

3. The Veteran's prostate cancer manifests as urine leakage requiring the wearing of absorbent materials which must be changed less than two times per day.  The Veteran's prostate cancer does not manifest as urine leakage requiring the wearing of absorbent materials which must be changed two to four times per day, urinary frequency with a daytime voiding interval of less than one hour or awakening to void five or more times per night, obstructed voiding with urinary retention requiring intermittent or continuous catheterization, urinary tract infection, or renal dysfunction.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for withdrawal of the claim for entitlement to an initial compensable evaluation for ischemic heart disease by the Veteran have been met.  38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. § 20.205.

2. The criteria for withdrawal of the claim for entitlement to an initial compensable evaluation for diabetes mellitus type II by the Veteran have been met.  38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. § 20.205.

3. The criteria for an initial compensable disability evaluation of 20 percent, but no more, for voiding dysfunction associated with prostate cancer have been met.   38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107 (2012); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.1-4.14, 4.21, 4.115a, 4.115b, Diagnostic Code 7528.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from June 1967 to June 1971.

This appeal arises from a June 2024 rating decision.  In the September 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Hearing docket.  A Board hearing was held on January 6, 2025.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the June 2024 AOJ decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or his attorney at the hearing or within 90 days following the hearing.  38 C.F.R. § 20.302(a).  Evidence was associated with the file during the period after the AOJ issued the June 2024 decision on appeal and prior to the Board hearing.  The Board did not consider this evidence in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.302(a), 20.801.  

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

This appeal has been advanced on the Board's docket pursuant to 38 U.S.C. § 7107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 20.800(c).

The Board notes that while the period to change AMA dockets per 38 C.F.R. § 20.202(c)(2) has not elapsed, a docket switch waiver letter (see Williams v. McDonough, 7 Vet. App. 305 (2024)) is not necessary because the Veteran submitted evidence within the applicable hearing docket evidentiary window, thereby waiving the right to switch dockets.

The Veteran and his attorney raised issues with the adequacy of the July 2024 VA male reproductive organ conditions examination, which did not take place prior to the June 2024 AOJ decision on appeal.  Neither the Veteran nor his attorney have raised any other issues with the duty to notify or duty to assist that occurred prior to the rating decision on appeal.  See Scott v. McDonald, 789 F.3d 1375, 1381 (Fed. Cir. 2015) (holding that "the Board's obligation to read filings in a liberal manner does not require the Board... to search the record and address procedural arguments when the veteran fails to raise them before the Board."); Dickens v. McDonald, 814 F.3d 1359, 1361 (Fed. Cir. 2016) (applying Scott to a duty to assist argument).

1. Entitlement to an initial compensable disability evaluation for ischemic heart disease has been withdrawn.

At his Board hearing on January 6, 2025, the Veteran and his attorney notified the Board that he wished to withdraw the issue of entitlement to an initial compensable disability evaluation for ischemic heart disease and confirmed this on the record.  See January 2025 hearing transcript.  

Withdrawal of a claim is only effective where the withdrawal is explicit, unambiguous, and done with a full understanding of the consequences of such action on the part of the claimant.  DeLisio v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 45, 57 (2011).  

The applicable regulation, 38 CFR § 20.205, is silent as to what is required for a valid withdrawal on the record at a hearing.  But the criteria set forth in DeLisio apply.  An oral withdrawal at a hearing must be (1) explicit, (2) unambiguous, and (3) done with a full understanding of the consequences of such action on the part of the claimant.  Acree v. O'Rourke, 891 F.3d 1009, 1012 (2018).  

At the hearing, the undersigned informed the Veteran that the claim would not be granted, denied, or remanded, and that if he wished to seek an increased rating for his ischemic heart disease in the future, he would need to file a new claim.  The undersigned explained that depending on when he filed his claim, the effective date of any future award could be impacted.  The Veteran stated that he understood the impact of withdrawing this appeal and wished to do so.  

The Board may dismiss any appeal which fails to allege specific error of fact or law in the determination being appealed.  38 U.S.C. § 7105.  An appeal may be withdrawn as to any or all issues involved in the appeal at any time before the Board promulgates a decision.  38 C.F.R. § 20.205.  Withdrawal may be made by the appellant or by his or her authorized representative.  38 C.F.R. § 20.205.  In the present case, the Veteran has withdrawn this appeal and, hence, there remain no allegations of errors of fact or law for appellate consideration.  Accordingly, the Board does not have jurisdiction to review the appeal and it is dismissed.

2. Entitlement to an initial compensable disability evaluation for diabetes mellitus type II has been withdrawn.

At his Board hearing on January 6, 2025, the Veteran and his attorney notified the Board that he wished to withdraw the issue of entitlement to an initial compensable disability evaluation for diabetes mellitus type II and confirmed this on the record.  See January 2025 hearing transcript.  

Withdrawal of a claim is only effective where the withdrawal is explicit, unambiguous, and done with a full understanding of the consequences of such action on the part of the claimant.  DeLisio, 25 Vet. App. at 57.  

The applicable regulation, 38 CFR § 20.205, is silent as to what is required for a valid withdrawal on the record at a hearing.  But the criteria set forth in DeLisio apply.  An oral withdrawal at a hearing must be (1) explicit, (2) unambiguous, and (3) done with a full understanding of the consequences of such action on the part of the claimant.  Acree, 891 F.3d at 1012.  

At the hearing, the undersigned informed the Veteran that the claim would not be granted, denied, or remanded, and that if he wished to seek an increased rating for his ischemic heart disease in the future, he would need to file a new claim.  The undersigned explained that depending on when he filed his claim, the effective date of any future award could be impacted.  The Veteran stated that he understood the impact of withdrawing this appeal and wished to do so.  

The Board may dismiss any appeal which fails to allege specific error of fact or law in the determination being appealed.  38 U.S.C. § 7105.  An appeal may be withdrawn as to any or all issues involved in the appeal at any time before the Board promulgates a decision.  38 C.F.R. § 20.205.  Withdrawal may be made by the appellant or by his or her authorized representative.  38 C.F.R. § 20.205.  In the present case, the Veteran has withdrawn this appeal and, hence, there remain no allegations of errors of fact or law for appellate consideration.  Accordingly, the Board does not have jurisdiction to review the appeal and it is dismissed.

3. An initial compensable disability evaluation of 20 percent, but no more, for voiding dysfunction associated with prostate cancer is granted.

The Veteran and his attorney assert that his currently assigned noncompensable rating for prostate cancer does not reflect the severity of his ongoing symptoms, specifically urinary incontinence, urinary frequency, and hot flashes or night sweats.  See January 2025 hearing transcript.  They further assert that the June 2024 VA male reproductive organ conditions examiner failed to elicit information from the Veteran about voiding dysfunction.  See id.

The Veteran's prostate cancer is currently rated under 38 C.F.R. § 4.115b, Diagnostic Code 7528, for malignant neoplasms of the genitourinary system, with a noncompensable evaluation effective July 12, 2019.

Disability ratings are determined by applying a schedule of ratings that is based on average impairment of earning capacity.  Separate Diagnostic Codes identify the various disabilities.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. Part 4 (2019).  Each disability must be viewed in relation to its history and the limitation of activity imposed by the disabling condition should be emphasized.  38 C.F.R. § 4.1.  

"Staged" ratings are appropriate for an increased rating claim when the factual findings show distinct time periods where the service-connected disability exhibits symptoms that would warrant different ratings.  Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007).  Given the nature of the present claim for higher initial evaluations for the Veteran's prostate cancer, the Board has considered all evidence of severity from the effective dates for the awards of service connection for those claims.  Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119 (1999).  

Where there is a question as to which of two disability evaluations shall be applied, the higher evaluation is to be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating.  Otherwise, the lower rating is to be assigned.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7. 

After an initial period of a 100 percent rating, if there has been no local reoccurrence or metastasis, Diagnostic Code 7528 provides for rating residuals as voiding dysfunction or renal dysfunction, whichever is predominant.  Here, the Veteran has not received therapeutic procedures for prostate cancer during the period on appeal, and he does not assert and the evidence does not show that there has been local reoccurrence or metastasis during the period on appeal.  See January 2025 hearing transcript; see generally VA treatment records, private treatment records.

Because the record contains no evidence of renal dysfunction or urinary tract infection attributable to the Veteran's prostate cancer and the Veteran has not contended that he has renal dysfunction or a urinary tract infection attributable to his prostate cancer, it is unnecessary to describe the rating criteria for renal dysfunction or urinary tract infection.

Voiding dysfunction is rated as urine leakage, frequency, or obstructed voiding; only the predominant area of dysfunction shall be considered for rating purposes.  38 C.F.R. § 4.115a.

Urine leakage is rated as follows: a 60 percent rating is warranted for leakage requiring the use of an appliance or the wearing of absorbent materials which must be changed more than four times per day, a 40 percent rating is warranted for leakage requiring the wearing of absorbent materials which must be changed two to four times per day, and a 20 percent rating is warranted for leakage requiring the wearing of absorbent materials which must be changed less than 2 times per day.  Id.

Urinary frequency is rated as follows: a 40 percent rating is warranted for a daytime voiding interval of less than one hour or awakening to void five or more times per night and a 20 percent rating is warranted for a daytime voiding interval between one and two hours or awakening to void three to four times per night.  Id.

Obstructed voiding is rated as follows: a 30 percent rating is warranted for urinary retention requiring intermittent or continuous catheterization.  Id.  

At the January 2025 Board hearing, the Veteran competently and credibly testified he experiences urinary incontinence, urinary frequency, and hot flashes or night sweats.  The Veteran and his attorney asserted that while the Veteran had attended a June 2024 VA examination, which the Board cannot consider because it took place following the decision on appeal, VA had not provided the Veteran with an opportunity to discuss the urinary incontinence or urinary frequency associated with his prostate cancer.  The Veteran testified that he has problems with urinary incontinence at work and has to get up 2-3 times per night to urinate and that he hardly ever gets up three times per night.  The Veteran testified that he has experienced urinary incontinence at work and must urinate 2-3 times in an eight-hour work shift.  He reported that he sometimes has to go home to change clothes after urinary incontinence and that when working a long shift he must wear absorbent materials and change them once per day.  The Veteran further testified that he does not like to discuss his urinary symptoms and had tried to address them on his own rather than ask for assistance from his medical providers.  

The Board finds the Veteran's descriptions of his prostate cancer-related urinary symptoms credible.  While the Veteran's medical records from the relevant time period are silent for complaints of urinary frequency and incontinence, the Board credits the Veteran's testimony that he has attempted to address these symptoms on his own rather than discuss them with medical providers.   The Veteran is competent to report his observable symptoms, including urinary frequency and incontinence.  Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377, 1377 n.4 (Fed. Cir. 2007).  The Veteran's testimony is also consistent with August 2022 private treatment records, including objective imaging showing a thick-walled urinary bladder for which the radiologist recommended clinical correlation for cystitis.  Consequently, the Board gives the Veteran's testimony great probative weight.

VA treatment records from the period on appeal are silent for complaints of urinary incontinence or urinary frequency.  However, as described above, the Board attributes this silence to reluctance on the part of the Veteran to discuss these symptoms with his VA medical providers.

Therefore, the Board finds that the Veteran's residuals of prostate cancer manifest as urine leakage requiring the wearing of absorbent materials which must be changed less than 2 times per day.  A higher rating is not available for urinary frequency, because the Veteran does not experience daytime voiding intervals of less than one hour or awakening to void five times or more per night.

 

D. Martz Ames

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Carmichael, A.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.