Citation Nr: A25034749
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 240702-452026
DATE: April 15, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for diverticulitis is denied.

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 60 percent for coronary artery disease with atrial fibrillation is denied.

Entitlement to an initial compensable rating for hypertension is denied.

Entitlement to a total disability rating based on individual unemployability (TDIU) for the period on appeal prior to July 29, 2024, is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran's GERD began during active service or is otherwise related to an in-service injury or disease including herbicide agent exposure and/or his service connected disabilities.

2. The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran's diverticulitis began during active service or is otherwise related to an in-service injury or disease including herbicide agent exposure.

3. The Veteran's coronary artery disease with atrial fibrillation does not demonstrate that a workload of 3 METs or less results in symptoms such as breathlessness, fatigue, angina, dizziness, arrhythmia, palpitations, or syncope.

4. The evidence does not show a history of diastolic pressure predominantly 100 or more with medication required for continuous control, or systolic pressure predominantly 160 or more. 

5. For the period on appeal, the Veteran's service-connected disabilities did not preclude him from securing and following substantially gainful employment.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for GERD have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.307, 3.309(e), 3.310.

2. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for diverticulitis have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.307, 3.309(e).

3. The criteria for entitlement to a rating in excess of 60 percent for coronary artery disease with atrial fibrillation have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.100, 4.104, Diagnostic Code 7005.

4. The criteria for entitlement to an initial compensable rating for hypertension have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1-4.7, 4.21, 4.104, Diagnostic Code 7101.

5. The criteria for entitlement to TDIU prior to July 29, 2024, have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.340, 3.341, 4.16.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from August 1967 to March 1970. 

The rating decision on appeal was issued in February 2024; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies. 

In the July 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Hearing docket. A Board hearing was held on November 12, 2024, before the undersigned Veteran's Law Judge; a transcript is of record. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the February 2024 AOJ decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or representative at the hearing or within 90 days following the hearing. 38 C.F.R. § 20.302(a). If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal and prior to the Board hearing, or (2) more than 90 days following the hearing, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.302(a), 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. This case has been advanced on the docket pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 20.800(c).

Service Connection

Service connection may be granted for disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303. The three-element test for service connection requires evidence of: (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166 -67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

Certain chronic diseases will be presumed related to service, absent an intercurrent cause, if they were shown as chronic in service; or, if they manifested to a compensable degree within a presumptive period following separation from service; or, if they were noted in service (or within an applicable presumptive period) with continuity of symptomatology since service that is attributable to the chronic disease. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 1112, 1113, 1137; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.307, 3.309. Walker v. Shinseki, 708 F.3d 1331, 1338 (Fed. Cir. 2013).

Generally, in order to establish presumptive service connection for a disease associated with exposure to certain herbicide agents, the evidence must show the following: (1) that the veteran served in the Republic of Vietnam during the period beginning on January 9, 1962, and ending on May 7, 1975 (or was otherwise exposed to an herbicide agent during active service); (2) that he currently suffers from a disease associated with exposure to certain herbicide agents listed under 38 C.F.R. § 3.309 (e); and (3) that the current disease process manifested to a degree of 10 percent or more within the specified time period prescribed in section 3.307(a)(6)(ii). 38 U.S.C. § 1116; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307 (a)(6), 3.309(e). If a veteran was exposed to an herbicide agent during active military, naval, or air service, the certain diseases shall be service connected, if the requirements of 38 C.F.R. § 3.307 (a) are met, even if there is no record of such disease during service.

In this case, a March 2023 Toxic Exposure Risk Activity (TERA) memorandum indicates the Veteran was presumptively exposed to herbicide agents in service. However, the list of diseases associated with exposure to certain herbicide agents does not include the Veteran's claimed conditions. 38 C.F.R. § 3.309 (e). Even if a Veteran is not entitled to presumptive service connection for a disease claimed as secondary to herbicide agent exposure, VA must also consider the claim on a direct service connection basis. See Combee v. Brown, 34 F.3d 1039 (Fed. Cir. 1994).

Notably, the Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxins Act of 2022 (PACT Act) also requires that, when a veteran whose active service subjected the veteran to participation in a TERA files a claim to service connect a disability and there is evidence of such disability, VA must provide the veteran with a VA examination and obtain a medical opinion addressing the possibility of a nexus between the claimed disability and the TERA. See 38 U.S.C. § 1168 (a)(1).

Service connection may be established on a secondary basis for a disability resulting from a service-connected disease or injury. 38 U.S.C. § 1110. Establishing service connection on a secondary basis requires evidence sufficient to show that a current disability exists and that the current disability results from the service-connected disability. 38 U.S.C. § 1110; Spicer v. McDonough, 61 F.4th 1360, 1364 (Fed. Cir. 2023) (invalidating the requirement of "proximate cause" and instead holding "but for" causation or aggravation is enough to show entitlement to secondary service connection); Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439 (1995).

1. Entitlement to service connection for GERD

The Veteran contends that his GERD resulted from his period of active service or, alternatively, that it is secondary to his service-connected heart condition and/or medication taken to treat such.  On his initial claim for service connection received in September 2023, the Veteran claimed that GERD was related to Agent Orange exposure.  At the hearing before the undersigned, he first raised the theory that GERD could be secondary to heart surgery or medications taken to treat his coronary artery disease with atrial fibrillation.

The February 2024 rating decision on appeal contained the following favorable findings: "You have been diagnosed with a disability. Your VA exam, dated January 6, 2024, shows a diagnosis of gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD). Participation in a toxic exposure risk activity is conceded. A VA memorandum dated March 14, 2023, conceded exposure to a TERA while in service. You were exposed to Herbicide during military service. Your service personnel records show service Vietnam."

Favorable findings made by the AOJ are binding on all AOJ adjudicators as well as on the Board. 38 U.S.C. § 5104A; 38 C.F.R. § 20.801 (a). 

Evidence

The service treatment records do not show any complaints of reflux or findings of GERD.  The March 1970 service separation examination noted normal abdomen and viscera examination.  On the report of medical history completed by the Veteran at that time, he denied frequent indigestion and stomach trouble.  

Private treatment records note a diagnosis of GERD with initial treatment noted in December 2007. A May 2009 private treatment record noted that the Veteran reported that gets heartburn.  He stated that he used to take Tagamet for GERD in the past.  A June 2009 treatment record noted a six-month history of GERD symptoms. An upper endoscopy was essentially negative. A March 2018 private treatment record noted the Veteran reported abdominal pain after eating pizza and chocolate for lunch; possible GERD was noted.  An April 2018 private treatment record noted some heartburn when he first gets up in the morning.

A VA examination in January 2024 showed that the Veteran was diagnosed with and treated with medication for GERD as early as 2009.  The examiner noted that available treatment records from November 2021 to the present are silent for complaints of or treatment for GERD.  The examiner opined that it was less likely than not that the Veteran had a diagnosis of GERD that was caused by his Vietnam service, including his exposure to Agent Orange as well as fuels, solvent and hazardous material as an engine powertrain repairman after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran.

The examiner explained that the weight of the medical literature does not support a causal relationship between the development of GERD and the TERA activities. The examiner also explained that the development of GERD reflects an imbalance between injurious or symptom-eliciting factors (reflux events, acidity of refluxate, esophageal hypersensitivity) and defensive factors (esophageal acid clearance, mucosal integrity). 

The Veteran testified at the November 2024 Board hearing that his GERD symptoms did not begin in service or shortly thereafter.  Rather, he believed the symptoms had onset after he was treated for coronary artery disease with atrial fibrillation.  He indicated that he believed medication used to treat his heart condition may have caused his GERD.  

Within 90 days of the Board hearing a private medical opinion was received in January 2025 from G.L.S., M.D., who reviewed the record.  Dr. G.S. wrote that while the list of diseases associated with exposure to certain herbicide agents does not include GERD, VA recognizes GERD as potentially connected to Agent Orange exposure, particularly when it occurs as a secondary condition to other service-connected disabilities. Dr. S. stated that "based on the medical documentation and considering the discussion documenting the lack of prior history of GERD and the service-connected onset of the GERD symptoms that he managed with OTC antiacid medications and which have persisted and worsened over the years and considering the scientific literature associating Agent Orange exposure with GERD, [the] Veteran... as likely as not has a service-connected disability of GERD."

Analysis

After a review of the evidentiary record, the Board concludes service connection is not warranted.

First, presumptive service connection is not warranted because the list of diseases associated with exposure to certain herbicide agents does not include GERD. 38 C.F.R. § 3.309 (e).

Second, the competent and probative medical evidence weighs persuasively against finding a causal nexus exists between the Veteran's current GERD and his military service (including as due to in-service herbicide agent exposure); or between the Veteran's current GERD and his service-connected coronary artery disease with atrial fibrillation.

The medical record shows the Veteran was not diagnosed with GERD until approximately 2007, decades after separation from service, and the Veteran has not asserted that his GERD had onset in service or shortly thereafter.  

The January 2024 VA opinion of record establishes that the Veteran's GERD disability is not at least as likely as not related to an in-service injury, event, or disease including herbicide agent exposure. The examiner's opinion is competent because it was offered by a medical professional who reviewed the Veteran's relevant history and considered pertinent medical literature, and the opinion is probative because it is based on an accurate medical history and provides an explanation that contains clear conclusions and supporting data. Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008). Consequently, the Board affords the VA opinion significant probative weight.

The Board has considered the opinion of Dr. S.  However, as the opinion is conclusory and contains no rationale or supporting citations, the Board finds it of no probative value.

The Veteran believes his GERD is secondary to treatment and/or medication for his service-connected heart disability; however, he is not competent to provide a nexus opinion regarding this issue. The issue is medically complex, as it requires knowledge of pathology and interpretation of complicated diagnostic medical testing. Therefore, it is outside the competence of the Veteran because the record does not show that he has the medical training or credentials to make such a determination. Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 n.4 (Fed. Cir. 2007); see also Kahana v. Shinseki, 24. Vet. App. 428 (2011). 

Finally, while the January 2024 VA opinion did not address the theory of secondary service connection, the Board finds that there was no pre-decisional duty to obtain such an opinion as the theory of secondary service connection was not raised until the November 2024 Board hearing.

Accordingly, the evidence is persuasively against the claim. As there is not an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence, the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine is not applicable and service connection for GERD is not warranted. See 38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

2. Entitlement to service connection for diverticulitis

The February 2024 rating decision on appeal contained the following favorable findings: "You have been diagnosed with a disability. Your VA exam, dated January 6, 2024, shows a diagnosis of diverticulitis. Participation in a toxic exposure risk activity is conceded. A VA memorandum dated March 14, 2023, conceded exposure to a TERA while in service. You were exposed to Herbicide during military service. Your service personnel records show service Vietnam."

Favorable findings made by the AOJ are binding on all AOJ adjudicators as well as on the Board. 38 U.S.C. § 5104A; 38 C.F.R. § 20.801 (a). 

Evidence

The service treatment records do not show any complaints of reflux or findings of diverticulitis.  The March 1970 service separation examination noted normal abdomen and viscera examination.  On the report of medical history completed by the Veteran at that time, he denied stomach trouble.  

Private treatment records note a diagnosis of diverticulosis of the colon with initial treatment noted in January 2012.

On VA examination in January 2024, the examiner noted that the Veteran had a history of acute diverticulitis as early as 2011 which resolved.  The examiner noted that in June 2021 the Veteran was noted to follow a "diverticulitis diet" in an effort to avoid further diverticulitis requiring treatment, and that a November 2021 CT documented diverticulosis without diverticulitis.  The examiner opined that after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran, it was less likely than not that the Veteran had a diagnosis of acute and transitory diverticulitis that was caused by Vietnam service including exposure to Agent Orange as well as fuels, solvent and hazardous material as an engine powertrain repairman.

The examiner explained that the weight of the medical literature does not support a causal relationship between the development of diverticulitis and the TERA activities.  The examiner noted that diverticulitis is defined as inflammation of one or several adjacent diverticula and that risk factors included a dietary pattern that is high in red meat and low in fiber, physical inactivity, and obesity.  

The Veteran testified that his stomach symptoms did not begin in service.  He believed they began shortly thereafter.  He stated that he believed he had been exposed to asbestos in service from work on tank exhaust systems.  He also described exposure to burning garbage during service in Vietnam.

A private medical opinion was received in January 2025 from G.L.S., M.D., who reviewed the record. Dr. S. indicated that based on what he extrapolated from a November 12, 2024, evaluation request letter, the Veteran had trouble with his stomach before entering service, and his problems started soon after he left service. He further noted that the Veteran had stomach pains in the service but did not seek treatment for them at the time because he thought the condition was temporary; when the condition persisted after service, he sought treatment.  Dr. S. opined that "based on the available medical documentation... there is insufficient clinical evidence to render an opinion for service connection regarding this condition."

Analysis

After a review of the evidentiary record, the Board concludes service connection is not warranted.

First, presumptive service connection is not warranted because the list of diseases associated with exposure to certain herbicide agents does not include diverticulitis. 38 C.F.R. § 3.309 (e).

Second, the competent and probative medical evidence weighs persuasively against finding a causal nexus exists between the Veteran's current diverticulitis and his military service (including as due to in-service herbicide agent exposure).

The medical record shows the Veteran was not diagnosed with diverticulitis until decades after separation from service, and the Veteran has not asserted that his diverticulitis had onset in service.  

The January 2024 VA opinion of record establishes that the Veteran's diverticulitis is not at least as likely as not related to an in-service injury, event, or disease including TERA exposures. The examiner's opinion is competent because it was offered by a medical professional who reviewed the Veteran's relevant history and considered pertinent medical literature, and the opinion is probative because it is based on an accurate medical history and provides an explanation that contains clear conclusions and supporting data. Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008). Consequently, the Board affords the VA opinion significant probative weight.

The Board has considered the opinion of Dr. S.; however, as the opinion is not based on an accurate factual premise and is conclusory without sufficient supporting rationale, the Board finds it of little to no probative value.  See Reonal v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 458, 461 (1993). To the extent that Dr. S. indicated that the Veteran had stomach pains in the service but did not seek treatment for them at the time because he thought the condition was temporary, this contradicts the Veteran's November 2024 Board hearing testimony, wherein he testified that his stomach symptoms did not begin in service, but rather began shortly after service. 

The Veteran believes his diverticulitis is related to various exposures during service; however, he is not competent to provide a nexus opinion regarding this issue. The issue is medically complex, as it requires knowledge of pathology and interpretation of complicated diagnostic medical testing. Therefore, it is outside the competence of the Veteran because the record does not show that he has the medical training or credentials to make such a determination. Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 n.4 (Fed. Cir. 2007); see also Kahana v. Shinseki, 24. Vet. App. 428 (2011). 

Accordingly, the evidence is persuasively against the claim. As there is not an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence, the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine is not applicable and service connection for diverticulitis is not warranted. See 38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

Increased Ratings

Disability ratings are determined by applying the criteria set forth in VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities, found in 38 C.F.R. Part 4. The ratings are intended to compensate, as far as can practicably be determined, the average impairment of earning capacity resulting from such diseases and injuries and their residual conditions in civilian occupations. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1. Where there is a question as to which of two evaluations shall be applied, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria for that rating. Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7. All benefit of the doubt will be resolved in the Veteran's favor. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 4.3.

3. Entitlement to a rating in excess of 60 percent for coronary artery disease with atrial fibrillation

The Veteran's coronary artery disease with atrial fibrillation is rated at 60 percent. The Veteran filed his current claim for increased rating in September 2023; thus, the period on appeal begins one year earlier in September 2022.  

The Veteran's coronary artery disease with atrial fibrillation is rated under 38 C.F.R. § 4.104, Diagnostic Code 7005.  Under that Code, arteriosclerotic heart disease (coronary artery disease) is rated in accordance with the General Rating Formula for Diseases of the Heart. A 10 percent rating is warranted where a workload of 7.1-10.0 METs results in heart failure symptoms, or continuous medication is required for control. A 30 percent rating is warranted where a workload of 5.1-7.0 METs results in heart failure symptoms, or where there is cardiac hypertrophy or dilatation confirmed by echocardiogram or equivalent (e.g., multigated acquisition scan or magnetic resonance imaging). A 60 percent rating is warranted where a workload of 3.1-5.0 METs results in heart failure symptoms. A 100 percent rating is warranted where a workload of 3.0 METs or less results in heart failure symptoms.

Under the rating criteria, one MET is the energy cost of standing quietly at rest and represents an oxygen uptake of 3.5 milliliters per kilogram of body weight per minute. 38 C.F.R. § 4.104, Note (2). When the level of METs at which breathlessness, fatigue, angina, dizziness, or syncope develops is required for evaluation, and a laboratory determination of METs by exercise testing cannot be done for medical reasons, an estimation by a medical examiner of the level of activity (expressed in METs and supported by specific examples, such as slow stair climbing or shoveling snow) that results in those symptoms may be used. Id. 

For purposes of the General Rating Formula for Diseases of the Heart, heart failure symptoms include, but are not limited to, breathlessness, fatigue, angina, dizziness, arrhythmia, palpitations, or syncope. 38 C.F.R. § 4.104, Note (3).

Evidence

An August 2023 echocardiogram noted normal right ventricle size and systolic function.   There was no significant valvular pathology. Left ventricle size was normal.  There was normal wall thickness.  Left ventricle ejection fraction was 50-55 percent.

A VA examination was conducted in January 2024.  The examiner stated that the Veteran had never had a myocardial infarction.  He required continuous medication to control his coronary artery disease with atrial fibrillation.  The examiner noted a history of angioplasty.  On examination, there was no evidence of cardiac hypertrophy or cardiac dilatation.  The examiner noted that recent EKG and echocardiogram were normal.  Recent exercise stress test results were normal.  The examiner noted that current interview-based METs test most accurately reflected the Veteran's current cardiac functional level.  The interview-based METs test noted shortness of breath at greater than 5 but not greater than 7 METs.  The examiner noted that this METs level has been found to be consistent with activities such as walking one flight of stairs, golfing (without cart), mowing lawn (push mower), and heavy yard work (digging).  

A February 2024 treatment record noted that the Veteran did not have any angina.  He had stable dyspnea on exertion for the past year-year and a half.  He noticed this when climbing stairs at home or going to the mailbox.  He had not had any worsening symptoms recently.  The Veteran had not had any chest pain, and he had not used his nitroglycerine.  

The Veteran testified in November 2024 that he did not have congestive heart failure.  He stated that he would "walk down the mailbox which is about 300 feet from my home and I have to stop halfway there to catch my breath and then when I get the mail I do the same coming back and a lot of times when I get back I have to sit in the chair for a while to kind of get my breathing to go back to normal."  He testified that he fatigued easily when just resting.  The Veteran stated that he experienced angina and that when standing up from sitting he would have a little dizziness.  He had never fainted.

Dr. S. provided a statement in January 2025.  He stated that based on his documented most recent history and the fact that this is a naturally progressive condition, the Veteran's medical records show evidence of worsening dyspnea, fatigue, angina and dizziness and that he can't walk more than 100 feet without having to stop and catch his breath.  The Veteran finds it harder to catch his breath even while resting and fatigues easily when active or at rest. He experiences dizziness when standing up or walking and considering the fact he has required the permanent installation of a WATCHMAN FLX to control atrial fibrillation and risk of stroke, the Veteran "has a disability rating consistent with 100%."

Analysis

Considering all relevant evidence of record, the Board finds a rating in excess of 60 percent is not warranted for the Veteran's coronary artery disease with atrial fibrillation.  There is no evidence of chronic congestive heart failure, or a workload of 3 METs or less, with symptoms such as breathlessness, fatigue, angina, dizziness, arrhythmia, palpitations, or syncope.

The Board has considered the Veteran's 2024 hearing testimony that he experienced some symptoms suggestive of heart failure (i.e., breathlessness, dizziness, and fatigue). Nonetheless, the objective clinical findings did not show evidence of symptoms that more nearly approximated those contemplated in a 100 percent rating. The Board finds the August 2023 echocardiogram and EKG results and private treatment records more persuasive. The January 2024 VA examination report showed a workload of greater than 5 METs but not greater than 7 METs, which is consistent with a 30 percent rating. Further, there was no evidence of acute congestive heart failure at any time.

The Board is sympathetic to the Veteran's lay statements that his disability is worse than currently assigned disability rating. The Veteran is competent to report symptoms that he can perceive through his natural senses. Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465 (1994). However, he is not competent to identify a specific level of disability according to the appropriate diagnostic codes, such as METs, or the presence of chronic heart failure. Such competent evidence concerning the nature and extent of the Veteran's disability have been provided by the VA examiner and clinicians who have examined him during the current appeal. Further, these medical findings provided in the examination report and the treatment records directly address the criteria under which the disability is evaluated. 

Although Dr. S. stated that the Veteran met the criteria for a 100 percent rating, he did not provide evidence of METs testing to support that assertion.

Rather, the clinicians who treated him and the VA examiner denied a history of congestive heart failure. Consequently, the Board gives more probative weight to the VA examination report and treatment records.

Accordingly, the evidence persuasively weighs against the assignment of a 100 percent rating for the Veteran's coronary artery disease with atrial fibrillation. As such, the benefit of the doubt doctrine does not apply. See 38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b); Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49 (1990); Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 781-82 (2021).

4. Entitlement to an initial compensable rating for hypertension

The rating decision on appeal granted service connection for hypertension and assigned an initial noncompensable rating from September 6, 2022.

Hypertension is rated pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 4.104, Diagnostic Code 7101, for hypertensive vascular disease (hypertension and isolated systolic hypertension).

Where, as here, a Diagnostic Code does not provide criteria for a noncompensable rating, a noncompensable rating shall be assigned when the requirements for a compensable rating are not met. 38 C.F.R. § 4.31.

Under Diagnostic Code 7101, a 10 percent rating is warranted for diastolic pressure predominantly 100 or more, or; systolic pressure predominantly 160 or more, or; it is the minimum evaluation for an individual with a history of diastolic pressure predominantly 100 or more who requires continuous medication for control.

In Wilson v. McDonough, 35 Vet. 75 (2021), the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims held that under Diagnostic Code 7101, "a history of diastolic pressure predominantly 100 or more [that] requires continuous medication for control" refers to blood pressure readings taken before a veteran began medication to control hypertension, and therefore may require analyzing blood pressure readings prior to the period on appeal.

The term "predominant" is not defined in the rating criteria. Merriam-Webster defines predominant to mean "being most frequent or common." See, e.g., "predominant," Merriam-Webster.com Online Dictionary, https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/predominant.

Where, as here, the question for consideration is the propriety of the initial evaluation assigned, consideration of the medical evidence since the effective date of the award of service connection and consideration of the appropriateness of a staged rating are required. See Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119, 126 (1999); Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007). Thus, the appeal period before the Board begins on September 6, 2022. See February 2024 rating decision.

The service treatment records note that the Veteran's blood pressure was 114/74 on the March 1970 separation examination.

A February 2012 treatment record noted that the Veteran was taking metoprolol for hypertension.  The VA treatment records reflect that the Veteran was prescribed Lisinopril for hypertension since at least 2018.  A September 2022 private treatment record noted that the Veteran should discontinue taking Lisinopril and switch to Losartan.  

There are no post-service medical records of record that predate his taking medication for hypertension.

On VA examination in January 2024 the Veteran was noted to have been diagnosed with hypertension in 2008. He was prescribed Losartan for hypertension. His current blood pressure readings were noted as 126/72, 138/70, and 130/90. The examiner stated that the Veteran's treatment plan includes taking continuous medication for hypertension, but also that he did not have a history of diastolic pressure predominantly 100 or more.

The medical evidence of record reflects the following blood pressure readings: 142/82 in February 2012; 148/92 in March 2012; 132/70 in July 2022; 98/60 in September 2022; 136/88 in December 2022; 143/92 in February 2024.

Given the foregoing evidence, the Board finds that the Veteran's hypertension is not manifested by a history of diastolic pressure predominantly 100 or more, including before medication was prescribed. Diastolic blood pressure readings have predominantly been under 100, and his systolic blood pressure readings have predominantly been under 160. The Veteran's hypertension is shown to be controlled by medication throughout the appeal period. For this reason, a 10 percent rating is not warranted.

5. Entitlement to TDIU

A claim for TDIU was raised as part and parcel of the Veteran's increased rating claim for coronary artery disease. See Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447 (2009). Thus, the appeal period for review begins in September 2022 and ends with the rating decision on appeal in February 2024.  In this regard, the Board notes that in a November 2024 rating decision the AOJ granted TDIU from July 29, 2024.  The Board's analysis will focus on whether a TDIU was warranted during the period on appeal. 

A TDIU may be assigned, where the schedular rating is less than total, where a veteran is unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation as a result of service-connected disabilities. 38C.F.R. §4.16 (a). To qualify for schedular consideration of a TDIU, if there is only one such disability, this disability shall be ratable at 60 percent or more, and, if there are two or more disabilities, there shall be at least one disability ratable at 40 percent or more and sufficient additional disability to bring the combined rating to 70 percent or more. Id. 

The phrase "unable to secure and follow a substantially gainful occupation" contains both economic and noneconomic components. Ray v. Wilkie, 31 Vet. App. 58, 73 (2019). The economic component simply means an occupation earning more than marginal income (outside of a protected environment) as determined by the U.S. Department of Commerce as the poverty threshold for one person. Id. The noneconomic component requires a determination as to a veteran's ability to secure and follow such employment. Id. Attention should be given to the veteran's history, education, skills, and training; whether the veteran has the physical ability (both exertional and nonexertional) to perform the types of activities required by the occupation at issue (e.g., lifting, bending, sitting, standing, walking, climbing, as well as auditory and visual limitations); and whether the veteran has the mental ability to perform the activities required by the occupation at issue (e.g., memory, concentration, ability to adapt to change, handle work place stress, get along with coworkers, and demonstrate reliability and productivity). Id. Factors such as age or impairment by non-service-connected disabilities are not to be considered. 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.341, 4.16, 4.19.

The fact that a Veteran is unemployed or has difficulty obtaining employment is not enough, as a schedular rating provides recognition of such. See Van Hoose v. Brown, 4 Vet. App. 361, 363 (1993). The schedular criteria contemplate compensating a Veteran for considerable loss of working time from exacerbations proportionate to the severity of the disability. 38 C.F.R. § 4.1. The ultimate question is whether the Veteran, because of service-connected disabilities, is incapable of performing the physical and mental acts required by employment, not whether he or she can find employment. See Van Hoose, 4 Vet. App. at 363.

For the period on appeal, the Veteran's service-connected disabilities were coronary artery disease with atrial fibrillation (rated 60 percent disabling); neoplasm of the kidney (20 percent); and eczema (60 percent, later reduced to 10 percent as the 60 percent was assigned in error).  He met the schedular criteria for TDIU during the period on appeal.  

Evidence

The Veteran contends that his coronary artery disease with atrial fibrillation alone resulted in his inability to work during the period on appeal.

The Veteran's DD 214 noted his military occupational specialty as engine power train repairman.  The Veteran testified that he had a high school education.  He stated that he had no computer skills.  The Veteran also testified that he retired in 2014 after working for 30 years in a job for the county.  He indicated that he was a diesel mechanic and then became a shop foreman, and was shop supervisor for 13 years.  He described the supervisor position as a "desk job."  The Veteran stated that he did not miss a lot of work due to his coronary artery disease while he was employed.  

The Veteran described the impact of his heart condition on his employment. He stated,  

I could definitely tell I didn't have the stamina when I come to walking some place or lifting. I couldn't do a whole lot of lifting without running out of air, wind, whatever you call it. Breath."  He noted that when he was a supervisor that "if I had to go in the field, I mean I was -- I run out of air pretty quickly, yes.

The Veteran testified that after his retirement he took care of his mother for several years until her death in 2023. 

The January 2024 VA heart examiner stated that the Veteran's coronary artery disease with atrial fibrillation did not impact his ability to perform any type of occupational task (such as standing, walking, lifting, sitting, etc.).

The record contains a private vocational assessment dated in November 2024.  This was prepared by J.G., M.S., a vocational consultant who interviewed the Veteran and reviewed the record.  She noted that:

[The Veteran] graduated high school and received some college courses but did not complete a degree. The Veteran does not have any computer skills. [He] last worked in a full-time substantially gainful capacity in approximately 2014 as a Fleet Supervisor. He held this position for approximately 12 years. Prior to this, he was a Diesel Mechanic for approximately 18 years with the same employer. He expressed difficulty performing his job duties due to shortness of breath, excessive fatigue, and chest pain. [The Veteran] also described difficulty with inability to perform prolonged standing or walking as well as lifting limitations. He retired from this position because he was eligible since he worked 30 years with this employer. The Veteran has not held any employment since retiring due to his inability to perform job duties because of his service-connected conditions.

J.G. stated that in her "vocational opinion, [the Veteran] has been unable to complete the physical requirements of even sedentary employment due to his limitations in lifting, carrying, pushing, pulling, standing, and walking because of his service-connected conditions since at least 2014."

She stated the Veteran had "described a history of near-falls due to his service-connected conditions. This would pose an additional barrier to his employment, as his fall risk would have been considered a liability by potential employers. Even potential falls are not compatible with employment, in my vocational opinion."  She stated that the Veteran "suffers from breathlessness even with minimal exertion such as standing up. Upon standing, [the Veteran] feels light-headed and dizzy." 

Analysis

First, with regard to the economic considerations in Ray, the evidence appears to reflect that the Veteran was not earning above the poverty thresholds during the appeal period in question. The available evidence indicates that he has not worked since 2014.

The remaining question here is whether the Veteran was able to secure or follow substantially gainful employment during the appeals period consistent with his education, training, work experience, and work history. 

After reviewing the pertinent evidence, the Board finds that based on the Veteran's education, skills, and noted work history, he could have secured substantially gainful employment as a shop supervisor or other relevant position that did not require him to be on his feet for much of the workday.

Although finding that the economic considerations are met, and the Veteran was not engaged in substantially gainful employment during the appeal period, the Board further finds that the Veteran's coronary artery disease with atrial fibrillation did not preclude him from securing or following substantially gainful employment. In this regard, analysis turns to non-economic consideration, namely the Veteran's history, education, skill, and training as well as physical abilities and mental abilities required by the occupations at issue.

The Board considered the physical ability-factors noted in Ray, to include lifting, bending, sitting, standing, walking, climbing, grasping, typing, reaching, auditory, and visual. See Ray, 31 Vet. App. 58. The evidence of record shows some limitation of exertion and walking as result of coronary artery disease, however, it does not indicate that the Veteran would have been unable to perform the physical activities of employment as a result of his coronary artery disease during the period on appeal. 

The January 2024 examination stated that the Veteran's coronary artery disease would not impact his ability to perform any type of occupational task.  The examiner noted a normal stress test and that the Veteran's dyspnea and fatigue would be associated with an activity level equivalent to light yard work, mowing lawn, and brisk walking. This indicates that some activities of work would result in fatigue or shortness of breath, perhaps requiring breaks or rest, but not that the Veteran would be unable to perform in the job.

The Veteran himself testified that he had not missed much work due to his coronary artery disease.  He noted that he would have some difficulty with his breathing if he had to go in the field, but he also described his position as a "desk job."  Additionally, the Veteran testified that he was able to care for his mother during the appeals period.  He did not describe any physical limitations as a result of coronary artery disease that impacted his ability to provide this care.

The Board has considered the opinion of J.G. but finds that it is outweighed by the other evidence of record as summarized above.  To the extent that J.G. opined that the Veteran was unable to perform his job duties due to coronary artery disease, she herself acknowledged that the Veteran "retired from this position because he was eligible since he worked 30 years with this employer."  Her characterization of the Veteran's symptomatology during the relevant period is not consistent with the objective evidence as noted above.  Specifically, J.G.'s description of the Veteran's fall risk is not supported by the record.  

Taken as a whole, the limiting factors caused by the Veteran's service-connected coronary artery disease as outlined above would appear to have had no more than a moderate impact on the Veteran's occupational functioning during the period on appeal.

The evidence indicates that the Veteran retired from his job of 30 years in 2014. There is no indication that any concessions had been made to the Veteran by reason of age or disability during his employment. The Board thus finds no compelling reason why the Veteran's service-connected coronary artery disease would have precluded his ability to perform supervisory occupational activities.

The Board does not doubt that the Veteran's service-connected coronary artery disease symptomatology caused some level of occupational impairment. However, the evidence does not support that this condition precluded substantially gainful employment during the relevant period.

In sum, the Board has considered the Veteran's past work history, training, and skills; however, the competent and credible evidence of record persuasively weighs against this claim. As such, the Board finds the Veteran was capable of securing and maintaining substantially gainful work during the period on appeal. Therefore, entitlement to a TDIU for that period is denied.

 

 

D. JOHNSON

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Mazzucchelli, Michael G.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.