Citation Nr: A25034355
Decision Date: 04/14/25	Archive Date: 04/14/25

DOCKET NO. 240923-476853
DATE: April 14, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for a right knee disorder is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for a neck disorder is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for a back disorder is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for headaches is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran's right knee disorder was not shown as chronic in service and did not manifest to a compensable degree within the applicable presumptive period; continuity of symptomatology is not established; and the disorder is not otherwise etiologically related to an in-service injury or disease.

2. The Veteran's neck disorder is not related to his military service.

3. The Veteran's back disorder is not related to his military service.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for service connection for a right knee disorder have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1131, 1137, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.307, 3.309.

2. The criteria for service connection for a neck disorder have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303. 

3. The criteria for service connection for a back disorder have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran honorably served in the United States Marines from May 1976 to February 1980.

These matters appear before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a September 2023 rating decision of a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

The Board has recharacterized the claim for service connection for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) as one for an acquired psychiatric disorder pursuant to Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1 (2009) (when a veteran makes a claim, he or she is seeking service connection for symptoms regardless of how those symptoms are diagnosed or labeled).  In this respect, while the Veteran does not have a PTSD diagnosis, he does have a diagnosis of depressive disorder.  Further, the Veteran has not separately sought service connection for distinct acquired psychiatric disorders, which allows the Board to expand the claim without concerns over concurrent jurisdiction disputes with the RO.

In the September 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement (NOD)), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

As the Board is remanding the claims of entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder and headaches, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

As a final introductory matter, the Board notes that in September 2018, the Veteran submitted an Authorization for Release of Information, but failed to identify any private clinician from whom records should be sought.  As this form was filed years before the instant claims for service connection and related to different disorders, the Board finds no error in the RO's failure to seek clarification from the Veteran as to the purpose of this form. That said, the Veteran is advised that the record does not contain any detailed medical records related to the claims adjudicated herein outside of the VA examination reports.  Thus, he may wish to obtain any records related to the claims denied herein and file a VA Form 20-0995 as discussed above.

Service Connection

Service connection may be granted for disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.  The three-element test for direct service connection requires evidence of: (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury.  Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166 -67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

Certain chronic diseases, including arthritis, will be presumed related to service if they were shown as chronic in service; or, if they manifested to a compensable degree within a presumptive period following separation from service; or, if they were noted in service, with continuity of symptomatology since service that is attributable to the chronic disease.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 1137; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.307, 3.309; Walker v. Shinseki, 708 F.3d 1331, 1338 (Fed. Cir. 2013).

1. Entitlement to service connection for a right knee disorder.

2. Entitlement to service connection for a neck disorder.

3. Entitlement to service connection for a back disorder.

The Veteran asserts that his right knee, neck, and back disorders (diagnoses confirmed during September 2023 VA examinations) were caused during his military service.  Specifically, that his right knee disorder is related to striking a metal pole in August 1979 and that his neck and back disorders were caused by a February 1977 motor vehicle accident (MVA).

Initially, the evidence does not support an award of service connection on a presumptive basis for right knee arthritis as the Veteran was not noted to have arthritis during his military service or for many years after.  Indeed, records indicate that arthritis was not diagnosed until the September 2023 VA examination.  While the Veteran was seen in service for right knee pain in August 1979, he denied any knee problems in January 1980; such refutes the concept of continuity of symptomology.  Thus, presumptive service-connection for right knee arthritis has not been established.

Importantly, as the Veteran has been diagnosed with right knee, neck, and back disorders, service connection may be granted on a direct basis for all of these claims.  Nevertheless, the evidence is persuasively against finding that a medical nexus exists between the Veteran's right knee, neck, back, and his service.  38 U.S.C. § 1131; Holton v. Shinseki, 557 F.3d 1363, 1366 (Fed. Cir. 2009); 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.  

As noted, the Veteran was treated for a right knee bruise after striking it on a 

metal pole in August 1979.  Additionally, he reported neck and back pain after a February 1977 MVA.  Thus, his "in service element" for these issues has been acknowledged. 

Turning to the nexus element of the claims, after reviewing the relevant medical records, the service department records, interviewing the Veteran, and reviewing his lay statements, a September 2023 VA examiner found that it was less likely than not that the Veteran's right knee, neck, and back were related to his military service.  Initially, the clinician observed that the Veteran was not diagnosed with a chronic disorder of the right knee, neck, or back during his service; it was also noted that after service the Veteran worked as a police officer for 31 years.  With respect to the Veteran's knee and back, the examiner noted that the Veteran specifically denied having chronic knee or back pains during a January 1980 report of medical history.  The Board notes that the Veteran's musculoskeletal system was also noted to be within normal limits during a concurrent medical examination.  Returning to the examination report, the examiner went on to opine that the most likely cause of the Veteran's right knee, neck, and back disorders was overuse and or recreational or occupational injury in the years between his 1980 separation and his 2023 claim for service connection.

Significantly, there is no medical opinion of record that contradicts the September 2023 examiner's opinions.  The Board acknowledges the Veteran's assertion that his right knee, neck, and back disorders are related to his military service.  The Board finds, however, that he is not competent to provide a nexus opinion in this case as the cause of musculoskeletal disorders is a matter not capable of lay observation and requires medical expertise to determine.  Indeed, the question of causation involves a medical subject concerning an internal physical process extending beyond an immediately observable cause-and-effect relationship.  See Woehlaert v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 456, 462 (2007).  Opinions regarding the diagnosis and etiology of musculoskeletal disorders are complex and generally beyond the competency of a lay witness.  Consequently, the Board gives more probative weight to the opinion of the September 2023 examiner who has greater medical training than the Veteran and exercised medical expertise in rendering the opinion, which was supported with  reasoned rationales.

In sum, the most probative evidence is against a finding of service connection for right knee arthritis pursuant to presumptive service connection under 38 C.F.R. § 3.309 as the most probative evidence indicates that the Veteran's disorder did not manifest to a compensable degree within one year of his separation from service and is not chronic in nature.  Further, service connection for a right knee disorder, neck disorder, and back disorder pursuant to direct service connection under 38 C.F.R. § 3.303 is not warranted as there is no competent evidence the Veteran's disorders are directly related to service, to include his in service injuries.  Accordingly, the claims are denied.  In reaching the above conclusions, the Board has considered the applicability of the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine, however, as the evidence is persuasively against the Veteran's claims, that doctrine is not applicable.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran's claims for service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder and headaches must be remanded to cure pre-decisional duty to assist errors.

The Board herein makes no finding regarding the Veteran's credibility.  Smith v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 332, 334 (2020).

4. Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder.

During an August 2023 VA examination, the Veteran was diagnosed with an acquired psychiatric disorder, but the clinician based the negative nexus opinion entirely on the fact that the Veteran had not been diagnosed with PTSD.  Thus, the Board finds that remand is required to obtain an opinion as to whether the Veteran's diagnosed acquired psychiatric disorder was caused by his in-service MVA.

5. Entitlement to service connection for headaches.

In his March 2023 application for service connection, it was reported that the Veteran's headaches began in service and were caused by in service inoculations.  Further, the Veteran's STRs show he was treated for headache symptoms in July 1976 and December 1978.  The Board finds that the foregoing should have resulted in VA obtaining an examination report and etiological opinion to determine whether the Veteran has a specific diagnoses attributable to head pain (or whether his pain causes functional loss) and whether any diagnosed disorder is related to his military service.  McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006).  Thus, remand is warranted to cure this error.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for an appropriate examination with a VA examiner on whether the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder is approximately at least as likely as not related to service, to include his in service MVA. The claims file and a copy of this remand should be provided for review.

The clinician is asked to answer and/or comment on the following:

a)	Identify each acquired psychiatric disorder that the Veteran suffers from.

b)	Is it approximately at least as likely as not that the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder is directly related to his military service, to include his in service MVA or any other theory raised by the record or the Veteran during the examination?

A full and complete rationale for all opinions expressed must be provided.  The examiner is asked not to provide any hyperlinks as part of the rendered opinion.

2. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination by an appropriate clinician to determine the nature and etiology of his headaches.  Following an examination of the Veteran and a review of the claims file, the examiner is asked to provide an opinion on the following:

a)	Identify all current diagnoses and disabilities referrable to the Veteran's claimed headaches, to include any pain causing functional loss.

b)	With respect to any headache disorder found upon examination or identified during a review of the claims file (to specifically include pain causing functional loss), the examiner should opine as to whether the diagnosed disorder is approximately at least as likely as not etiologically related to service, to include the Veteran's in service inoculations or his in service headache treatment.

The examiner must provide a complete rationale for all opinions provided.  The examiner is asked not to provide any hyperlinks as part of the rendered opinion. 

 

Nathaniel Doan

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	K. Sosna, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.