Citation Nr: A25034353
Decision Date: 04/14/25	Archive Date: 04/14/25

DOCKET NO. 230510-345798
DATE: April 14, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a headache disability, to include migraine and tension headaches (hereinafter "headache disability"), is remanded.

Entitlement to an initial disability rating in excess of 30 percent for a service connected acquired psychiatric disorder is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The appellant served in the United States Marine Corps from January 2003 to September 2003, from June 2004 to June 2005, and from November 2013 to August 2014, including periods of service in Southwest Asia and with additional periods of service in the United States Marine Corps Reserves.

Procedural History

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a July 2022 rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs' (VA) Veterans Benefits Administration, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ), which, inter alia, denied service connection for migraine headaches, and granted service connection for an unspecified anxiety disorder at 30 percent disabling, effective May 2, 2021.  The appellant's VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement (NOD)), was received by VA in May 2023.  The appellant elected the Direct Review docket. 

Applicable Evidentiary Window

As the appellant has selected the Direct Review docket, the Board may only consider the evidence of record before the AOJ at the time of its decision on the issues on appeal.  See 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300(a), 301.  The Board will not consider evidence received after the AOJ decision unless the claimant files a timely request for a Board hearing or an opportunity to submit additional evidence on the NOD (VA Form 10182).  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  The appellant has not filed such a request. If additional evidence was submitted after the AOJ decision, the Board will not consider it.  If the appellant would like VA to consider any evidence that was added to the claims file that the Board could not consider, the appellant may file a supplemental claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim(s), considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a supplemental claim are included with this decision.  See also Cook v. McDonough, 36 Vet. App. 175 (2023). 

Recharacterization of an Issue on Appeal 

The U.S. Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (CAVC) has held that the scope of a claim for service connection for a disability includes any disability that reasonably may be encompassed by the claimant's description of the claim, reported symptoms, and other information of record.  Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1, 5-6 (2009).  In accordance with Clemons, the issue on appeal has been expanded to an increased rating for an acquired psychiatric disorder, as reflected on the title page of this decision.

Applicable Law

An appellant's claim must be remanded to the AOJ to correct pre-decisional duty to assist errors, including when the AOJ fails to make reasonable efforts to obtain VA treatment records, relevant federal or private treatment records; fails to obtain a VA examination; or provides an inadequate VA examination or opinion.? 38?C.F.R. §?20.802(a).  Here, the appellant's claim for entitlement to service connection for a headache disability and for an increased rating for an acquired psychiatric disorder must be remanded to provide an adequate examination and opinion.

1. Entitlement to service connection for a headache disorder

The appellant contends that she currently suffers from headaches as a result of her military service.  See VA Form 21-526EZ Application for Disability Compensation and Related Compensation Benefits, May 2, 2021.  The appellant reported that she began experiencing headaches several times a week during service and they have continued and worsened since then.  See VA Form 21-526EZ Application for Disability Compensation and Related Compensation Benefits, May 2, 2021.  

A May 2021 VA examiner opined that while the appellant did not experience migraines, she did experience tension headaches.  See Headaches Disability Benefits Questionnaire (DBQ), May 25, 2021.  The May 2021 VA examiner opined that the appellant does not have a diagnosis of migraine headaches but does have a diagnosis of tension headaches, and that any currently diagnosed headaches are likely not related to sensitivity to bright light during service.  Id.  As a rationale for this opinion the May 2021 examiner noted that the appellant's service treatment records are silent for complaints of headaches.  Id.  

The May 2021 examiner did not address the appellant's lay contentions regarding the onset, course and nature of her headache disability.  An examination which ignores the appellant's lay assertions is inadequate.  See Dalton v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 23, 39 (2007) ("it appears that the medical examiner impermissibly ignored the appellant's lay assertions"); Miller v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 249, 260 (2020) ("The examiner must address the veteran's lay statements to provide the Board with an adequate medical opinion").   On remand, the AOJ must obtain a new medical opinion which considers and addresses the appellant's lay contentions.   

Subsequent to the rating decision on appeal, a memorandum confirming the appellant's participation in Toxic Exposure Risk Activities (TERA) were associated with the appellant's file.  See Memorandum, May 16, 2023; Memorandum, December 3, 2022.

Pursuant to the Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxics Act of 2022 (PACT Act), VA must provide a VA examination and medical opinion when there exists evidence of a disability and evidence of participation in a TERA when such evidence is not sufficient to establish service connection for the disability. 38 U.S.C. § 1168(a).

A TERA examination is required unless the claimed disability (1) is based on physical trauma, (2) is a mental disorder, (3) did not manifest during service, or (4) has an etiology not associated with toxic exposure. VBA Letter 20-22-10, pp. 10-12 (Dec. 22, 2022).  A TERA examination is required in this case because there is currently insufficient information to decide the claim, and the appellant's claimed disability does not fall within any of the exceptions.  Therefore, a remand for a TERA examination under the PACT Act is warranted. 38 U.S.C. § 1168(a).

The AOJ did not make a pre-decisional duty to assist error based on any of the provisions in this Act, since it was not in effect at the time of the decision.  However, pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a), a remand is permitted to satisfy any statutory or regulatory duty that could aid in substantiating the claim.

2. Entitlement to an initial disability rating in excess of 30 percent for an acquired psychiatric disorder

Of note, subsequent to the filing of the appeal in this matter, in February 2025, the AOJ granted service connection for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), combined that disability with the rating for an unspecified anxiety disorder, and rated the combined disorder at 70 percent disabling, effective September 26, 2024.  As this was not a full grant of the issues on appeal, the appellant's claim for an increased rating remains on appeal before the Board.  See generally, AB v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 35 (1993).

The appellant claims she suffers from a disability as a result of military sexual trauma (MST) she experienced during a deployment.  See VA Form 21-526EZ Application for Disability Compensation and Related Compensation Benefits, May 2, 2021.  In the rating decision on appeal, service connection for an unspecified anxiety disorder was granted with a disability evaluation of 30 percent effective May 2, 2021.  

The appellant was afforded a VA examination in May 2022.  That examination noted a current diagnosis of unspecified anxiety disorder.  See Initial PTSD DBQ, May 5, 2022.  However, in the comments of the diagnosis section it states "PTSD, dissociative subtype" with no explanation as to whether that is a separate diagnosis or how the PTSD, dissociative subtype, relates to the unspecified anxiety disorder diagnosis.  The PTSD DBQ lists no other mental health diagnoses.  In the relevant mental health history section, the PTSD DBQ notes that the appellant engaged in mental health treatment in 2021 for disordered eating.  Id.  The remarks section of the DBQ noted that the appellant was extremely guarded during her examination and that she expressed concern that results of the examination might negatively impact her job as a Department of Defense investigator.  Id.  May 2022 and June 2022 VA medical opinions do not address why PTSD dissociate subtype is listed as part of the diagnostic comments but is not a diagnosed condition; nor do they address the appellant's eating disorder diagnosis.  Further the May 2022 VA medical examination and the May and June 2022 VA medical opinions do not address the additional psychiatric symptoms that are contained in the appellants VA medical records.  

A January 2021 VA psychology consult noted that the appellant reported symptoms of traumatic stress, depression, anxiety, and disordered eating related to combat trauma and MST.  See VA Psychology PC Consult Note, January 7, 2021, and Addendum, January 11, 2021.  That record also noted that the appellant endorsed pervasive irritability and anger that impact her relationships, a persistently depressed mood, low energy/motivation, social withdrawal, lack of enjoyment in activities, and anxiety/worrying.  Id.  Additionally, the January 2021 consult note indicated that the appellant had experienced dissociative flashbacks.  Id.  During the January 2021 medical appointment, the appellant again expressed a belief that seeking mental health treatment could negatively impact her career.  Id.  From February 2021 through May 2021 the appellant was involved with various eating disorder treatments through VA.  See e.g. VA Medical Records Addendum, January 14, 2021; Nutrition Telephone Contact Note, April 30, 2021.

When the Secretary undertakes to provide a veteran with a VA medical examination or opinion, it must be adequate. Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007).  Here, because the May 2021examination and the May and June 2021 medical opinions do not appear to have considered all of the appellant's symptoms and diagnoses, they are inadequate.  See Reonal v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 458, 461 (1993) (a medical opinion based upon an inaccurate factual premise has no probative value); see also Dalton v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 23 (2007) (a medical opinion is inadequate if it does not consider a veteran's reports of symptoms and history, even if recorded in the course of the examination).

On remand the AOJ must obtain a new medical examination and opinion regarding the nature and severity of the appellant's acquired psychiatric disorder.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the appellant for an examination to determine the nature and etiology of her headache disability.  The clinician must review the claims file and a complete copy of this remand in conjunction with rendering any opinion.  This review should be noted in the examination report.  The clinician is asked to address the following:

2. Please state any diagnoses associated with the appellant's headaches.

For each diagnosed disability, the clinician is requested to state whether it is likely (an approximate balance of negative and positive evidence) that the condition had its onset during service or is otherwise etiologically related to the appellant's service. 

The VA clinician should note that the appellant's service in Southwest Asia qualifies as a TERA under the PACT Act.  See VA Memoranda dated May 16, 2023, and December 3, 2022.  In this regard, the examiner must consider: 

(a.) the total potential exposure through all applicable deployments; and 

3. the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the appellant.

In providing the requested opinion, consider the appellant's description of her in-service symptoms as well as her post-service symptoms.    

The clinician is advised that the appellant is competent to report her symptoms and history, and such reports must be considered.  If the clinician rejects the appellant's reports, the clinician must provide a reason for doing so.  The Board does not make any credibility determinations at this time with respect to the appellant's lay statements.

Following direction from the?United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit in Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021), the proper standard of review for service connection claims is whether the factors of the case are in an "approximate balance."? Lynch?held that the appellant is entitled to the benefit of the doubt when the evidence is in an approximate balance - i.e., nearly equal - and does not require the evidence to be in exact equipoise.? See Id.?

The mere absence of evidence of contemporaneous treatment in the service treatment records cannot, standing alone, serve as the sole basis for an unfavorable opinion.  However, it is permissible to consider this as one factor in the determination regarding the origins of the claimed disability, providing there is also sufficient explanation as to why it is reasonable to have expectation of treatment in the circumstance presented.  

4. Schedule the appellant for a VA examination with an appropriate clinician to assess the nature and severity of the appellant's acquired psychiatric disorder for the period on appeal.  The clinician must review the claims file and a complete copy of this remand in conjunction with rendering any opinion.  This review should be noted in the examination report.  The clinician should provide a full description of the disability and report all signs and symptoms necessary for evaluating the appellant's disability under the rating criteria.

All opinions must be supported by a clear rationale.  The clinician is asked to explain in detail the underlying reasoning for his or her opinion, to include citing to relevant evidence, supporting factual data, prior medical opinions, and medical literature, as appropriate.

If any requested opinion cannot be provided without resorting to mere speculation, the clinician must explain why a more definitive response is not possible or feasible. In other words, merely saying he or she cannot respond will not suffice.

5. Thereafter, readjudicate the claims.

 

K.A. KENNERLY

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Jennifer Sullivan-Brief, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.