Citation Nr: A25034424
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 240321-425842
DATE: April 15, 2025

ORDER

The issue of the propriety of the proposed reduction in rating for intervertebral disc syndrome, lumbosacral strain with thoracic degenerative disc disease and lumbar degenerative disc bulging (spine disability) is dismissed.

REMANDED 

The issue of entitlement to a disability evaluation in excess of 10 percent for left hip, irregular impingement (limitation of abduction) is remanded.

The issue of entitlement to a compensable disability evaluation for left hip, irregular impingement (limitation of extension) is remanded.

The issue of entitlement to a compensable disability evaluation for left hip, irregular impingement (limitation of flexion) is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

The February 2024 proposal to reduce the rating for the Veteran's spine disorder was not an adjudicative determination by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA).

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The claim regarding the February 2024 proposal to reduce the rating of the Veteran's spine disorder must be dismissed as a matter of law. 38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. § 20.205.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from April 2001 to December 2001.

These matters come before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a February 2024 rating decision issued by a VA Regional Office (RO). 

The Veteran appealed this decision and elected the direct review docket. By selecting the direct review docket, the Board must base its decision on the evidence that was before the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) at the time of the February 2024 decision. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

DISMISSAL

The Veteran attempted to appeal the propriety of a proposed disability rating reduction of her lumbar spine disorder from 40 percent to 10 percent.

The United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) has held that the RO's decision to defer a ruling until a later date does not constitute a final decision by the agency, because all factual and legal questions relevant to the claim have been reserved for adjudication at a later date. Shipley v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 458 (2011). In other words, a decision that merely refers to future action is not a determination by the RO and therefore the filing of a notice of disagreement on such a decision, does not place the issue in appellate status. Moreover, "the Board is unable to act on a 'matter' absent an appealable, binding RO decision that is adverse to the claimant." Sellers v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 265, 274 (2012). See also 38 U.S.C. §§ 511 (a), 7104(a).

At the time the Veteran filed her Notice of disagreement, the February 2024 decision was a proposed reduction, not a final determination that a reduction would occur. 

The Board may dismiss any appeal which fails to allege specific error of fact or law in the determination being appealed. 38 U.S.C. § 7105. While the Veteran filed a VA Form 10182 as to the proposed reduction, a proposal is not an appealable issue; an appeal can only be initiated after VA actually reduces a Veteran's rating.

Accordingly, the appeal of the propriety of the proposed disability evaluation reduction for a lumbar spine disability is dismissed. 

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran seeks higher ratings for her left hip disorders.

The Veteran's left hip is currently rated 10 percent for impairment of the thigh, limitation of abduction under 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, DC 5253, and noncompensable ratings under DC 5251 and 5252 for limitation of extension and flexion, respectively.

For the reason set forth below, the Board finds that a remand is warranted to correct a duty to assist error that occurred prior to the February 2024 decision on appeal.

In relation to these claims, the Veteran underwent a VA hip and thigh condition examination in December 2023. The examination report indicated that the Veteran receives injections and uses a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory gel to relieve pain associated with her left hip disabilities; however, it is not clear whether the examiner discounted the ameliorative effects of the Veteran's medication when evaluating her symptoms. A remand is necessary to determine the severity of the Veteran's symptoms while discounting the ameliorative effects of medication. Jones v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 56 (2012) (holding that the ameliorative effects of medication may not be considered in assigning a disability rating where these effects are not explicitly contemplated by the rating criteria). 

Accordingly, an opinion is warranted to determine the severity of the Veteran's left hip disabilities, without consideration of ameliorative effects of medication.

In remanding this claim, the Board makes no credibility determination, expressed or implied, at this juncture.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Arrange for an appropriate clinician to review the Veteran's claims file and provide an opinion as to the severity of the service-connected left hip disabilities throughout the claim period. Based on the examination report, the Veteran's documented medical history, and lay assertions, the clinician should state what the severity of these disabilities might be when discounting the ameliorative effects of any medication taken to treat the condition. 

If this is not feasible, the clinician MUST provide a detailed explanation and rationale for why this could not be accomplished. Specifically, if the clinician cannot provide an opinion without resorting to mere speculation, he or she must provide a complete explanation for why an opinion cannot be rendered. 

If an opinion cannot be given without resorting to speculation, the clinician should explain why and state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training).

If the inability to provide an opinion without resorting to speculation is due to a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), the RO should develop the claim to the extent it is necessary to cure any such deficiency. If the inability to provide an opinion is due to the examiner's lack of requisite knowledge or training, then the RO should obtain an opinion from a medical professional who has the knowledge and training needed to render such an opinion.

If the reviewing clinician finds that physical examination or telehealth interview of the Veteran and/or diagnostic testing is necessary, such should be accomplished. A clear rationale for all opinions would be helpful and a discussion of the facts and medical principles involved would be of considerable assistance to VA.

2. Readjudicate the claims

 

 

Thomas L. English

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Palatt, E V.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.