Citation Nr: A25034296
Decision Date: 04/14/25	Archive Date: 04/14/25

DOCKET NO. 240419-434216
DATE: April 14, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD) is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for other specified trauma stressor related disorder is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for the purpose of establishing eligibility for treatment is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served active duty from September 2015 to August 2016 and May 2021 to May 2022.

This matter is on appeal to the Board of Veterans' Appeals from June 2023 and February 2024 decisions issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).  In April 2024, the Veteran disagreed with the decisions by submitting a VA Form 10182 and electing the evidence submission lane under the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA) system.  

The Board may only consider the evidence of record before the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) at the time of its decision on the issues on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the appellant or his or her representative with the notice of disagreement, known under the AMA system as the VA Form 10182, or within 90 days following receipt of the notice of disagreement.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300(a), 303.  If additional evidence was submitted between the dates of the AOJ decision and VA's receipt of the notice of disagreement, the Board will not consider it unless it is resubmitted during the 90 days following VA's receipt of the notice of disagreement.  If evidence is not resubmitted, the appellant is welcome to file a supplemental claim to have this evidence considered.  Id.; Cook v. McDonough, 36 Vet. App. 175 (2023).

Upon review of the claims file, the Board finds that a pre-decisional duty to assist error has occurred that requires remand of the claims.

The Board notes that the RO denied the Veteran's service connection claim for OCD as it found, in part, he did not have a diagnosis for the condition.  However, review of treatment records show the Veteran has indeed been diagnosed with OCD.  The Veteran has asserted that his diagnosed disability is related to his military service.  Prior to the decision on appeal, the Veteran was not afforded a VA examination in connection with the claim.  Moreover, there is currently no medical opinion on file that addresses the etiology of the disorder and whether it is related to the Veteran's military service.  Therefore, a pre-decisional duty to assist error occurred, and the claim must be remanded.

In turning to the Veteran's service connection claim for an other specified trauma stressor related disorder, the Board finds that, prior to the decision on appeal, the RO did not obtain a medical opinion to determine the nature and etiology of the disorder. Therefore, a pre-decisional duty to assist error occurred, and remand is necessary for a medical opinion.

Lastly, service connection claims for treatment purposes only are considered if compensation is denied, and as the claims for service connection for OCD and other specified trauma stressor related disorder are being remanded herein, these claims are inextricably intertwined. Harris v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 180 (1991) (two issues are "inextricably intertwined" when they are so closely tied together that a final Board decision on one issue cannot be rendered until the other issue has been considered). As such, adjudication of the Veteran's claim for service connection for treatment purposes only, under 38 U.S.C. § 1702, must be deferred pending the outcome of his service connection claims.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

The AOJ should schedule the Veteran for a VA examination to determine the etiology of the Veteran's claimed OCD and other specified trauma stressor related disorder.  A medical opinion should also be obtained.

The examiner is requested to review all pertinent records associated with the claims file, including the Veteran's service treatment records, post-service medical records, and assertions.

It should be noted that the Veteran is competent to attest to factual matters of which he has first-hand knowledge. If there is a medical basis to support or doubt the history provided by the Veteran, the examiner should state this with a fully reasoned explanation.

If the Veteran is found to have OCD and/or other specified trauma stressor related disorder, the examiner should provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not that the conditions is related to or caused by the claim in-service injury, event, or treatment.  The Board notes the Veteran has been diagnosed with OCD and other specified trauma stressor related disorder.  

In rendering the opinions, the VA examiner should consider and address lay assertions and statements of record to include his claimed disorders are related to traumatic events he witnessed in service.

A clear rationale for all opinions must be provided, and a discussion of the facts and medical principles involved would be of considerable assistance to the Board. 

 

Ann K. Minami

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	K.M. Walker

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.