Citation Nr: A25034569
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 240419-434921
DATE: April 15, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to a rating of 70 percent, but no greater, for acquired psychiatric disorder, is granted.

REMANDED

Entitlement to a total disability rating based on individual unemployability due to service connected disabilities (TDIU) is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

Throughout the appeal period, the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder resulted in occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, without total occupational and social impairment.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for a rating of 70 percent, but no greater, for acquired psychiatric disorder has been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.7, 4.126, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9400.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from November 2010 to August 2021, and was honored with multiple decorations for their service, including the Armed Forces Service Medal; Good Conduct Medal; Global War on Terrorism Expeditionary Medal; Global War on Terrorism Service Medal; Meritorious Unit Commendation; Navy Marine Corps Achievement Medal; National Defense Service Medal; Navy E Ribbon; Navy Pistol Sharpshooter Ribbon; and Sea Service Deployment Ribbon.

The matter comes before the Board on appeal from a rating decision issued in February 2024 by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office. 

In the April 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal, the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. §?20.301.  

Entitlement to a rating of 70 percent, but no greater, for acquired psychiatric disorder.

The Veteran contends that his acquired psychiatric disorder, rated as insomnia disorder with generalized anxiety disorder, should be rated in excess of 50 percent throughout the appeal period. 

Disability ratings are determined by applying a schedule of ratings that is based on average impairment of earning capacity. Separate diagnostic codes identify the various disabilities. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R., Part 4. Each disability must be viewed in relation to its history and the limitation of activity imposed by the disabling condition should be emphasized. 38 C.F.R. § 4.1. Examination reports are to be interpreted in light of the whole recorded history, and each disability must be considered from the point of view of the Veteran working or seeking work. 38 C.F.R. § 4.2. 

All reasonable doubt will be resolved in the claimant's favor. 38 C.F.R. § 4.3. Where there is a question as to which of two disability evaluations shall be applied, the higher evaluation is to be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating. Otherwise, the lower rating is to be assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7.

Where the Veteran is appealing the initial assignment of a disability rating, the severity of the disability is to be considered during the entire period from the initial assignment of the disability rating to the present time.  Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119 (1999).

Where a claimant appeals the denial of a claim for an increased disability rating for a disability for which service connection was in effect before, he filed the claim for increase, the present level of disability is the primary concern, and past medical reports should not be given precedence over current medical findings. Francisco v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 55, 57-58 (1994).  

Separate ratings can be assigned for separate periods based on the facts found - a practice known as "staged" ratings. Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007). Staged ratings are appropriate whenever the factual findings show distinct periods where the service connected disability exhibits symptoms that would warrant different ratings. Id.

The Veteran's service connected acquired psychiatric disorder is evaluated as 50 percent disabling effective August 18, 2021, under the criteria of Diagnostic Code 9400, which provides that such disability is evaluated pursuant to the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders. 38 C.F.R. § 4.130.

The General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders provides a 50 percent rating is warranted when there is occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity, due to such symptoms as: flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short- and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships.

A 70 percent rating is warranted when there is occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or work-like setting); and inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.

A 100 percent rating is warranted when there is total occupational and social impairment due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent ability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; and memory loss for names of closest relatives, own occupation, or own name.

The United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit has held that the evaluation under 38 C.F.R. § 4.130 is "symptom-driven," meaning that "symptomatology should be the fact-finder's primary focus when deciding entitlement to a given disability rating" under that regulation. See Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 116-117 (Fed. Cir. 2013). The symptoms listed are not exhaustive, but rather "serve as examples of the type and degree of symptoms, or their effects, that would justify a particular rating." Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436, 442 (2002). In the context of determining whether a higher disability evaluation is warranted, the analysis requires considering "not only the presence of certain symptoms, but also that those symptoms have caused occupational and social impairment in most of the referenced areas" - i.e., "the regulation...requires an ultimate factual conclusion as to the Veteran's level of impairment in most areas." Vazquez-Claudio, 713 F.3d at 117-118; 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411.

Further, when evaluating a mental disorder, the Board must consider the "frequency, severity, and duration of psychiatric symptoms, the length of remissions, and the Veteran's capacity for adjustment during periods of remission," and must also "assign an evaluation based on all the evidence of record that bears on occupational and social impairment rather than solely on the examiner's assessment of the level of disability at the moment of the examination." 38 C.F.R. § 4.126 (a). 

Effective August 4, 2014, VA amended the portion of its Schedule for Rating Disabilities dealing with mental disorders and its adjudication regulations that define the term "psychosis" to remove outdated references to the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition (DSM-IV) and replace them with references to the recently updated DSM-5. 79 Fed. Reg. 149, 45094 (August 4, 2014). The provisions of the interim final rule apply to all applications for benefits that are received by VA or that were pending before the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) on or after August 4, 2014. VA adopted as final, without change, the interim final rule and clarified that the provisions of this interim final rule do not apply to claims that have been certified for appeal to the Board or are pending before the Board as of August 4, 2014, even if such claims are subsequently remanded to the AOJ. 80 Fed. Reg. 53, 14308 (March 19, 2015). In the instant case, the Veteran's appeal for an increased rating was certified to the Board in May 2024 and, as such, the DSM-V applies to her claim. In this regard, the Board notes that the DSM-5 removed reference to Global Assessment of Functioning scores. 

As an initial matter, the Board has broadened the Veteran's claim to acquired psychiatric disorder, as the Veteran has been diagnosed with insomnia disorder; generalized anxiety disorder; adjustment disorder with anxiety and depressed mood; anxiety; and depression. Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1 (2009).

With respect to the Veteran's psychiatric symptomatology, the Veteran's medical records and lay statements report complaints of depressed mood; anxiety; panic attacks occurring weekly or less often; chronic sleep impairment; disturbances of motivation and mood; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships; difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or work like setting; intrusive dreams; lack of focus; reduced concentration; social anxiety; suicidal ideation; difficulty with hygiene; anger; irritability; memory loss; suspiciousness; flattened affect; and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships. 

With respect to social impairment, the Veteran has been married to his second wife since 2017. The Veteran states that his wife is supportive, but that they do have marital problems and difficulty. Specifically, the Veteran says that his hives have impacted his sex life and hobbies, controlling his life. The Veteran does not have any children and does not have much contact with his family. The Veteran also seldom socializes with his military buddies, work acquaintances, or local acquaintances.

With respect to educational impairment, the Veteran received a high school diploma prior to entering service and then obtained a Bachelor of Science in Nuclear Engineering Technologies. After service the Veteran had been working for his MBA but was not doing well in class and subsequently dropped out because he could no longer take it.

With respect to the Veteran's occupation impairment, the Veteran was in the Navy for over a decade and was able to maintain adequate and satisfactory performance as a Surface Ship Nuclear Propulsion Plant Supervisor. While the Veteran had a hard time adjusting to civilian life, he was able to hold down a steady job. However, the Veteran is currently working as Program Manager with a military contractor and has experienced issues at work due to his lack of concentration and focus. This has impacted his job performance, as he reports that he has been counseled for being anywhere from 300 to 500 emails The Veteran states that he is currently being monitored by the leadership and was just put on probation for missing too much work.

The Board must consider the totality of the nature, frequency, severity, and duration of the Veteran's psychiatric symptomatology, as well as both occupational and social impairment resulting therefrom. In this regard, since the Veteran filed for an increased rating for his acquired psychiatric disorder, he has had two VA examinations.

In the May 2023 VA examination, the examiner found the Veteran's psychiatric symptomatology resulted in occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks, although generally functioning satisfactorily, with normal routine behavior, self-care and conversation. The examiner noted symptoms of depressed mood; anxiety; panic attacks that occur weekly or less often; chronic sleep impairment; suicidal ideation; lost interest in his hobbies due to hives; felt worthless; had passive death wishes; had sleep impairment, including night terrors; rapidly fluctuating appetite; fatigue; and excessive worry. The examiner also noted during the examination, the Veteran had a depressed mood and constricted affect, but otherwise seemed presentable with intelligible speech, sustained eye contact, good social interactions, and maintained concentration within functional limits. Therefore, the examiner found that the Veteran's condition had progressed and was now diagnosed with insomnia with generalized anxiety disorder and adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood.

In the February 2024 VA examination, the examiner found the Veteran's psychiatric symptomatology resulted in occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity. The examiner noted symptoms of depressed mood; anxiety; suspiciousness; panic attacks more than once a week; chronic sleep impairment; flattened affect; disturbances of motivation and mood; and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships. The examiner also noted during the exam the Veteran appeared anxious but was cooperative and engaged throughout the exam. Thus, the examiner found the Veteran's generalized anxiety disorder and insomnia disorder had not changed. 

The Board notes that the Veteran's medical records also reflect the Veteran has been seeking assistance and medication for his acquired psychiatric disorder. Throughout the appeal period the Veteran was prescribed multiple medications to assist his psychiatric disorder, but ultimately only took Sertraline throughout the entire appeal period. Further, the Veteran sought mental health treatment, which he attended throughout the appeal period. Some the mental health records reflected severe depressive symptoms and severe anxiety symptoms, with the Veteran noting on multiple occasions he has fleeting and/or passive suicidal thoughts. The Veterans suicidal ideation was concerning enough that he removed all firearms from his home as a lethal means reduction. 

The Board finds that although the May 2023 VA examiner only found occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks, although generally functioning satisfactorily, with normal routine behavior, self-care and conversation and the February 2024 VA examiner only found occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity, the Veteran's psychiatric symptoms throughout the entire appeal period more closely approximate occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas. Specifically, the Veteran's symptoms include suicidal ideation; intrusive dreams; irritability; memory loss; difficulty with personal hygiene; continuous anxiety and depression; panic attacks at least once a week; difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or work like setting; and the inability to establish and maintain effective relationships. However, the Board does not find the Veteran's psychiatric symptoms ever met total occupational and social impairment for the period on appeal. Specifically, the evidence of record does not demonstrate during the appeal period that the Veteran has psychiatric symptomatology such as gross impairment in thought or communication; delusions; hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger to self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living; or spatial disorientation. Consequently, the Board finds the record does not reflect total occupational and social impairment as contemplated by the rating criteria for a 100 percent rating.

Therefore, the Board finds that during the appeal period, the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder was manifested by psychiatric symptomatology resulting in manifestations that more nearly approximate occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, resulting in a disability rating consistent with a 70 percent. 

The Board has also considered whether staged ratings under Francisco, supra, are appropriate for the Veteran's service connected acquired psychiatric disorder during the appeal period; however, the Board finds that his symptomatology has been stable throughout the appeal period. Therefore, assigning additional staged ratings for such disability is not warranted. Furthermore, the Veteran has not raised any other issues, nor have any other issues been reasonably raised by the record, with regard to the increased rating claim adjudicated herein. Doucette v. Shulkin, 28 Vet. App. 366 (2017) (confirming that the Board is not required to address issues unless they are specifically raised by the claimant or reasonably raised by the evidence of record).

In reaching such determination, the Board has considered the applicability of the benefit of the doubt doctrine. However, the probative evidence is not in approximate balance and weighs against the Veteran's claim. Thus, the benefit of the doubt doctrine is not applicable in such regard, and his increased rating claim must be denied. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7.

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to a TDIU.

In the instant appeal, TDIU was not alleged by the Veteran. However, the Board finds TDIU was reasonably raised by the record and stems from the receipt of the Veteran's claim for an increased rating for MDD. Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447 (2009); Harper v. Wilkie, 30 Vet. App. 345 (2018). 

Total disability ratings for compensation may be assigned, where the schedular rating is less than total, when a veteran is unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation as a result of service-connected disabilities, provided that if there is only one such disability, such disability shall be ratable as 60 percent or more, and if there are two or more disabilities, there shall be at least one disability ratable at 40 percent or more and sufficient additional disability to bring the combined rating to 70 percent or more. 38 C.F.R. § 4.16 (a). 

In this decision, the Board increased the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder from 50 to 70 percent throughout the entire appeal period. Accordingly, the Veteran has met the schedular criteria for a TDIU for the entire appeal period. Although the Veteran meets the schedular criteria, the Board is unable to adjudicate such issue as there is a lack of information regarding the Veteran's work history. Specifically, the Veteran has claimed recently he has been put on probation for missing work, but it is unclear whether it is related to his service connected disabilities or other medical conditions. 

Consequently, a remand is warranted for further development and adjudication of the claim.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Provide the Veteran with a VA Form 21-8940, Application for Increased Compensation Based on Unemployability and request that the Veteran provide an information necessary to adjudicate the claim for entitlement to a TDIU.

(Continued on the next page)

?

2. The Board notes that the Veteran has provided contradicting statements as to his employment throughout the period on appeal. In VA treatment records, the Veteran reported working at a military defense contractor and was put on probation for missing work due to his hives. However, within the Veteran's VA examinations for his acquired psychiatric disorder he specifically stated he had been having difficulties at work due to his acquired psychiatric disorder. Please make sure the Veteran lists his complete employment history on the VA Form 21-8940, including all full-time and part-time work.

3. Thereafter, conduct any other development necessary and adjudicate the claim for a TDIU.

 

 

Melanie J. Mann

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Hageman Gaina, Samantha L.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.