Citation Nr: A25034220
Decision Date: 04/14/25	Archive Date: 04/14/25

DOCKET NO. 240415-430802
DATE:  April 14, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an initial compensable rating for chronic maxillary sinusitis is denied.

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran's chronic maxillary sinusitis does not result in non-incapacitating episodes characterized by headaches, pain, and purulent discharge or crusting; nor does his sinusitis result in incapacitating episodes requiring prolonged antibiotic treatment.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for an initial compensable rating for chronic maxillary sinusitis have not been met. 38 U.S.C. § 1155?(2018);?38 C.F.R. §§ 4.7, 4.97,?Diagnostic Code 6513?(2024). 

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran had active naval service from August 2003 to August 2007, and active military service from August 2007 to November 2015.??? 

This case comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from?a February 2024 higher-level review (HLR) rating decision issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ). Initially, the Veteran was granted entitlement to service connection for sinusitis and assigned a noncompensable rating in an October 2023 rating decision. In October 2023, the Veteran filed a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: HLR, requesting review of the initial rating assigned for his sinusitis. The February 2024 HLR rating decision on appeal was issued in response to that request. ????? 

In the April 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.?Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the October 2023 rating decision, which was subsequently subject to HLR. 38 C.F.R. §?20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the October 2023 decision, which was subsequently subject to HLR, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§?20.300, 20.301, 20.801.?

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Increased Rating - Sinusitis

The Veteran asserts that he should have a higher rating for his sinusitis as his symptoms are worse than those contemplated by the currently assigned rating. The Veteran's sinusitis has been assigned a noncompensable (zero percent) rating under?38 C.F.R. § 4.97,?Diagnostic Code 6513, for the entire period on appeal. 

Under?Diagnostic Code 6513, a 10 percent rating is warranted where there is one or two incapacitating episodes per year of sinusitis requiring prolonged (lasting four to six weeks) antibiotic treatment; or, three to six non-incapacitating episodes per year of sinusitis characterized by headaches, pain, and purulent discharge or crusting.

In March 2015, the Veteran had a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of his brain in connection with reported headaches. However, the MRI revealed a mucous retention cyst within the left maxillary sinus, and mucosal thickening in the bilateral maxillary sinuses.

In January 2023, the Veteran contacted the VA Medical Center and reported that he had recently noticed that his sinusitis was flaring up more than normal, and he was experiencing nasal congestion and sinus pressure. In April 2023, the Veteran was seen at the VA Medical Center by otolaryngology for complaints of sinusitis. At that time, the Veteran reported that he occasionally experienced facial pressure and nasal congestion, and that he occasionally used over-the-counter medication for treatment. The Veteran denied using nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs and nasal sprays. He denied purulent discharge, sinus infections, and smell changes. He reported unilateral migraines with photosensitivity and aura, but felt that they were a separate process from his nasal congestion and pressure. Computed tomography (CT) scan at that time revealed possible left maxillary sinus mucous retention cyst. After discussion with his treatment provider, the Veteran elected to try medical therapy for treatment before undergoing nasal endoscopy. 

In June 2023, the Veteran was again seen at the VA Medical Center by otolaryngology for follow-up. The Veteran again reported that he occasionally used over-the-counter allergy medication, but denied using non-steroidal antiinflammatory medication or nasal sprays. He again denied purulent discharge, sinus infections, and changes in smell. At that time, the examiner noted that the Veteran did have inferior turbinate hypertrophy, but there was no definitive evidence of sinusitis on scope examination. The examiner ordered an additional CT scan to evaluate for sinus disease. In July 2023, the Veteran was afforded a CT scan of his sinuses. At that time, CT scan of the maxillofacial showed osteoma, but no signs of sinus disease.

At an August 2023 VA examination, the Veteran reported that he experienced headaches, nasal congestion with cough and thick yellow mucous, and nasal pressure. The examiner noted that the Veteran experienced episodes of sinusitis, headaches, pain of affected sinus, tenderness of affected sinus, and purulent discharge. The examiner noted that the Veteran had not experienced any non-incapacitating episodes of sinusitis characterized by headaches, pain, and purulent discharge or crusting in the prior 12-month period. The examiner also noted that the Veteran did not experience any incapacitating episodes of sinusitis requiring prolonged use of antibiotics for treatment in the prior 12-month period. The Veteran had not had sinus surgery, or any other repeated sinus-related procedures performed. The examiner noted that the Veteran's sinusitis did impact his ability to work as his symptoms would make it difficult to focus. He reported that he was an information technology (IT) engineer and that he had lost 2-4 weeks of work in the prior 12-month period as a result of sinusitis symptoms.

The Board finds that the Veteran is not entitled to an initial compensable rating for sinusitis. In this regard, there is no indication from the record that the Veteran experiences incapacitating episodes requiring prolonged use of antibiotics for treatment. There is likewise no indication from the record that the Veteran experiences three to six non-incapacitating episodes that are characterized by headaches, pain, and purulent discharge or crusting. The Board notes that an incapacitating episode of sinusitis is described as one that requires bed rest and treatment by a physician. In fact, a review of the record shows that while the Veteran did report purulent discharge to the August 2023 VA examiner, he denied experiencing any such symptoms when he was seen at the VA Medical Center by otolaryngology in April 2023 and June 2023. At those times, the Veteran only reported symptoms of facial pain and nasal congestion. There is certainly no indication from the treatment notes of record that the Veteran experiences episodes of sinusitis requiring treatment, let alone treatment with prolonged use of antibiotics. Further, while the Veteran has reported headaches, he characterized them as migraines and reported that he felt they were a separate process from his sinusitis. Regardless, the Veteran is in receipt of a separate rating for migraine headaches. As such, using the headache symptoms to, in any way, support a higher rating for sinusitis would constitute impermissible pyramiding in violation of 38 C.F.R. § 4.14. As such, even with consideration of all the Veteran's reported symptoms, there is no basis for the assignment of a higher rating for sinusitis. As such, entitlement to an initial compensable rating for sinusitis is not warranted. 38 C.F.R. § 4.97, Diagnostic Code 6513.

Consideration has been given to assigning staged ratings. However, at no time during the period in question has the disability warranted a higher schedular rating than that assigned. Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119 (1999); Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007). 

Accordingly, the Board finds that the benefit-of-the-doubt rule is not applicable as the evidence weighs persuasively against the claim and is not in approximate balance. Therefore, entitlement to an initial compensable rating for sinusitis not warranted. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc).

 

 

Kristin Haddock

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	UmezEronini, Ikechukwu

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.