Citation Nr: A25034482
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 221212-304081
DATE: April 15, 2025

ORDER

New and relevant evidence having been received, readjudication of the claim for service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include depression, is warranted.

Entitlement to a compensable evaluation for syphilis is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include depression, is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

1.  In a January 2018 rating decision, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) denied entitlement to service connection for anxiety and depression.

2.  Since the January 2018 rating decision, new evidence has been received that tends to prove or disprove a matter at issue in the claim for service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder.

3.  Throughout the period on appeal, the Veteran's service-connected syphilis has not been manifested by an active infection or productive of any residuals.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1.  The criteria for readjudication of the claim for service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 5104C, 5108; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.160(d), 3.2500, 3.2501.

2.  The criteria for a compensable evaluation for syphilis have not been met. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1-4.14, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 6310.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from September 1970 to April 1972. 

This case comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from December 2021 and November 2022 rating decisions.

In December 2022, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 10182 and elected direct review.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the December 2021 and November 2022 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decisions on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decisions on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, he may file a supplemental claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id.  Specific instructions for filing a supplemental claim are included with this decision.  However, because the Board is remanding the underlying merits of the claim for service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, any evidence that the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of that claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Law and Analysis

The Veteran and his representative have not raised any issues with the pre-decisional duty to notify or duty to assist with regard to the issues decided herein. See Scott v. McDonald, 789 F.3d 1375, 1381 (Fed. Cir. 2015) (holding that "the Board's obligation to read filings in a liberal manner does not require the Board to search the record and address procedural arguments when the veteran fails to raise them before the Board."); Dickens v. McDonald, 814 F.3d 1359, 1361 (Fed. Cir. 2016) (applying Scott to a duty to assist argument).

New and Relevant Evidence

VA will readjudicate a claim if new and relevant evidence is received with respect to a supplemental claim.  New evidence is evidence not previously part of the actual record before agency adjudicators.  Relevant evidence is information that tends to prove or disprove a matter at issue in a claim.  Relevant evidence includes evidence that raises a theory of entitlement that was not previously addressed.  The new and relevant standard will not impose a higher evidentiary threshold than the previous new and material evidence standard under § 3.156(a). 38 U.S.C. § 5108; 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.

The evidentiary record for a supplemental claim includes all evidence received by VA before VA issues notice of a decision on the supplemental claim.  For VA to readjudicate the claim, the evidentiary record must include new and relevant evidence that was not of record as of the date of notice of the prior decision. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501(b).

The AOJ previously considered and denied a claim for anxiety and depression in a January 2018 rating decision.  In particular, the AOJ found that the Veteran's service treatment records did not show complaints, treatment, or a diagnosis.  Therefore, the AOJ concluded that anxiety and depression did not occur in and were not caused by his military service.  

The Veteran later submitted a supplemental claim in August 2022, which the AOJ denied in the November 2022 rating decision currently on appeal.  

The evidence of record at the time of the January 2018 rating decision included the Veteran's service treatment records, post-service medical records, and lay statements.  The evidence received between the January 2018 and November 2022 rating decision includes a July 2019 VA psychiatric examination report in which the examiner provided a negative nexus opinion.  That evidence was not previously part of the record before the AOJ and tends to prove or disprove a matter at issue in the service connection claim.  Therefore, the Board finds that this evidence is both new and relevant, and readjudication of the previously denied claim for service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder is warranted.  

Increased Evaluation

Disability ratings are determined by applying the criteria set forth in the VA Schedule for Rating Disabilities, found in 38 C.F.R., Part 4.  The rating schedule is primarily a guide in the evaluation of disability resulting from all types of diseases and injuries encountered as a result of or incident to military service.  The ratings are intended to compensate, as far as can practicably be determined, the average impairment of earning capacity resulting from such diseases and injuries and their residual conditions in civilian occupations. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1.  Where there is a question as to which of two evaluations shall be applied, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria for that rating. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7.

In considering the severity of a disability, it is essential to trace the medical history of the veteran. 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.41.  Consideration of the whole-recorded history is necessary so that a rating may accurately reflect the elements of disability present. 38 C.F.R. § 4.2; Peyton v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 282 (1991). While the regulations require review of the recorded history of a disability by the adjudicator to ensure a more accurate evaluation, the regulations do not give past medical reports precedence over the current medical findings.

Where entitlement to compensation has already been established and an increase in the disability rating is at issue, it is the present level of disability that is of primary concern. See Francisco v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 55, 58 (1994).  However, where the question for consideration is the propriety of the initial ratings assigned, evaluation of the evidence since the effective date of the grant of service connection is required. Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119, 125-26 (1999).  Where VA's adjudication of the claim for increase is lengthy and factual findings show distinct time periods where the service-connected disability exhibits symptoms which would warrant different ratings, different or "staged" ratings may be assigned for such different periods of time. Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505, 509-10 (2007); Fenderson, 12 Vet. App. at 126-27.

Except as otherwise provided by law, a claimant has the responsibility to present and support a claim for benefits. VA shall consider all information and lay and medical evidence of record in a case and when there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, VA shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (benefit-of-the-doubt rule not for application when evidence persuasively favors one side or the other).

The Veteran's service-connected syphilis is currently assigned a noncompensable evaluation, pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 4.88b, Diagnostic Code 6310.

Diagnostic Code 6310 states that syphilis should be rated under the appropriate body system for any residual disability of infection, which includes, but is not limited to, diseases of the nervous system, vascular system, eyes, or ears (see Diagnostic Code 7004, 8013, 8014, 8015, and 9301).

In considering the evidence of record under the laws and regulations as set forth above, the Board finds that the Veteran is not entitled to a compensable evaluation for his service-connected syphilis.

The Veteran has not been shown to have an active infection or any residuals of syphilis during the appeal period.  In fact, a November 2021 VA examiner specifically found that the disorder was inactive, as shown by diagnostic testing, and that he did not have any residuals or symptoms attributable to syphilis.  His treatment records also do not document an active infection, and his treatment providers have not associated any current symptoms or residuals to his prior infection.  The Veteran also told the November 2021 VA examiner that he had not had any recent treatment for the disorder.

Based on the foregoing, the evidence does not persuasively show that the Veteran is entitled to a compensable evaluation for his service-connected syphilis.  Accordingly, the appeal is denied.

The Veteran and his representative have not raised any other issues, nor have any other issues been reasonably raised by the record. See Doucette v. Shulkin, 28 Vet. App. 366, 368 (2017) (confirming that the Board is not required to address issues unless they are specifically raised by the claimant or reasonably raised by the evidence of record).  

REASONS FOR REMAND

Upon review, the Board finds that a remand is needed for to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error for the remaining issue on appeal.

A July 2019 VA examiner found that the Veteran has never been diagnosed with a mental disorder and concluded that he does not currently have such a disorder.  He stated that validity testing indicated that the Veteran exaggerated his symptoms and noted that he presented in a euthymic, well-oriented mood.  The examiner concluded that the Veteran does not meet DMS-5 criteria for any mental health diagnosis, including depression.

Nevertheless, the examiner did not reconcile his finding with prior evidence documenting diagnoses and treatment.  Indeed, he did not discuss VA treatment records documenting a diagnosis of major depressive disorder, a February 2019 VA treatment record showing treatment for anxiety, or a May 2019 VA treatment record indicating that the Veteran has been prescribed sertraline for depression. See Reonal v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 458, 461 (1993) (holding that a medical opinion based upon an incomplete or inaccurate factual premise has no probative value).  Therefore, the Board finds that an additional examination and medical opinion were needed.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

The Veteran should be afforded a VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of any acquired psychiatric disorder that may be present.  Any studies, tests, and evaluations deemed necessary by the examiner should be performed. 

The examiner is requested to review all pertinent records associated with the claims file.

It should be noted that the Veteran is competent to attest to factual matters of which he has first-hand knowledge, including observable symptomatology.  If there is a medical basis to support or doubt the history provided by the Veteran, the examiner should provide a fully reasoned explanation.

The examiner should identify all current psychiatric disorders.  If any previously diagnosed acquired psychiatric disorder is not found on examination, the examiner should address whether it was misdiagnosed or has resolved.  It should be noted that prior VA treatment records document diagnoses of major depressive disorder and anxiety and a prescription for sertraline. 

For each diagnosis identified other than PTSD, the examiner should provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not that the disorder manifested in or is causally or etiologically related to the Veteran's military service, to include any symptomatology or events therein. 

The examiner should also opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran has an acquired psychiatric disorder that is caused by or resulted from his service-connected syphilis.  He or she should address whether any current acquired psychiatric disorder would have been less severe but-for his service-connected syphilis, to include any worsening of functionality.

Regarding PTSD, the AOJ should provide the examiner with a summary of any verified in-service stressors, and the examiner must be instructed that only these events may be considered for the purpose of determining whether an in-service stressor has resulted in PTSD.

The examiner should determine whether the diagnostic criteria to support the diagnosis of PTSD have been satisfied.  If the PTSD diagnosis is deemed appropriate, the examiner should then comment upon the link between the current symptomatology and any verified in-service stressor.

A clear rationale for all opinions should be provided.

 

 

J.W. ZISSIMOS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Brandon C. Procell

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.