Citation Nr: A25034435
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 240320-425215
DATE: April 15, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an initial 70 percent rating but no more for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

The severity, frequency, and duration of the Veteran's PTSD symptoms more closely approximates occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas from initial entitlement.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for a 70 percent rating for PTSD have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.126, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran had active duty service from September 2005 to September 2009. This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a January 2004 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO) which granted service connection for PTSD and assigned an initial 30 percent rating.

In the March 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the January 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim[s], considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Increased Rating for PTSD.

The Veteran contends that his PTSD is more severe than what is contemplated by the currently assigned 30 percent rating. 

Disability evaluations are determined by evaluating the extent to which a Veteran's service-connected disability adversely affects his or her ability to function under the ordinary conditions of daily life, including employment, by comparing his or her symptomatology with the criteria set forth in the Schedule for Rating Disabilities. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1. The percentage ratings represent as far as can practicably be determined the average impairment in earning capacity resulting from such diseases and injuries and the residual conditions in civilian occupations. Generally, the degree of disabilities specified are considered adequate to compensate for considerable loss of working time from exacerbation or illness proportionate to the severity of the several grades of disability. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1. Separate diagnostic codes identify the various disabilities and the criteria for specific ratings.

If two ratings are potentially applicable, the higher rating will be assigned if the disability more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating; otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.7. Any reasonable doubt regarding the degree of disability will be resolved in favor of the Veteran. 38 C.F.R. § 4.3; see also Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

The Veteran's entire history is to be considered when making disability evaluations. See generally 38 C.F.R. § 4.1; Schafrath v. Derwinski,1Vet. App.?589 (1995).

The Veteran filed his claim of service connection in August 2023. He is currently in receipt of an initial 30 percent rating, effective August 30, 2023, for his service-connected PTSD pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411.

Diagnostic Code 9411 applies the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders (General Rating Formula). Under the General Rating Formula, a 30 percent rating is assigned for occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks (although generally functioning satisfactorily, with routine behavior, self-care, and conversation normal), due to such symptoms as: depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks (weekly or less often), chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss (such as forgetting names, directions, recent events).

A 50 percent rating is assigned for occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to such symptoms as: flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short- and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships.

A 70 percent rating is assigned for occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relationships, judgment, thinking or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near- continuous panic or depression affecting ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a work-like setting); and inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.

The maximum 100 percent rating is assigned for total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent ability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; and memory loss for names of closes relatives, own occupation, or own name.

The Board notes that the symptoms listed in VA's general rating formula for mental disorders are not intended to constitute an exhaustive list, but rather serve as examples of the type and degree of the symptoms, or their effects, that would justify a particular rating. Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436, 442-43 (2002). Evaluation under § 4.130 is symptom-driven, meaning that symptomatology should be the fact-finder's primary focus when deciding entitlement to a given disability rating under that regulation. Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 116-17 (Fed. Cir. 2013).

While the evaluation under § 4.130 is focused on symptomatology, the frequency, severity, and duration of the symptoms also play an important role in determining the rating. Id. VA must engage in a "holistic analysis" that assess the severity, frequency, and duration of the signs and symptoms of the veteran's service-connected mental disorder; quantifies the level of occupational and social impairment caused by those symptoms; and assigns an evaluation that most nearly approximates the level of occupational and social impairment. Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 10, 22 (2017).

Turning to the evidence of record, there are no post-service treatment records from VA or another private facility regarding the severity Veteran's PTSD or general psychiatric condition during the pendency of this appeal.  The available clinical  records do not show any treatment for any psychiatric disorder.   

The records do contain conflicting medical opinions regarding the nature and severity of the Veteran's PTSD. 

First, the Veteran submitted a July 2023 private IME, conducted by J.R., PhD, licensed clinical psychologist.  This medical provider found that the criteria for a diagnosis of PTSD had been met and linked it to in-service stressors.  Regarding symptoms, the Veteran reported reexperiencing his trauma in the form of nightmares and intrusive memories, coupled with intense psychological distress while re-experiencing. He experienced hyperarousal in the form of poor sleep initiation, awakening in the middle of the night, poor concentration and resulting anxiety. This has also resulted in avoidance behaviors inclusive of avoiding people and crowds, not wanting to talk about past experiences, as well as emotional numbing and isolation. Triggers included crowds, the scent of BBQ, loud noises, and not being in control of situations.  His symptoms caused occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood.

The private examiner stated that the Veteran showed all of the following symptoms: Depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks more than once a week, near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss (such as forgetting names, directions, recent events), flattened affect, difficulty in understanding complex commands, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a worklike setting, inability to establish and maintain effective relationships, suicidal ideation, obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities, impulse control problems, grossly inappropriate behavior, neglect of personal appearance and hygiene, and intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living. 

The examiner further stated that the Veteran's symptoms of PTSD caused by his inservice traumas have caused significant mental health difficulties affecting multiple areas of his life. Since his time in the military and exposure to combat trauma, there has been persistent strain in all relationships. He was noted to have lived with his wife of 15 years, and his children until five months ago. He was currently going through divorce due to his PTSD symptoms.  During his marriage he was said to find little pleasure in shared activities that he used to enjoy. He was irritable and exhibited impulsive and grossly inappropriate angry outbursts without significant provocation. At times, he even punched the wall in anger. He indicated that he feels emotionally numb and detached and tends to physically isolate. 

Socially, he reported that post-trauma symptoms have had a negative impact. He described having significant difficulty making and maintaining friendships since the onset of his PTSD symptoms. He said he frequently thinks about death and feels anxious.   The Veteran also reported suffering from regular nightmares, had difficulty sleeping at night, and felt fatigued throughout the day. He was suspicious of others and experiences heightened concern about perceived threats and maintaining physical safety. He described being hypervigilant and anxious when among people and unable to tolerate being in large crowds. He tended to isolate at home and avoid crowds. He often declined invitations from others to socialize or attend events. He was invited less and less often. As a result, he was not engaging in previously enjoyed activities and denied having many close friends. 

With regard to daily life, the Veteran felt compelled to have a routine and often checked on the security of his surroundings. He kept weapons available in case someone breaks into his residence. Further, he tended to neglect various daily life activities and routine responsibilities, such as organizing and cleaning his residence, meal preparation, and putting away clothes. Even his hygiene and appearance were neglected, as he sometimes went days without showering, shaving, or even combing his hair.  

His educational history indicated that he completed high school prior to service and attempted some college courses during service but could not complete them due to his busy schedule.  Occupationally, he reported that post-trauma symptoms have significantly impacted occupational performance. He has experienced problems maintaining gainful employment and advancing in his career since separating from the military. He tended to become overwhelmed, shut down, and leave positions. He currently worked as a project engineer. He indicated he experiences severe anxiety and becomes emotionally overwhelmed. He has missed work altogether or left work early due to his PTSD symptoms. His PTSD symptoms have resulted in reduced work performance. He had difficulty concentrating, staying on task, remembering information, and following detailed instructions and procedures. He reported that he experiences low motivation and exhibits a tendency to procrastinate. His PTSD symptoms have caused difficulty getting along with coworkers. He tended to become angry at work in response to minor frustrations. He has lashed out verbally, quite a bit. He felt incapable and worried about not being able to work. His PTSD symptoms have kept him from seeking or accepting certain positions that may be more demanding or require more interpersonal interaction, but which would result in better pay. Overall, he described having impaired work performance and progression and being unable to live up to his occupational potential.

Regarding mental health treatment, the Veteran denied having any mental health issues prior to joining the military. He also denied ever being diagnosed with or treated for a mental health condition. He has never engaged in pharmacotherapy and in psychotherapy. He has never been psychiatrically hospitalized. He currently reported post-trauma symptoms and behaviors that negatively impact multiple facets of life. Record review indicated a PCL5 score of 75, suggesting he has been experiencing symptoms consistent with a PTSD diagnosis in the past month and may benefit from evidence-based treatment for PTSD, such as prolonged exposure therapy, cognitive processing therapy, or cognitive-behavioral conjoint therapy. 

With regard to depression, he reported experiencing, without any significant periods of total remission since 2009, depressed mood, markedly diminished interest, or pleasure in almost all activities, decreased appetite nearly every day, insomnia, fatigue, feelings of worthlessness, feelings of excessive and inappropriate guilt, and recurrent thoughts of death and suicide (without current intent). 

With regard to anxiety, he reported experiencing excessive and uncontrollable anxiety and worry about maintaining physical safety, the well-being of his children, and how he is viewed by other at work, occurring more days than not for since 2009. He reported that the anxiety is associated with feeling restless and on edge, being easily fatigued, irritability, muscle tension, and difficulty falling or staying asleep. Further, he reported experiencing, about once or twice every couple of weeks, unexpected and abrupt surges of intense fear and discomfort that quickly reach a peak and that are characterized by accelerated heart rate, sweating, trembling, sensation of shortness of breath, feelings of choking, chest discomfort, nausea, and numbness or tingling sensations. Lastly, there were cognitive consequences to the Veteran's mood symptoms. He reported diminished ability to concentrate, impairment memory, and difficulty understanding complex instructions. 

The Veteran had no relevant legal history. All germane behavioral manifestations have been previously described.  Regarding substance abuse, he denied ever being diagnosed with or treated for a substance abuse/dependence issue. However, he openly acknowledged that he has consumed alcohol in the amount of one to two drinks about three times a year since 2009. He reported that he smokes cannabis in the amount of couple of hits nightly in 2022. No illicit drug use was reported. 

On mental status examination, the Veteran was appropriately dressed for season and situation and demonstrated adequate personal hygiene, though his hair was somewhat unkempt. He was alert and oriented to person, place, time, and situation. Stature and height were unremarkable. He maintained good eye contact, related in a cooperative and appropriate manner, and appeared well-nourished and chronological age. His mood appeared depressed, and his posture was tense. His affect was flat. His speech was fluent and normal in rate, rhythm, and volume. Thought processes and content were unremarkable. 

The impression was that overall, the Veteran endorsed experiencing chronic levels of depression and anxiety following the trauma(s) experienced while in the military. These difficulties adversely impact multiple facets of life including social, occupational, marital, and family environments. There are also cognitive consequences. The IME evaluator determined that the level of psychological distress based on the veteran's self-report and diagnostic clinical interview is severe.

A conflicting diagnosis and level of disability is shown in an October 2023 VA examination.  The VA examiner, a clinical psychologist, conceded that the Veteran had in-service stressors sufficient to support but determined that the criteria for a DSM-5 diagnosis of PTSD was not met.  Instead, the examiner diagnosed the Veteran with a generalized anxiety disorder and determined that this condition is less likely than not related to service, despite referencing treatment for an adjustment disorder in 2008 during active service.  The examiner noted that the Veteran described anxiety in certain situations such as pending childbirth and marriage (in May 2008 during active service), as well as difficulty with command staff which apparently remitted once stressor situations lessened.  Regarding current symptoms, it was noted that the anxiety he presents with now is more generalized in that he's had excessive anxiety and worry, with it occurring more days than not.  He found it difficult to control the worry, and his anxiety, and worry were associated with restlessness/feeling keyed up or on edge, being easily fatigued, having difficulty concentrating, irritation, and having sleep disturbance. 

The Veteran's psychiatric disorder was found to result in occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks, although generally functioning satisfactorily, with normal routine behavior, self-care, and conversation.  The VA's review of records included the diagnosis of adjustment disorder in May 2008, his reports of impacts of deployments and a visit to the morgue in May 2009, and another diagnosis of adjustment disorder in July 2009 with work related stress related to chain of command. He was noted to have been prescribed Trazodone with this prescription last filled in 2010.  The examiner confirmed review of the July 2023 opinion and noted that it diagnosed him with PTSD.  The examiner acknowledged his military history was from 2005 to 2009 and he worked in mortuary affairs.  

Regarding his post military social, marital, and family history, the Veteran explained that he doesn't go out and kept to himself, which was a change for him.  He stated, "I really don't hang out with people." He described discomfort being around large groups and he has stopped going to concerts. Close relationships have suffered as he and wife were currently separated.  He reported "It's been a build-up, I'm an anxious person, she didn't like the fact I didn't want to go and over time it wore on the relationship." He also said some anger issues on his part have played a role. They had 3 children. He was not estranged from parents and his father was living with him.  He kept in contact with mother. He has lost interest in going out publicly.  He no longer played music in public which he previously enjoyed doing.  He also has stopped playing video games because "they frustrate me." He had some non-family personal relationships, and these are military buddies he has contact with online through Facebook. 

Post-service the Veteran had always been employed but he indicated that he has bounced around jobs.  He reported "I'm good at my job, it's a skill set that valued but I feel highly anxious and can't take it and quit because I feel overwhelmed." He was a controls engineer for automation systems. He was on his sixth job postmilitary but said he was about to leave the company. He was never fired for cause. He obtained a bachelor's degree in electrical engineering. He denied attendance problems. He said that when overwhelmed he gets snappy or shuts down with others.

His post-service mental health history was significant for therapy on and off for 2 years. This with different therapists and there were no notes of such sessions. He reported that he has a mix of depression and anxiety. He had no motivation and had to fight to get going, such as getting out of bed. He felt overwhelmed with his life situation--e.g. work, being a single father. He had a hard time dealing with multiple things in his life and shuts down. He said he isolates. He said he does not eat routinely, and that he's lost 60 lbs. in 18 months. These mood states have built up over many years.  He reported "It's starting to get so overwhelming; I've lost motivation, I'm starting to feel numb." He has had irritation and anger outbursts when he feels overwhelmed. He denied current suicidal ideations (SI) and has never attempted suicide. He describes having impulsive thoughts of self-harm but was to dismiss these.  He denied legal problems.  As for substance abuse, he indicated going out and drinking a lot after college in 2013 but currently did not drink with any regularity.  He indicated he hasn't had a drink in two years.  He used marijuana recreationally or to calm down, says there were times he used daily but says he has not used at all in 6 months.  

His symptoms actively pertaining to his diagnoses included depressed mood, anxiety, chronic sleep impairment, and disturbances of motivation and mood.  

Behavioral observations revealed him to be engaged and cooperative. He was clear in thought, fully alert, without delusional or paranoid thought content. He denied suicidal or homicidal ideation. His mood was anxious. He was oriented times 4. Recent and remote memory were intact.  He was competent to manage affairs.

The rest of the examination focused on why the examiner declined to diagnose PTSD.  The examiner stated that currently his symptom presentation justifies a current diagnosis of generalized anxiety disorder. The examiner acknowledged that while an independent medical examiner diagnosed PTSD, he disagreed with this diagnosis as the anxiety he struggles with are not centered on trauma-materials but are more generalized in their presentation.

In considering the conflicting examination opinions, the Board finds that the July 2023 private IME is of greater probative weight than the October 2023 VA examination.  In making this determination, the Board notes that the findings and opinion from the July 2023 diagnosing and linking PTSD to service was accepted by VA in granting service connection for PTSD in the January 2024 rating on appeal.  The Board notes that the private opinion included a comprehensive history taken from the Veteran and appears to have included some test results as the private examiner indicated that a PCL5 score of 75 was indicative of PTSD.  The Board finds the Veteran to be credible, and this history given by him is similar to the history and symptoms (although less comprehensive) also reported in the October 2023 VA examination. 

The findings from the July 2023 IME examination discussed at length above discloses symptoms resulting in occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relationships, judgment, thinking or mood as contemplated by the criteria for a 70 percent rating.  Likewise, although describing his symptoms as less severe and not attributable to PTSD, the symptoms reported in the October 2023 VA examination also include some findings supportive of a 70 percent rating.  

When considered together, the findings from the July 2023 IME and the October 2023 VA examination show his symptoms interfering with his social and family relationships to the extent that his marriage has ended, and he has withdrawn from social activities including no longer participating in hobbies such as playing music in public, and declining invitations from others to socialize or attend events.  He also is noted to have had periods of neglect of self-care reported, including neglecting to shower or groom his hair at times per the July 2023 IME, and as reported in the October 2023 VA examination he did not eat regularly and had lost significant weight in 18 months.  The July 2023 IME described cognitive symptoms such as issues with concentration and memory impacting his work, school, family relationships, judgment, thinking or mood, while the October 2023 VA examination disclosed impacts due to reduced motivation.    

With respect to occupational impacts, although the Veteran has consistently maintained a high level of employment, as he is shown to work in engineering, the evidence from the July 2023 IME and October 2023 indicate that his PTSD symptoms have impacted his career as well.  By his own admission he has "job hopped" and not stayed in one job for very long.  As described in the July 2023 IME his PTSD symptoms have caused occupational problems including conflicts with coworkers due to becoming angry, feelings of inadequacy at work and avoidance of positions that might be more demanding or require more interpersonal interaction.  

When considering the frequency, severity, and duration of the Veteran's impairment in assessing his disability picture, the Board finds that, throughout the appeal period, the evidence demonstrates occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas such as work, family relations, judgment, thinking, and mood per the above described symptoms.  Such symptomatology more closely resembles 70 percent rating.

However, the Veteran's service-connected PTSD does not meet the criteria for a 100 percent rating. As noted, a 100 percent rating requires total occupational and social impairment due to symptoms such as gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent ability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; and memory loss for names of closes relatives, own occupation, or own name. While no particular symptom is required, the probative evidence does not show symptoms of gross impairment in thought process, persistent danger to himself or others, grossly inappropriate behavior, disorientation of time or place, or intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living.  

Although he has had periods of self-neglect including hygiene at times, his symptoms are not shown to involve intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living.  He is not shown to be in persistent danger of self-harm and is not shown to have periods of disorientation as to time, place, or memory.  He is not shown to be occupationally disabled, having worked consistently throughout the appeal period.  Socially, although noted to have social withdrawal and marital problems resulting in divorce, he is also noted to be in generally good relationships with other family members, including his father, who was noted to live with him.  

In making this determination the Board has considered the Veteran's reported history of symptomatology related to the service-connected PTSD. He is competent to report such symptoms and observations. Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 470 (1994). However, his credible descriptions of his observable symptoms more closely describe the 70 percent criteria, rather than the 100 percent criteria.  

Accordingly, the Board finds that a 70 percent rating is warranted, but a rating in excess of 70 percent is not warranted for his PTSD. In reaching this decision, the Board considered the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine. See 38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.3; Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49, 55-56 (1990).

 

 

Eric S. Leboff

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Eckart, C.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.