Citation Nr: A25034874
Decision Date: 04/16/25	Archive Date: 04/16/25

DOCKET NO. 190411-35627
DATE: April 16, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 10 percent for right lower radiculopathy associated with degenerative disc disease with degenerative joint disease, thoracolumbar spine with intervertebral disc syndrome has already been adjudicated and is therefore dismissed.

Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 20 percent for exercise induced compartment syndrome left lower extremity is denied.

Entitlement to a total disability rating based on individual unemployability (TDIU) due to service-connected disabilities is granted. 

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. In an August 30, 2023, order, the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) adjudicated the issue of entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 10 percent for right lower radiculopathy associated with degenerative disc disease with degenerative joint disease, thoracolumbar spine with intervertebral disc syndrome. 

2. The issue of entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 10 percent for right lower radiculopathy associated with degenerative disc disease with degenerative joint disease, thoracolumbar spine with intervertebral disc syndrome was erroneously docketed twice; this decision does not disturb the findings in the August 30, 2023, Board order. 

3. For the period on appeal, the Veteran's exercise induced compartment syndrome left lower extremity has been manifested by a moderate incomplete paralysis of the external popliteal nerve.

4. The competent evidence of record shows that the Veteran has been unable to secure or maintain substantially gainful employment as a result of his service-connected disabilities.  

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for dismissal of the issue entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 10 percent for right lower radiculopathy associated with degenerative disc disease with degenerative joint disease, thoracolumbar spine with intervertebral disc syndrome have been met.  38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. § 20.205. 

2. The criteria for establishing entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 20 percent for exercise induced compartment syndrome, left lower extremity, have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.124a, Diagnostic Code (DC) 8721.

3. The criteria for establishing entitlement to a TDIU have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.340, 3.341, 4.16(a).

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served honorably in the United States Marine Corps from September 1994 to December 1995 and in the United States Army from November 2003 to June 2009.  Among his awards, the Veteran received the National Defense Service Medal with one bronze star and the Global War on Terrorism Medal.  

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a February 2019 Statement of the Case (SOC) issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) regional office (RO).

In the April 2019 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Hearing docket. On May 28, 2024, the Veteran withdrew the hearing request.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the February 2019 SOC, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran [or representative] within 90 days following receipt of the withdrawal of the hearing request. 38 C.F.R. § 20.302(b). If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the February 2019 SOC and prior to receipt of the withdrawal, or (2) more than 90 days following receipt of the withdrawal, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.302(b), 20.801.

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim[s], considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Disability ratings.

Disability ratings are determined by applying the criteria set forth in the VA Schedule for Rating Disabilities (Rating Schedule).  38 C.F.R. Part 4.  The Rating Schedule is primarily a guide in the evaluation of disabilities resulting from all types of diseases and injuries encountered as a result of or incident to military service. The ratings are intended to compensate, as far as can practicably be determined, the average impairment of earning capacity resulting from such diseases and injuries and their residual conditions in civilian occupations. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1.  

Ratings are assigned according to the manifestation of symptoms, but the use of the term "such as" in the General Rating Formula demonstrates that the symptoms after the phrase are not intended to constitute an exhaustive list, but rather are to serve as examples of the type and degree of the symptoms, or their effects, that would justify a rating. Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436 (2002). Neither the number of symptoms nor the type of symptoms controls in determining whether the criteria for the next higher rating have been met. It is the effect of the symptoms, rather than the presence of symptoms, pertaining to the criteria for the next higher rating, that is determinative, and the Board must draw fact-based conclusions as to whether those symptoms, and their severity, frequency, and duration, have caused the level of occupational and social impairment associated with a given rating. Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 10 (2017).  Further, the Veteran's entire history is to be considered when making disability evaluations. See generally 38 C.F.R. § 4.1; Schafrath v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 589 (1995).

The Court has held that a claimant may experience multiple distinct degrees of disability that might result in different levels of compensation from the time the increased rating claim was filed until a final decision is made. Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007). Separate evaluations may be assigned for separate periods of time if such distinct periods are shown by the competent evidence of record during the appeal, a practice known as "staged" ratings. See Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119, 126 (1999).

When the evidence is in approximate balance in the Veteran's favor or nearly equal regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, the Secretary shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; see also Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49, 53 (1990); Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (2021).  

Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 10 percent for right lower radiculopathy associated with degenerative disc disease with degenerative joint disease, thoracolumbar spine with intervertebral disc syndrome.

On August 30, 2023, the Board issued an order which denied the Veteran's request for entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 10 percent for right lower radiculopathy associated with degenerative disc disease with degenerative joint disease, thoracolumbar spine with intervertebral disc syndrome, thereby rendering that issue moot.

The Board has jurisdiction where there is a question of law or fact on appeal to the Secretary. 38 U.S.C. § 7104; 38 C.F.R. § 20.104. The Board may dismiss any appeal which fails to allege specific error of fact or law in the determination being appealed. 38 U.S.C. § 7105 (d)(5).

In light of the August 2023 Board order, there is no longer a case or controversy associated with the appellant's claim of entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 10 percent for right lower radiculopathy associated with degenerative disc disease with degenerative joint disease, thoracolumbar spine with intervertebral disc syndrome.  As such, that issue is no longer before the Board.   

Accordingly, the Board does not have jurisdiction over this issue again, and it must be dismissed.  This dismissal will not disturb the findings in the August 30, 2023, Board order.  

Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 20 percent for exercise induced compartment syndrome, left lower extremity.

The Veteran contends that he is entitled to a disability rating in excess of 20 percent for exercise induced compartment syndrome, left lower extremity.  Having carefully reviewed the evidence of record, and considering all pertinent laws and regulations, the Board finds that the Veteran's contention is not warranted.

By way of history, the Veteran's exercise induced compartment syndrome, left lower extremity has been rated as 20 percent disabling under Diseases of the Peripheral Nerves, 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, DC 8721.  Specifically, the Veteran's exercise induced compartment syndrome, left lower extremity has been rated under neuralgia of the external popliteal nerve.  Under the DC, a 40 percent rating is warranted with complete paralysis of the external popliteal nerve manifested by foot drop and slight droop of first phalanges of all toes, cannot dorsiflex the foot, extension (dorsal flexion) of proximal phalanges of toes lost; abduction of foot lost, adduction weakened; anesthesia covers entire dorsum of foot and toes.

A 30 percent rating is warranted with incomplete paralysis severe.

A 20 percent rating is warranted with incomplete paralysis moderate.

A 10 percent rating is warranted with incomplete paralysis mild. 

A precursor to the rating table governing Diseases of the Peripheral Nerves provides the following guidance:

The term "incomplete paralysis," with this and other peripheral nerve injuries, indicates a degree of lost or impaired function substantially less than the type picture for complete paralysis given with each nerve, whether due to varied level of the nerve lesion or to partial regeneration. When the involvement is wholly sensory, the rating should be for the mild, or at most, the moderate degree. The ratings for the peripheral nerves are for unilateral involvement; when bilateral, combine with application of the bilateral factor.

VA's Adjudication Procedures Manual (M21-1) provides guidance in the assignment and definition of the terms mild, moderate, and severe peripheral nerve conditions. Although the Board is not bound by the M-21-1, it is required to discuss any relevant provisions as part of the duty to provide adequate reasons or bases if the Board chooses to rely on an M21-1 provision as a factor to support its decision." Overton v. Wilkie, 30 Vet. App. 257, 264 (2018). Here, the Board finds the M21-1 guidance helpful.

Under the M21-1, the "mild" level of evaluation is reasonably assigned when sensory symptoms are recurrent but not continuous, assigned a lower medical grade reflecting less impairment, and/or affecting a smaller area in the nerve distribution. M21-1, Part V, Subpart iii, Chapter 12, Section A.2.c.

The "moderate" level of evaluation is reserved for the most significant and disabling cases of sensory-only involvement. These are cases where the sensory symptoms are continuous, the symptoms are assigned a higher medical grade reflecting greater impairment and/or they affect a larger area in the nerve distribution. Id. Moderate is the maximum evaluation that can be assigned for neuralgia, characterized usually by a dull and intermittent pain in the distribution of a nerve. 38 C.F.R. § 4.124.

Marked muscle atrophy is expected for "severe" paralysis of the nerve. In general, severe incomplete paralysis of a peripheral nerve involves motor and/or reflex impairment (for example atrophy, weakness, or diminished or hyperactive reflexes) at a grade reflecting a very high level of limitation or disability. Neuritis characterized by loss of reflexes, muscle atrophy, sensory disturbances, and constant pain should be rated as high as severe incomplete paralysis of the nerve. Id.

In the case at hand, the Board finds that the competent evidence shows that the Veteran's overall disability picture warrants a 20 percent rating and does not meet the criteria for a 30 percent disability rating.  Specifically, the evidence does not show that the Veteran suffers from a severe incomplete paralysis of the external popliteal nerve and there is no evidence of a foot drop, atrophy, weakness, or diminished or hyperactive reflexes. 

The Veteran attended a VA examination in September 2008.  The examiner took a history that the Veteran's exercise induced compartment syndrome began when he experienced a bad landing on a parachute jump.  The examiner found that the Veteran now experiences pain while exercising. 

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in May 2010.  The examiner found that the Veteran suffered from compartment syndrome left lower extremity and peroneal nerve palsy.  The examiner took a history of the Veteran initially injuring his left ankle during a parachute jump.  The examiner indicated that the Veteran suffered from pain, numbness, and paresthesias in his left foot and calf.  The examiner indicated that the Veteran was preparing to undergo decompression surgery in the hopes of alleviating his symptoms.  Upon testing, the examiner found normal sensory responses, normal reflexes, and normal muscle tone.  The examiner found that the Veteran's activities of daily living were impacted in that the Veteran had difficulty shopping and doing chores and could not participate in sports or exercise.  The examiner concluded by indicating that the Veteran's compartment syndrome and peroneal nerve palsy were moderately severe and required surgery. 

The Veteran attended a VA examination in November 2012.  The examiner found numbness in the left lower extremity, no loss of muscle strength, no muscle atrophy, normal deep tendon reflexes, and no trophic changes.  The examiner found no evidence of nerve involvement.  Ultimately, the examiner found that the Veteran would be precluded from working at positions which require long periods of standing.

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in February 2015.  The examiner took a history of the Veteran initially injuring his left ankle during a parachute jump.  The examiner found that the Veteran suffers from numbness and pain in his left foot and calf.  The examiner indicated that the Veteran has undergone decompression surgery which was not successful in alleviating the Veteran's pain and numbness.  Upon testing, the examiner found no loss of muscle strength, no atrophy, normal deep tendon reflexes, no trophic changes and no nerve involvement.  The examiner found the Veteran occupationally impaired to the extent that the Veteran would be prevented from working at a job which required long periods of standing.       

 An April 2015 Addendum to the February 2015 report was also completed.  The addendum contained sensation to light touch testing which showed normal results for the upper thigh, the thigh, the lower leg/ankle, and the foot/toes.

The Board has considered the Veteran's statements in support of his claim.  The Board acknowledges that the Veteran is competent to report his symptoms.  Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 470 (1994). However, the Veteran does not have the medical training necessary to opine as to whether his exercise induced compartment syndrome, left lower extremity is severe enough to warrant a higher evaluation under the VA's rating criteria because that is a complex medical determination outside the realm of common knowledge.   Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372 (Fed. Cir. 2007), Charles v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 370 (2002).

In light of this evidence, the Board finds that the Veteran's exercise induced compartment syndrome, left lower extremity most closely approximates the criteria for a 20 percent disability rating and does not satisfy the criteria for a disability rating of 30 percent.  Specifically, the competent evidence of record demonstrates that the Veteran has incurred a moderate incomplete paralysis of the external popliteal nerve and not a severe incomplete paralysis of the external popliteal nerve.  Expressly, the evidence does show that the Veteran has continuous pain and numbness in the left foot and calf.  However, the evidence does not show that the Veteran suffers from marked muscle atrophy and there is no evidence of a foot drop, atrophy, weakness, or diminished or hyperactive reflexes.

The Board further finds that the Veteran has not requested an extraschedular rating and the competent evidence of record does not support an extraschedular rating.  The Board finds that the Veteran's disability picture is adequately contemplated by the rating schedule when the level of severity and symptomatology of the Veteran's disability is compared with the established rating criteria.   

Accordingly, the Veteran is not entitled to a disability rating in excess of 20 percent for his exercise induced compartment syndrome, left lower extremity.  As the weight of the evidence is against this claim, the benefit of the doubt rule is not applicable.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

Entitlement to TDIU is granted.

The Veteran contends that he has been unable to secure or maintain substantially gainful employment as a result of his service-connected disabilities.  Having carefully reviewed all evidence on file, and considering all pertinent laws and regulations, the Board finds that the Veteran's contention is warranted.

By way of history, the Veteran has been service connected for the following disabilities:  (i) sleep apnea rated at 50 percent disabling; (ii) traumatic brain injury (TBI) rated at 40 percent disabling; (iii) bilateral pes planus rated at 30 percent disabling; (iv) headache disorder associated with TBI rated at 30 percent disabling; (v) exercise induced compartment syndrome left lower extremity rated as 20 percent disabling; (vi) degenerative disc disease with degenerative joint disease thoracolumbar spine with intervertebral disc syndrome rated as 10 percent disabling; (vii) insomnia disorder rated as 20 percent disabling; (viii) tinnitus rated as 10 percent disabling; (ix) petite mal seizure disorder rated as 10 percent disabling; (x) gastroesophageal reflux disease rated as 10 percent disabling; (xi) right lower radiculopathy associated with degenerative disc disease with degenerative joint disease thoracolumbar spine with intervertebral disc syndrome rated as 10 percent disabling; (xii) left knee meniscus derangement with meniscus debridement and instability rated as 10 percent disabling; (xiii) left knee meniscus derangement with meniscus debridement and limitation of extension rated as 10 percent disabling; (xiv) erectile dysfunction rated a 0 percent disabling; (xv) scar left lower extremity associated with exercise induced compartment syndrome left lower extremity rated as 0 percent disabling; and (xvi) scar status post arthroscopic meniscus debridement associated with left knee meniscus derangement status post arthroscopic meniscus debridement rated as 0 percent disabling.  These disabilities combine for a 100 percent rating from April 18, 2016.

A total disability rating for compensation purposes may be assigned when the Veteran is unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation as a result of service-connected disabilities, provided that, if there is only one such disability, this disability shall be ratable at 60 percent or more, or if there are two or more disabilities, there shall be at least one ratable at 40 percent or more, and sufficient additional disability to bring the combined rating to 70 percent or more. 38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a). 

In the case at hand, the Veteran currently has a 50 percent disability rating for sleep apnea and the Veteran's combined disability rating has been at 100 percent since April 18, 2016.  Accordingly, the Veteran has one disability ratable at 40 percent or more and sufficient additional disability to bring the combined rating to 70 percent or more.  Thus, the Veteran meets the schedular requirements for a TDIU. 

Therefore, the remaining question concerns whether the Veteran is unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation as a result of his service-connected disabilities. 38 C.F.R. § 4.16 (a).

A finding of total disability is appropriate, "when there is present any impairment of mind or body which is sufficient to render it impossible for the average person to follow a substantially gainful occupation." 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.340 (a)(1), 4.15.

"Substantially gainful employment" is that employment, "which is ordinarily followed by the nondisabled to earn their livelihood with earnings common to the particular occupation in the community where the veteran resides." Moore (Robert) v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 356, 358 (1991). Marginal employment is not considered substantially gainful employment. 38 C.F.R. § 4.16 (a).

In determining whether unemployability exists, consideration may be given to a veteran's level of education, special training, and previous work experience, but not to his age or to any impairment caused by nonservice-connected disabilities. 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.341, 4.16, 4.19.

In the case at hand, the Veteran is a high school graduate who has completed an associate degree in general education at Fayetteville Tech and an associate degree in culinary arts from Le Cordon Bleu.  A January 2019 correspondence documents that the Veteran has also completed a VA Vocational Rehabilitation and Employment (VR&E) program.    

The Veteran has been employed as a kitchen manager from March 2011 to May 2011, an assistant operations manager from August 2015 through March 2016, a security supervisor from March 2018 to December 2018, a pest control technician from May 2021 to December 2021, and a cleaner from March 2022 to November 2022.  The employment evidence of record, as well as the Veteran's July 2024 statement in support of his claim, indicates that the Veteran has not worked in any capacity since November 18, 2022.  

The Veteran attended a VA examination for his service-connected thoracolumbar condition in February 2015.  The examiner found that the Veteran had a limited range of motion and suffered from pain radiating down the right side to his buttocks.  The examiner indicated that the Veteran experienced 2 to 3 flare-ups per week during which he had pain with motion, sitting, and standing.  The examiner additionally found that the Veteran could not bend, stoop, or lift.  

The Veteran attended a VA examination for his exercise induced compartment syndrome in February 2015.  The examiner indicated that the Veteran suffered from left leg pain and numbness in his left foot and calf.  The examiner concluded that this condition prohibited employment which required prolonged standing.  

The Veteran also attended a February 2015 VA examination for his service-connected sleep apnea.  The examiner found that the Veteran required the use of a continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) machine and suffered from persistent hypersomnolence.  The examiner further indicated that the Veteran suffers from loud snoring and apneic pauses. 

The Veteran attended a VA examination for his service-connected traumatic brain injury in June 2016.  The examiner found that the Veteran suffered from mild memory impairment, and difficulty with attention, concentration, and executive functions.  The examiner also found that the Veteran was occasionally disoriented and suffered neurobehavioral effects which interfere with social and workplace interactions.  The examiner took a history that the Veteran suffered from sharp headaches which occurred once or twice a month.  During a headache, the Veteran stated he became very photosensitive.   The Veteran also reported sleep difficulties which limit him to 3 hours of sleep per night.  The Veteran indicated that his primary concern was his memory loss and his inability to learn and retain new material.  

The Veteran was also afforded a June 2016 examination for his service-connected left knee meniscal derangement status post arthroscopic meniscus debridement.  The examiner found that the Veteran's left knee frequently locked up and he experienced joint instability 2 to 3 times a day.  The examiner indicated that the Veteran ambulated with a cane, and he suffered from pain with walking, standing, sitting, and climbing or descending stairs.  The examiner found that the Veteran suffered from limited range of motion and had suffered a meniscal tear.

The Veteran's treatment record from February 14, 2018, documents that the Veteran suffered several in-service incidents in which he struck his head.  These incidents left the Veteran dazed and feeling nauseous.  The physician noted that the Veteran was experiencing headaches approximately 3 times per week.  Each time the headache started behind his right eye and radiated to his temporal and occipital regions.  The physician noted that the Veteran's headaches are accompanied by photophobia and phonophobia.  The examiner found that the Veteran is forced to retreat into a dark closet until the pain passes, which usually takes hours.  The condition headache disorder associated with TBI is service connected.

The Veteran has submitted several statements in support of his claim, including his July 2024 statement.  In his statements, the Veteran avers that he has made his best attempt at working, as documented by his work history and his attempts at furthering his education.  However, the Veteran indicated that each attempt to return to work was thwarted by the limitations arising from his service-connected disabilities.  The Veteran indicated that, ultimately, the impairments arising from his service-connected disabilities prevented him from engaging in substantially gainful employment.  As the Veteran's physical limitations outlined in the aforementioned medical evidence show significant impairments to employment, the Board finds the Veteran's testimony credible.  

The Board has considered the Veteran's numerous statements in support of his claim, including his July 2024 statement.  The Board acknowledges that the Veteran is competent to report his symptoms and on that of which he has personal knowledge.  Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 470 (1994).  However, the Veteran is not competent to opine as to whether the impairments arising from his service-connected disabilities render him incapable of engaging in substantially gainful employment for the purposes of establishing a TDIU as that matter is a complicated legal determination outside the realm of common knowledge of a lay person.  Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372 (Fed. Cir. 2007).

When the VA medical reports of record are considered in conjunction with the Veteran's credible statements concerning his attempts to return to work, the Board finds that the Veteran's impairments arising from his service-connected disabilities render the Veteran unable to obtain or maintain substantially gainful employment consistent with his education and occupational background.  Specifically, the Board finds that the medical evidence documents that the Veteran is limited in his ability to sit, stand, walk, bend, stoop, and lift.  The Veteran ambulates with the use of a cane.  The Veteran suffers from an impaired memory and ability to concentrate.  His ability to learn and retain new material is limited.  The Veteran suffers from headaches approximately 3 times a week.  When the Veteran has a headache, he has to retreat to a dark closet for hours until the pain passes.  The Veteran suffers from a sleep impairment which limits him to 3 hours of sleep per night and, as a result, he suffers from excessive sleepiness during the day.

(Continued on the next page)

?

In sum, the Board is satisfied that the service-connected disabilities are so severe as to render the Veteran unable to maintain any form of substantially gainful employment consistent with his education and occupational background. Accordingly, a TDIU is warranted.

 

 

B. MULLINS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Litts, Norman W. Jr

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.