Citation Nr: A25034664
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 240829-469771
DATE: April 15, 2025

ORDER

Service connection for tinnitus is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

The evidence is at least in approximate balance as to whether the Veteran's tinnitus is related to hazardous noise exposure during active service.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to service connection for tinnitus have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran has active service in the United States Air Force from September 1986      to August 1996.

This matter is before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a September 2023 rating decision in which service connection for tinnitus was denied.  In the August 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the September 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Service Connection

Generally, to establish service connection, a claimant must show: (1) a present disability; (2) an in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service, the so-called "nexus" requirement. 38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303; see also Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, the benefit of the doubt shall be given to the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b). An approximate balance of the evidence includes but is not limited to equipoise. Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 781 (Fed. Cir. 2021). Evidence is not in "approximate balance" or "nearly equal" when the evidence persuasively favors one side or the other. Id.

Service connection for tinnitus 

The Veteran contends that he has tinnitus that had onset in or is otherwise related to service. The Veteran indicated that he was exposed to acoustic trauma from jets, generators, ramset nail guns and needle guns, constant drilling with equipment installation at the Pentagon, and rifles and machine guns during basic training.  

Service treatment records show no complaints of hearing loss or ear problems on service entry or separation.

In February 2021 the Veteran underwent a VA Hearing Loss and Tinnitus examination in which the examiner confirmed recurrent tinnitus. The Veteran described the onset and circumstances as unknown and the current condition as daily and intermittent. The examiner provided two conclusions in the examination report. First, the Veteran had a diagnosis of clinical hearing loss, such that his tinnitus is at least as likely as not (50% probability or greater) a symptom associated with the hearing loss, as tinnitus is known to be a symptom associated with hearing loss. Second, the examiner found that in the absence of a significant permanent shift in hearing thresholds between service entry and separation, it is less likely than not that the Veteran's clinical hearing loss and tinnitus in turn is related to military noise exposure. 

In a May 2021 VA Hearing Loss and Tinnitus examination, the examiner confirmed that the onset of the Veteran's tinnitus was in 1990, that it is constant, and that his tinnitus was at least as likely as not a symptom of his hearing loss, as tinnitus is known to be a symptom associated with hearing loss. The examiner again found that in the absence of significant shifts in hearing thresholds in service or complaints of tinnitus in service, there is no nexus between auditory damage in service to relate to the current report of tinnitus. 

In the October 2021 rating decision, the RO made favorable findings of a current diagnosis of tinnitus; and as the Veteran's MOS of communications-cable and systems craftsman entailed maintaining base telephone communications, a low probability of hazardous noise exposure. Despite the Veteran's MOS role is assigned a low probability for hazardous noise exposure; the Veteran's entire period of service with diagnosed tinnitus are subject to consideration for presumptive service connection as a chronic disease. The remaining determination for the Board with the requirements of a current diagnosis and an in-service injury met, is a nexus between the current diagnosis and inservice injury. 

In June 2023, the Veteran submitted a medical opinion by a private clinician, P.D., APRN who offered her opinion that it is at least as likely as not (a 50/50 probability) that the Veteran's current bilateral tinnitus condition is due to noise exposures during his active service. The examiner reviewed the Veteran's personnel records noting his MOS as a telephone switch technician and his lay statement in which he indicated that he was frequently exposed to noise trauma from jets, generators, ramset nail guns and needle guns, constant drilling with equipment installation at the Pentagon, and rifles and machine guns during basic training and was not issued hearing protection. The examiner noted that while the Veteran's MOS had a lower probability of hearing trauma, his combined exposures to varying repetitive noise levels account for hearing trauma. Further, an audiogram can be normal months or even years following acoustic trauma before hearing loss and tinnitus develops due to cochlear deterioration and damage that is undetectable by audiogram. Research has shown that subjects who have normal audiometric thresholds have been shown to have outer hair cell damage and dead cochlea regions. The examiner provided complete citations to a number of professional treatises to support the opinion provided.  The Study of Otoacoustic Emissions and the Suppression of Otoacoustic Emissions in Subjects with tinnitus and Normal Hearing: An Insight to Tinnitus Etiology, International Archives of Otorhinolaryngology, 19(2), p. 171-175 (2015). Evidence indicates that subtle changes in cochlear function can be detected by otoacoustic emissions testing even before the occurrence of significant changes in the patient's audiogram.

In conclusion, the examiner's report noted that acoustic trauma, particularly frequent and repetitive, is linked to hearing loss and tinnitus, even years after the actual exposure, related to an acceleration of age-related hearing loss due to the prior noise exposure at an earlier time and age. 

In evaluating the evidence, the Board has been charged with the duty to assess the credibility and weight given to evidence. Davidson v. Shinseki, 581 F. 3d 1313 (Fed. Cir. 2009); Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F. 3d 1372 (Fed. Cir. 2007). Indeed, the Court has declared that in adjudicating a claim, the Board has the responsibility to do so. Bryan v. West, 13 Vet. App. 482, 488-89 (2000). In doing so, the Board is free to favor one medical opinion over another, provided it offers an adequate basis for doing so. Owens v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 429, 433 (1995). 

Accordingly, the Board finds that the evidence in favor of service connection for tinnitus approximates an even balance for and against service connection. As such, the Veteran is afforded the benefit of the doubt, and service connection is granted for bilateral tinnitus. Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 781 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

 

 

DUSTIN L. WARE

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Adams Hill, Denise

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.