Citation Nr: A25034433
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 220921-279492
DATE: April 15, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to an increased disability rating in excess of 10 percent for right knee condition, to include patellofemoral pain syndrome, limitation of flexion, limitation of extension, crepitus, and instability, is remanded.

Entitlement to an increased disability rating in excess of 10 percent for left knee condition, to include patellofemoral pain syndrome, limitation of flexion, limitation of extension, crepitus, and instability, is remanded.

Entitlement to a total disability rating based on individual unemployability (TDIU) is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the Army from January 2005 to May 2009.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an August 2022 Higher-level Review rating decision by the Regional Office (RO) which considered the evidence of record at the December 2021 rating decision.

In the September 2022 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the December 2021 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

1. Entitlement to an increased disability rating in excess of 10 percent for right knee condition, to include patellofemoral pain syndrome, limitation of flexion, limitation of extension, crepitus, and instability, is remanded.

2. Entitlement to an increased disability rating in excess of 10 percent for left knee condition, to include patellofemoral pain syndrome, limitation of flexion, limitation of extension, crepitus, and instability, is remanded.

Remand is permitted only to correct pre-decisional duty to assist errors, or for correction of any other error by the agency of original jurisdiction in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty if correction of the error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the appellant's claim. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802. 

After review of the record, a remand is required in this case to ensure that VA's responsibilities under the duty to assist are followed and that the Veteran is afforded every possible consideration. 38 U.S.C. § 5103(a); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159. The VA has a duty to assist veterans in developing their claims for benefits. 38 C.F.R. § 3.159.  

The Veteran contends his bilateral knee disability is not adequately addressed by the current 10 percent rating under diagnostic code 5260. See Notice of Disagreement, September 2022. He asserts that his knees should be separately rated based on limitation of flexion, limitation of extension and instability, not just pain. He experiences symptoms of weakness, stiffness, lack of endurance, locking, fatigability, tenderness and pain. See VA knee examination, October 2010. 

In general, all disabilities, including those arising from a single disease entity, are rated separately, and all disability ratings are then combined in accordance with 38 C.F.R. § 4.25.  Pyramiding, the rating of the same disability, or the same manifestation of a disability, under different DCs, is to be avoided when rating a veteran's service-connected disabilities.  38 C.F.R. § 4.14.  It is possible for a veteran to have separate and distinct manifestations from the same injury which would permit rating under several DCs; however, the critical element in permitting the assignment of several ratings under various DCs is that none of the symptomatology for any one of the conditions is duplicative or overlapping with the symptomatology of the other condition.  Esteban v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 259, 261-62 (1994); Lyles v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 107 (2017) (holding that 38 C.F.R. § 4.14 prohibits compensating a veteran twice for the same symptoms or functional impairment). 

VA's General Counsel has held that a claimant who has limitation of flexion, limitation of extension and instability of the knee may be rated separately under DCs 5260, 5261, and 5257, respectively. VAOPGCPREC 9-2004; 69 Fed. Reg. 59,990 (2004).

When rating disabilities of the musculoskeletal system, 38 C.F.R. § 4.40 allows for consideration of functional loss due to pain and weakness causing additional disability beyond that reflected on range of motion measurements.  DeLuca v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 202 (1995).  Further, 38 C.F.R. § 4.45 provides that consideration also be given to decreased movement, weakened movement, excess fatigability, incoordination, and pain on movement, swelling, and deformity or atrophy of disuse.  Painful motion is considered limited motion at the point that pain actually sets in.  See VAOPGCPREC 9-98. 

Limitation of flexion of the knee results in a noncompensable rating when flexion is limited to 60 degrees or greater. Flexion limited to 45 degrees is assigned a 10 percent rating. Flexion limited to 30 degrees is assigned a 20 percent rating. Flexion limited to 15 degrees is assigned a 30 percent rating. Id., DC 5260.

Limitation of extension to 5 degrees or less is assigned a noncompensable rating. Extension limited to 10 degrees is assigned a 10 percent rating. Extension limited to 15 degrees is assigned a 20 percent rating. Extension limited to 20 degrees is assigned a 30 percent rating. Extension limited to 30 degrees is assigned a 40 percent rating. Finally, extension limited to 45 degrees or greater is assigned a 50 percent rating. Id., DC 5261.

When slight impairment of the knee due to recurrent subluxation or lateral instability is found, a 10 percent rating is assigned. Moderate recurrent subluxation or lateral instability is granted a 20 percent rating. Severe recurrent subluxation or lateral instability is assigned a 30 percent rating. Id., DC 5257.

In Correia v. McDonald, 28 Vet. App. 158 (2016), the Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) held that the final sentence of 38 C.F.R. § 4.59 requires that the examiner record the results of range of motion testing "for pain on both active and passive motion [and] in weight-bearing and non-weight-bearing."

Imaging from September 2010 revealed mild suprapatellar spurring of the right knee.

In October 2010, the Veteran underwent an initial VA Knee examination which found decreased ROM of the right knee on flexion of 120 to 0 on extension, the left knee had full ROM. The Veteran reported symptoms of weakness, stiffness, lack of endurance, locking, fatigability, tenderness and pain. He did not report swelling, heat, redness, giving way, deformity, drainage, effusion, subluxation and dislocation. During flare ups the Veteran experienced difficulty bending the knee, squatting, walking and doing stairs.

In October 2021, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination to address the severity of his service-connected bilateral knee disability. The Veteran was diagnosed with patellofemoral pain syndrome of both knees. He was noted as having a history of effusion occasionally. The Veteran reported current symptoms of chronic pain, swelling, limited extended standing, walking and climbing. He treated the symptoms with Reston medications. The examiner found objective evidence of moderate crepitus. The Veteran's initial range of motion (ROM) was measured as 120 on flexion and extension, the ROM decreased to 110 during flares and repeated use over time. The Veteran was not found to have ankylosis, subluxation, or instability. 

When the Secretary provides a veteran with a VA medical examination or opinion, it must be adequate. A medical opinion is adequate when it is based upon consideration of the veteran's prior medical history and describes the disability in detail sufficient for the Board's evaluation of the claimed disability to be fully informed.  Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007); See also Martinak v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 447 (2007).  

Unfortunately, the examination is not adequate, and remand is needed to correct predecisional duty to assist errors. The post-remand examiner must ask the Veteran whether (and, if so, how) symptoms of weakened movement, excess fatigability, incoordination, and/or pain on movement have resulted in the functional loss of the knees. Specifically, the examiner should ask the Veteran about the totality of his knee symptoms besides pain and how they affect his daily life. The examiner must also elicit information regarding the Veteran's reports of instability in the knees and then indicate the degree of any lateral instability or recurrent subluxation in each knee. Further, the examination report reflects that the Veteran's range of motion in the left knee was tested on both active and passive motion and that the examiner stated that there was pain on active and passive motion. While the examiner noted pain on active and passive motion, the examiner did not specify at which point the pain occurred. It is also unclear whether the Veteran's ROM was tested on weight-bearing and nonweight-bearing. Thus, the examination is insufficient to satisfy Correia and a remand.

Finally, if not specifically contemplated by the rating criteria, a higher rating may not be denied based on relief provided by medication. Jones v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 56, 63 (2012). The holding of Jones v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 56 (2012), applies when evaluating musculoskeletal disabilities if the relevant Diagnostic Code (DC) does not reference medication use. Ingram v. Collins, 2025 U.S. App. Vet. Claims LEXIS 327. The Veteran is rated under 5260 for limitation of flexion which does not contemplate medication.

The Board, thus, finds that a remand is needed to obtain a new medical examination and opinions in compliance with the below directives for the Veteran's current bilateral knee condition.

3. Entitlement to a total disability rating based on individual unemployability (TDIU) is remanded.

The Veteran has raised the claim of TDIU as part of the increased rating claim in his July 2022 request for HLR. 

It is the established policy of VA that all veterans who are unable to secure and follow a substantially gainful occupation by reason of service-connected disabilities shall be rated as totally disabled. 38 C.F.R. § 4.16. Substantially gainful employment is that employment that is ordinarily followed by the nondisabled to earn their livelihoods with earnings common to the particular occupation in the community where the veteran resides. Moore v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 356 (1991). Marginal employment will not be considered substantially gainful employment. 38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a). A TDIU may be assigned, if the scheduler rating is less than total, when the disabled person is, in the judgment of the rating agency, unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation as a result of service-connected disabilities, provided that if there is only one such disability it is ratable at 60 percent or more, and that if there are two or more such disabilities at least one is ratable at 40 percent or more and the combined rating is 70 percent or more. 38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a).

At the October 2021 Knee VA examination, the examiner noted that the Veteran's knee condition impacted his ability to perform occupational tasks, in that the Veteran was limited in his ability to stand for extended periods, ability to walk and climb. 

Although the Veteran is now in receipt of a combined 100 percent rating for the entire period on appeal, TDIU is not moot. Because if a single disability rated 60 percent or greater, by itself, warrants TDIU, the Veteran is potentially eligible for the additional award of special monthly compensation at the housebound rate (SMC(s)). To afford the Veteran the greatest opportunity to maximize benefits, Bradley v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 280 (2008) and Buie v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 242, 248 (2010), the Board finds that TDIU is inextricably intertwined with the other remanded issue; remand of this claim is also required. Harris v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 180 (1991).

As the Veteran has raised the issue of TDIU an attempt should be made by the AOJ to obtain a completed VA Form 21-8940 from the Veteran.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1.  Schedule the Veteran for an examination by an appropriate clinician to determine the current severity of his service-connected bilateral knee condition. The examiner should provide a full description of the disability and report all signs and symptoms necessary for evaluating the Veteran's disability.

2. The examiner must ask the Veteran whether (and, if so, how) symptoms of weakened movement, excess fatigability, incoordination, and/or pain on movement have resulted in the functional loss of the knees. 

3. The examiner must elicit information regarding the Veteran's reports of instability in the knees and then indicate the degree of any lateral instability or recurrent subluxation in each knee.

4. The examiner must test the Veteran's active motion, passive motion, and pain with weight-bearing and without weight-bearing and specify the point in which pain begins. If it is not possible to provide a specific measurement without speculation, the examiner should explain why.

5. The examiner should offer an opinion regarding the use of pain medication, specifically Reston, and its effects on the Veteran's bilateral knee disability.  

A rationale for the opinions in the examination report must be provided. If the examiner is unable to reach an opinion without resort to speculation, he or she should explain the reasons for this inability and comment on whether any further tests, evidence or information would be useful in rendering an opinion.

6. Provide the Veteran with a VA form 21-8940, and instruct him to fill it out and return it to the RO. The Veteran is asked to complete the form for all of the years since his claim.

 

 

Thomas L. English

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	C. Leuer, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.