Citation Nr: A25034802
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 240709-453660
DATE: April 15, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to a rating for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) in excess of 70 percent prior to April 29, 2021, is denied.  

A total disability rating based upon individual unemployability due to one service-connected disability (TDIU) is granted.  

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) is remanded.  

Entitlement to special monthly compensation (SMC) under 38 U.S.C. § 1114(s) is remanded.  

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. Prior to April 29, 2021, the Veteran's PTSD disability picture was best characterized as occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas; total occupational and social impairment was not shown.  

2. The probative evidence of record is in relative equipoise as to the Veteran being unable to secure or follow substantially gainful employment as a result of the one service-connected disability of PTSD.  

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. Entitlement to a rating in excess of 70 percent for PTSD prior to April 29, 2021, is not warranted.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7, 4.126, 4.130, Code 9411.  

2. The criteria for a TDIU based on one disability (PTSD) have been met.            38 U.S.C. § 1114(s); Bradley v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 280, 291-92 (2008); Buie v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 242, 250-51 (2010).  

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The appellant is a Veteran who served on active duty from December 1985 to November 1988.  This matter is before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a July 2023 higher level review rating decision, which reviewed a January 2023 rating decision.  [The Board notes, regarding procedural history, which will be discussed in more detail below, that the Veteran submitted an intent to file on April 15, 2021, and submitted a claim for the above issues in May 2021.  A June 2021 rating decision, in part, continued PTSD at 70 percent, and denied service connection for GERD.  In February 2022 the Veteran filed a supplemental claim seeking, in part, an increased rating for PTSD, service connection for GERD, and TDIU.  Then, a January 2023 rating decision, in part, increased the rating for PTSD to 100 percent, effective June 22, 2022, continued the denial of service connection for GERD, and determined that TDIU was moot.  Subsequently, a July 2023 higher level review decision granted an earlier effective date of April 29, 2021, for the 100 percent rating for PTSD.]  In July 2024, the Veteran timely appealed the July 2023 rating decision to the Board by submitting a VA Form 10182 and requested direct review by the Board.  Therefore, the Board's review is limited to evidence on record at the time of the January 2023 rating decision.  

Additionally, the Board notes that on his July 2024 VA Form 10182, the Veteran listed one of the issues as "effective date PTSD" which suggests that the Veteran was seeking an earlier effective date for service connection for his PTSD.  However, in an April 2023 statement by the Veteran's attorney submitted with the April 2023 higher level review request, the attorney indicated that he was requesting an earlier effective date for his PTSD of April 15, 2020, which is one year prior to his increased rating claim, indicating that the Veteran is seeking a 100 percent rating back to April 15, 2020, and not seeking an earlier effective date for service connection for PTSD.  There is no discussion or argument regarding entitlement to an earlier effective date for the award of service connection for PTSD, only ongoing argument regarding the rating assigned for PTSD.  See Rudd v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 286, 299-300 (2006).  For these reasons, the Board finds that the issue of an earlier effective date for the award of service connection for PTSD is not before the Board for appellate consideration.  

1. Entitlement to a rating for PTSD in excess of 70 percent prior to April 29, 2021, is denied.  

As noted above, the Veteran submitted an intent to file on April 15, 2021, and submitted a claim seeking an increased rating for PTSD in May 2021.  A June 2021 rating decision, in part, continued PTSD at 70 percent, and in February 2022 the Veteran filed a supplemental claim seeking, in part, an increased rating for PTSD.  Then, a January 2023 rating decision, in part, increased the rating for PTSD to 100 percent, effective June 22, 2022.  Subsequently, a July 2023 higher level review decision granted an earlier effective date of April 29, 2021, for the 100 percent rating for PTSD.  

The governing law and regulations generally provide that the effective date of an evaluation and award of compensation based on a claim for increase will be the date of receipt of the claim or the date entitlement arose, whichever is the later, the exception being that if an increase in disability is shown during the year preceding the filing of a claim, the increase may be awarded from the date on which the increase in severity is shown.  38 U.S.C. § 5110(b)(3); 38 C.F.R. § 3.400.  

However, a Veteran can preserve the effective date by continuously pursuing a claim or issue.  This is accomplished in the AMA by filing an appropriate administrative review option to an AMA decision as specified in 38 C.F.R.             § 3.2500(c) within one year of the issuance of the decision (or the time period specified in § 3.2500(f), as applicable to simultaneously contested claims).  If a claim is continuously pursued, it will be considered filed as of the date of the first claim in the continuously pursued chain, not the date the most recent request for review was received.  38 C.F.R. §§ 3.400, 3.2500(c).  

In this case, the Board finds that the Veteran has continuously pursued the assignment of a higher rating and earlier effective date through Decision Review Requests (Higher Level Review and Supplemental Claims) in the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA) system since the June 2021 rating decision.  Accordingly, the earliest possible effective date for the award of a higher rating for the Veteran's PTSD is April 15, 2020, a year prior to the Veteran's April 15, 2021, intent to file.  

The Veteran's PTSD is rated under the criteria in Code 9411 (and the criteria in the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders (General Formula)).  A 70 percent rating is warranted when there is occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a worklike setting); inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.  

A 100 percent rating is warranted for total occupational and social impairment due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (ADLs) (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name.  38 C.F.R. § 4.130, Code 9411.  

VA must consider all symptoms of a claimant's condition that affect the level of occupational and social impairment.  Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112 (Fed. Cir. 2013).  The use of the term "such as" in 38 C.F.R. § 4.130 demonstrates that the symptoms listed after that phrase are not intended to constitute an exhaustive list, but rather are to serve as examples of the type and degree of the symptoms, or their effects, that would justify a particular rating.  Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436 (2002).  Accordingly, the evidence considered in determining the level of impairment from PTSD under 38 C.F.R. § 4.130 is not restricted to the symptoms listed in the General Rating Formula.  Instead, VA must consider all symptoms of a claimant's condition that affect occupational and social function.  When evaluating a mental disorder, the rating agency shall consider the frequency, severity, and duration of psychiatric symptoms, length of remissions, and the Veteran's capacity for adjustment during periods of remission.  38 C.F.R.        § 4.126(a).  When evaluating the level of disability from a mental disorder, the rating agency will consider the extent of social impairment but shall not assign a rating solely on the basis of social impairment.  38 C.F.R. § 4.126(b).  

When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding the merits of an issue material to the determination of the matter, the benefit of the doubt in resolving each such issue shall be given to the claimant.  38 U.S.C.           § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.  Where there is a question as to which of two ratings shall be assigned, the higher criteria will be assigned if the disability more closely approximates the criteria for that rating.  Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7.  

An April 2020 VA treatment record notes that the Veteran reported that his mood was ok, and that although his sleep was good, he still woke up every two hours.  He related that he was having less nightmares, still had flashbacks, and had a good energy level.  The Veteran reported that he sometimes angered easily but that his anger episodes had decreased.  He related that he was utilizing coping skills that he learned in group therapy.  

A July 2020 VA suicide screen notes that the Veteran reported that over the past month he had not wished he was dead or wished that he could go to sleep and not wake up, and he indicated that over the past month he had not had any actual thoughts of killing himself.  

A July 2020 VA treatment record notes that the Veteran reported that his sleep, energy, and interest, were ok and that he was waiting to go to work.  He related that he wanted to have something to do and that he had been having less nightmares.  The Veteran reported that he had been riding bikes 2-3 miles daily with his son.  

A September 2020 VA health survey notes that the Veteran indicated that he was not limited in moderate activities and that he felt that he had accomplished less than he would have liked in his work or other daily activities only "a little of the time" over the past 4 weeks.  He related that he had felt calm and peaceful most of the time over the past 4 weeks and that, compared to one year ago, his emotional problems were much better.  

A December 2020 VA treatment record notes that the Veteran reported that he was doing well on his current psychiatric medications.  He related that his mood was good and that he was sleeping well.  The Veteran reported that he was currently working and that although he still had nightmares, he was not having any delusions, suicidal thoughts, or homicidal thoughts.  

A February 2021 VA treatment record notes that the Veteran reported that he had started a new job in December 2020.  

An April 2021 VA treatment record notes that the Veteran denied any thoughts of hurting himself or others.  

Prior to April 29, 2021, the Board finds that the Veteran's PTSD disability picture is best characterized as approximating occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, warranting a 70 percent rating, (but not total occupational and social impairment, so as to warrant a 100 percent rating).  

A psychiatric disability picture of less that total impairment is suggested by the level of functioning related to employment and social relations.  During the period on appeal, prior to April 29, 2021, the Veteran had a stable relationship with his son and engaged in daily activities with him for part of that time.  He was able to maintain employment until April 28, 2021, (as noted in his February 2022 TDIU claim), and he was able to perform ADLs (evidence of actual functioning at such times).  Significantly, symptoms noted during the evaluation period also do not suggest total impairment.  Gross impairment in thought process or persistent delusions and hallucinations were not clinically noted.  The Veteran did not report any hallucinations during the period on appeal, and there was no known evidence to suggest that the Veteran was at risk for imminent harm to self or others at that time.  Nor did he display grossly inappropriate behavior, substantial memory loss, or an inability to tend to minimal hygiene.  Also, while the Veteran reported anger episodes, such episodes does not appear to have resulted in his being considered a persistent danger to himself or others.  Therefore, a PTSD disability picture of total occupational and social impairment is not shown during the period on appeal, prior to April 29, 2021, and a schedular 100 percent rating is not warranted.  

2. A TDIU rating due to one service-connected disability is granted.  

The Veteran has been assigned a 100 percent rating for his PTSD from April 29, 2021, and the Regional Office (RO), in a July 2023 higher level review decision, found that entitlement to a TDIU rating remained moot.  However, the receipt of a 100 percent schedular rating for a service-connected disability does not necessarily render moot any pending claim for a TDIU.  Bradley v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 280, 291-92 (2008).  Although no additional disability compensation may be paid when a total schedular disability rating is already in effect, Bradley recognizes that a separate award of a TDIU predicated on a single disability may form the basis for an award of special monthly compensation under 38 U.S.C. § 1114(s).  See Id.  Thus, the CAVC reasoned, it might benefit the Veteran to retain the TDIU rating, even where a 100 percent schedular rating has also been granted.  Buie v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 242, 250-51 (2010) (requiring VA to assess all of the claimant's disabilities to determine whether entitlement to SMC under 38 U.S.C. § 1114(s) is established whenever a Veteran with a total disability rating is subsequently awarded service connection for any additional disability or disabilities even in the absence of an express claim for SMC).  

As noted above, the evidence of record discloses that the Veteran has been in receipt of a 100 percent schedular disability rating effective from April 29, 2021.  Other that PTSD, which the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) granted a 100 percent rating (effective from April 29, 2021), the Veteran is only service-connected for erectile dysfunction (at 0 percent, effective April 15, 2021) and hypertension (at 0 percent, effective August 10, 2022).  As discussed in further detail below, the Veteran's claim seeking service connection for GERD is being remanded for further development.  

Regarding the issue of the PSTD disability's impact on the Veteran's ability to obtain and sustain substantially gainful employment, the Board notes that under    38 C.F.R. § 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411, a 100 percent schedular rating most generally is productive of, [t]otal occupational and social impairment due to gross impairment in thought processes or communication; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living, including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene; and memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name.  Id.  

While this degree of severity is not dispositive of a grant of a TDIU under the provisions laid out in Bradley and Buie, it is of utmost relevance for the precise reasons which the CAVC delineated in these decisions.  Again, the Board must emphasize that a 100 percent rating for a service-connected disability does not necessarily render moot any pending claim for a TDIU.  Bradley, 22 Vet. App. 280; Buie, 24 Vet. App. 242.  

On June 2021 VA PTSD examination, the examiner opined that the Veteran's PTSD disability picture was best characterized as occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.  Symptoms due to PTSD included difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work like setting, and intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living, including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene.  

In his February 2022 TDIU claim, the Veteran asserted that his PTSD keeps him from securing or following any substantially gainful occupation.  He related that he last worked full time on April 28, 2021, and that his last job was in housekeeping from December 2020 to April 2021.  The Veteran reported that his highest gross earnings per month from that job were $2960.00 per month.  

On June 2022 VA PTSD examination, the examiner opined that the Veteran's PTSD disability picture was best characterized as occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas.  The Veteran reported that he has not gotten along with people he has worked with and has been fired from jobs due to his behavior and attitude.  He related that he been out of work since February 2021, and that he would just leave jobs and would not return.  Symptoms due to his PTSD included difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work like setting, suicidal ideation, impaired impulse control, such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence, persistent danger of hurting self or others, neglect of personal appearance and hygiene, and intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living, including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene.  

Upon careful consideration of the deterioration of the Veteran's mental health status and the consequential impact upon his social and occupation functionality, the Board finds that his PTSD supports a grant of a TDIU for this one service-connected disability, Bradley, 22 Vet. App. 280.  As such, the weight of competent and probative evidence supports a separate award of a TDIU predicated on PTSD as the basis for a potential award of special monthly compensation under 38 U.S.C. § 1114(s).  Bradley, 22 Vet. App. 280.  

REASONS FOR REMAND

3. Entitlement to service connection for GERD.  

The Veteran's claim seeking service connection for GERD has been denied because his service treatment records (STRs) do not show complaints of, treatment for, or a diagnosis of GERD during his service and because he did not have a current diagnosis of GERD.  

However, treatment records prior to, and during, the period on appeal seem to suggest that the Veteran has been diagnosed with GERD.  

An October 2009 VA treatment record notes that the Veteran reported abdominal pain, and the impression was possible GERD.  

A December 2014 VA treatment record notes that the Veteran reported acid reflux for the past few weeks and that the assessment was GERD.  

A July 2015 VA treatment record notes an assessment of GERD.  

A September 2020 VA treatment record notes that the Veteran received treatment for GERD.  He reported right upper quadrant abdominal pain which was determined to likely be GERD due to the use of NSAIDs and vinegar.  

An October 2020 VA treatment record notes that the Veteran had been taking proton pump inhibitors for GERD.  

In a February 2022 statement, the Veteran reported that his stomach gets so messed up from his PTSD that he has diarrhea on a regular basis.  

On June 2022 VA PTSD examination, it was noted that medical diagnoses relevant to the understanding or management of the Veteran's mental health disorder included, in part, stomach problems, GERD, and diarrhea.  

A July 2024 VA Toxic Exposure Risk Assessment (TERA) memorandum notes that the Veteran participated in a TERA due to exposure to lubricants, fuels, fumes, chemicals, and combustibles.  

The Board finds that the Veteran's February 2022 statement and the examiner's indication on June 2022 VA PTSD examination that medical diagnoses relevant to the understanding or management of the Veteran's mental health disorder included, in part, stomach problems, GERD, and diarrhea, raised an alternative theory of entitlement to service connection based on secondary service connection (i.e., that GERD is secondary to his PTSD).  However, no VA examiner has opined on whether the Veteran's GERD was caused or aggravated by his service-connected PTSD.  Therefore, based on the evidence of record, to specifically include the treatment records which suggest that the Veteran is receiving treatment for GERD and that an alternate theory of service connection based on secondary service connection was raised, the Board finds RO's failure to schedule and conduct an examination to be a pre-decisional duty to assist error, requiring remand under the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA) and McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006).  

The Board also notes, regarding secondary service connection, that in 2023, Spicer v. McDonough was decided, which changed the analysis and standard for determining whether a condition is service connected on a secondary basis.  Spicer, 61 F.4th 1360 (Fed. Cir. 2023).  In Spicer, the Federal Circuit invalidated the requirement of "proximate cause" and instead held "but for" causation is enough to show entitlement to secondary service connection.  Id.  

The Board additionally notes that the opinion furnished in response to the examination will address the Veteran's exposure to toxic substances in light of the July 2024 TERA memorandum finding that the Veteran participated in a TERA.  

4. Entitlement to SMC under 38 U.S.C. § 1114(s).  

SMC at the housebound rate is payable where a Veteran has a single service-connected disability rated at 100 percent, and has an additional, service-connected disability or disabilities independently ratable at 60 percent, that are separate and distinct from the 100 percent service-connected disability and involve different anatomical segments or bodily systems.  38 U.S.C. § 1114(s); 38 C.F.R. § 3.350 (i).  Under Bradley, a TDIU may be warranted in addition to a schedular 100 percent evaluation if the TDIU could be granted for a disability other than the disability for which a 100 percent schedular rating was in effect.  The CAVC reasoned that under such circumstances, there would be no duplicate counting of disabilities.  See Bradley v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 280, 293-94 (2008); see also Buie v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 242, 248 (2010).  

The Board notes that this decision has granted TDIU due to one service-connected disability (the Veteran's PTSD).  However, the issue of entitlement to SMC under 38 U.S.C. § 1114(s) is inextricably intertwined with the issue of entitlement to service connection for GERD since a grant of service connection could potentially allow for a grant of SMC under 38 U.S.C. § 1114(s); thus, these issues must be remanded concurrently.  Harris v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 180, 183 (issues are "inextricably intertwined" when a decision on one issue would have a "significant impact" on a Veteran's claim for the second issue).  

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Arrange for a VA examination of the Veteran to establish the presence and ascertain the likely etiology of his GERD.  On examination of the Veteran, the examiner should offer opinions that respond to the following:

(a) Confirm the presence of, and identify by diagnosis, any GERD diagnosed during the period on appeal.  The examiner should specifically acknowledge the September 2020 VA treatment record which notes that the Veteran received treatment for GERD, an October 2020 VA treatment record which notes that the Veteran had been taking proton pump inhibitors for GERD, and the notation on June 2022 VA PTSD examination, that medical diagnoses relevant to the understanding or management of the Veteran's mental health disorder included, in part, stomach problems, GERD, and diarrhea.  

(b) Identify the likely etiology for the Veteran's GERD.  Specifically, is it at least as likely as not that it is related directly to his service (due to exposure to certain environmental hazards, such as lubricants, fuels, fumes, chemicals, and combustibles therein)?  

(c) If the GERD is found to be less likely than not directly related to his service, opine whether it is at least as likely as not that the GERD was caused or aggravated by the Veteran's service-connected PTSD, to include any medications taken for the PTSD.  In addressing aggravation, the provider must indicate whether (1) Is it at least as likely as not that, but for the Veteran's service-connected PTSD, he would not have GERD?  (2) Is it at least as likely as not that the Veteran's GERD would be less severe and result in less functional impairment but for his service-connected PTSD and/or medications for PTSD?

(d) If aggravation is shown, the provider should indicate to the extent possible, the baseline level of severity of the GERD (that is, the approximate level of severity of the disorder prior to the onset of the aggravation).  

(e) If the Veteran's PTSD did not cause or aggravate the GERD, identify the etiology for the GERD that is considered to be more likely (to the extent the record permits), and explain why that is so.  

All opinions must include rationale.  

After completion of the above, readjudicate the claims, to include the inextricably intertwined issues of entitlement to service connection for GERD and SMC under           38 U.S.C. § 1114(s).  

 

 

John R. Doolittle, II

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Bayles, James J.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.