Citation Nr: A25034991
Decision Date: 04/16/25	Archive Date: 04/16/25

DOCKET NO. 240813-465198
DATE: April 16, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for migraine headaches is granted.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea, to include as secondary to service-connected posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) with alcohol use disorder, is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

Resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Veteran's migraine headaches had their onset during her active duty service.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for service connection for migraine headaches have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the U.S. Army from October 2003 to March 2004 and from December 2007 to December 2008.

The rating decision on appeal was issued in December 2023 and constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.  

In the August 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the December 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim of service connection for migraine headaches, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of service connection for sleep apnea, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of that claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Service connection for migraine headaches. 

The Veteran contends she developed migraine headaches as a result of  toxic exposures while deployed to Iraq. Alternatively, she asserts that she developed headaches while mobilized to New Orleans after Hurricane Katrina. Specifically, she claims she experienced headaches after working long hours, sleeping four hours a day next to a generator, working in the sun, and not drinking enough water. See June 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ; June 2023 VA Form 4138.

Service connection may be granted for disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service. 38 U.S.C. §§1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §3.303. Generally, establishing service connection requires evidence of:   (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166-67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

Pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (b), where a chronic disease is shown as such in service, subsequent manifestations of the same chronic disease are generally service connected.  If a chronic disease is noted in service but chronicity in service is not adequately supported, a showing of continuity of symptomatology after separation is required.  Entitlement to service connection based on chronicity or continuity of symptomatology pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (b) applies only when the disability for which the Veteran is claiming compensation is due to a disease enumerated on the list of chronic diseases in 38 U.S.C.A. § 1101 (3) or 38 C.F.R. § 3.309 (a).  Walker v. Shinseki, 708 F.3d 1331 (Fed. Cir. 2013).  Migraine headaches are an organic disease of the nervous system and therefore a chronic disease.

Furthermore, 38 U.S.C. 1154 (b) allows a combat veteran to use satisfactory lay or other evidence to establish that he was injured or incurred a disability while on active duty, even in cases where there is no official record that such injury or disability occurred.  38 U.S.C. § 1154 (b).  However, 38 U.S.C. § 1154 (b) does not eliminate the need for evidence of a nexus; it merely reduces, for veterans who have engaged in combat with the enemy, the burden of presenting evidence of incurrence or aggravation of an injury or disease in-service.  See Collette v. Brown, 82 F.3d 389, 392 (Fed. Cir. 1996).  

As an initial matter, the December 2023 rating decision on appeal favorably established that (1) the Veteran has been diagnosed with migraine headaches; (2) migraine headaches are a chronic disease that may be presumptively linked to military service; and (3) the Veteran was exposed to environmental hazards during her deployment. Absent clear and unmistakable evidence to the contrary, the Board is bound by these favorable findings. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104 (c).

The Veteran was a member of the Indiana National Guard from March 2003 to April 2012. See August 2020 service record. In December 2007, she was mobilized to Southwest Asia in support of Operation Iraqi Freedom for a period of time not to exceed 400 days. See December 2007 orders. In August 2008, the Veteran was awarded the Combat Action Badge "for engaging or being engaged by the enemy." See August 2008 orders. 

In a July 2020 VA treatment record, the Veteran described being asleep in Iraq when a mortar exploded in the area, blowing open the door to her sleeping quarters. The VA treatment provider noted that the Veteran endorsed headaches since that episode. See July 2020 and December 2020 VA treatment records. 

Both private and VA treatment records note the Veteran's struggle with frequent migraine headaches after her service in 2008. See e.g., February 2017 private treatment records (associated with the claims file in July 2023); July 2020; December 2020; June 2023 VA treatment records.

As such, in applying 38 U.S.C. § 1154 (b), the Board concludes there is sufficient evidence, specifically the Veteran's statements to treatment providers and her award of the Combat Action Badge, to conclude the presence of migraine headaches during her second period of service. 

As to the nexus element, the Veteran is competent to report the onset and persistent nature of her migraine headaches. See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 (Fed. Cir. 2007) (a layperson is competent to report a contemporaneous medical diagnosis).  Furthermore, the Board finds there is no evidence of record to indicate that the Veteran's lay statements concerning her chronic migraine headache symptoms after service are not credible.  See Buchanan, 451 F.3d at 1337 (holding lay evidence concerning continuity of symptoms after service, if credible, is ultimately competent, regardless of the lack of contemporaneous medical evidence).  

As for evidence weighing against the Veteran's claim, the Board acknowledges a November 2023 VA opinion and a December 2023 addendum opinion that both found no nexus between the Veteran's diagnosed migraine headaches and her toxic exposure risk activities (TERAs).  However, given the Board's finding that the Veteran's statements, as to the in-service onset of headaches and post-service continuity of symptomatology, as well as November 2023 VA opinion that found the Veteran's migraines are a medically unexplained chronic multi-symptom illness of unknown etiology  that is at least as likely as not related to her service, the Board finds the evidence is at least approximately balanced as to whether the Veteran's current disability of migraine headaches had their onset during her active duty service. Accordingly, any reasonable doubt must be resolved in favor of the Veteran and entitlement to service connection for migraine headaches is granted.  38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc) (holding exact equipoise is not required for benefit of the doubt to be applied.)

REASONS FOR REMAND

Entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea, to include as secondary to service-connected PTSD, is remanded.

The Veteran contends she experiences sleep apnea, or insomnia, as a result of exposure to toxins, including burn pits, while deployed to Iraq. Alternatively, she asserts her sleep apnea is caused or aggravated by her service-connected PTSD, with alcohol use disorder (moderate). See June 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ; June 2023 VA Form 4138. 

Under the AMA, the Board may only remand an issue for the correction of (1) duty to assist errors occurring prior to the date of the AOJ decision on appeal (i.e., pre-decisional duty to assist errors) and (2)?AOJ errors in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty, if correction of such error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the appellant's claim. ?See?38?C.F.R. §?20.802 (a).? Having reviewed the evidence of record, the Board finds that remand for pre-decisional duty to assist errors is required.

The December 2023 rating decision on appeal favorably established that (1) the Veteran has a current diagnosis of sleep apnea; (2) the Veteran was exposed to environmental hazards while deployed; and (3) the claimed primary disability of PTSD, with alcohol use disorder, is service-connected. Absent clear and unmistakable evidence to the contrary, the Board is bound by these favorable findings. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104 (c).

The Veteran's STRs are silent as to any in-service incurrence or onset of sleep apnea or sleep difficulties. 

A May 2020 VA sleep study report noted that the Veteran was referred for "evaluation of sleep apnea with the following complaints: daytime sleepiness, snoring, witnessed apnea, unrefreshing sleep, [and] frequent nocturnal arousals." See May 2022 VA polysomnography report (associated with the claims file in July 2023). 

In a November 2023 examination, the VA examiner noted that the Veteran reported that the burn pits and "inhaling the chemicals" caused her sleep apnea. However, in the accompanying opinion, the examiner claimed, "[n]o documentation in the TERA for any exposures." He then noted the lack of medical evidence of sleep difficulties in service and cited a link to the government public health website asserting that sleep apnea is not presumptively linked to burn pit exposures. Thus, the November 2023 VA examiner concluded that the Veteran's sleep apnea was not related to the Veteran's participation in an identified TERA pursuant to her status as a Veteran under 38 U.S.C. §§ 1117 and 1119. See November 2023 Sleep Apnea DBQ; November 2023 VA opinion. 

When the Secretary undertakes to provide a Veteran with a VA medical examination or opinion, it must be adequate. Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007). A medical examination or opinion is adequate "where it is based upon consideration of the veteran's prior medical history and examinations," Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 123 (2007). Generic medical treatise evidence cannot, without more, provide the medical nexus necessary to establish entitlement to benefits. Sacks v. West, 11 Vet. App. 314, 317 (1998). Additionally, a medical opinion can be inadequate as a matter of law when the rationale is based solely on general articles and does not discuss any facts pertaining to the Veteran's condition or individual circumstances. See Bailey v. O'Rourke, 30 Vet. App. 54, 60-61 (2018).

Thus, the Board finds the November 2023 VA opinion is insufficient to use in adjudicating the claim for direct service connection. First, he appeared to be uninformed as to the TERA to which the Veteran was exposed, yet then opined that it is less likely than not that the Veteran's OSA is associated with "the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments...and the synergistic, combined effect of all [TERAs] of the Veteran," he did not provide an adequate rationale or explanation as to how he came to that conclusion.  Also, although he cited to a medical article, he did not specify how it was applicable to this Veteran's claim. Moreover, the VA examiner appeared to incorrectly require the Veteran's sleep apnea be solely due to burn pit exposure rather than all toxic exposures presumed in a Veteran deployed to Southwest Asia.  The law does not require such a limited determination. Finally, the examiner's rationale included that sleep apnea is not a presumptive condition for burn pit exposure, which while true, is not dispositive of the issue.  

Thus, the Board finds that the AOJ erred in relying on the November 2023 opinion in determining direct service connection in the December 2023 rating decision on appeal. As such, remand is warranted to obtain an addendum opinion as to whether the Veteran's sleep apnea is related to her in-service TERA, including but not limited to exposure to particulate matter and burn pits, may be associated with any risk factors leading to her current sleep apnea.

Turning to the Veteran's other contention, service connection may be granted on a secondary basis for a disability that is proximately due to or aggravated beyond its natural progression by a service-connected disease or injury. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310. Establishing service connection on a secondary basis requires evidence sufficient to show that (1) a current disability exists and (2) the current disability was either (a) caused by or  (b) aggravated by a service-connected disability. Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439, 448 (1995) (en banc).

To address the Veteran's claim, VA obtained an opinion based on records review only in December 2023. The December 2023 VA clinician cited a medical study identifying various medical conditions that are risk factors in developing sleep apnea. These conditions include obesity, hypertension, craniofacial / upper airway abnormalities, chronic nasal obstruction and smoking. However, the examiner, again, did not address whether the Veteran had any of the listed risk factors and, if so, how they may have affected her sleep apnea. To the contrary, the study cited appeared to be directed towards men with sleep apnea, thus raising a question about its relevant to this Veteran. See Bailey, 30 Vet. App at 60-61. 

In addition, the December 2023 clinician's opinion regarding aggravation was cursory and not supported by adequate rationale. See El-Amin v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 136, 140 (2013). Specifically, the examiner did not address the Veteran's prior medical history or her contentions regarding sleep issues resulting from PTSD symptoms, specifically excessive alcohol use. Moreover, the examiner's rationale does not clearly distinguish between secondary service connection based on causation and aggravation.  Thus, there is an outstanding question as to whether the Veteran's alcohol use, already determined to be one of her PTSD symptoms, could have worsened her diagnosed sleep apnea. See July 2020; December 2020 VA treatment records (noting a history of excessive alcohol use); November 2022 VA treatment record (noting possible relationship between mental health condition and sleep issues). 

Finally, the Board notes that the examiner reported that the Veteran's "STRs confirm [sleep apnea] diagnosis." The Board finds this statement to be inaccurate since, as stated above, the Veteran's STRs are silent as to sleep issues. See D'Aries v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 97, 104 (2008) (finding that the Board may reject a medical opinion if it is not based on a veteran's relevant medical history).

Therefore, the Board finds the December 2023 VA opinion as to secondary service connection is also inadequate and not probative. Thus, the AOJ erred in relying on it in rendering the December 2023 rating decision on appeal. Accordingly, remand is warranted to obtain another VA opinion as to whether the Veteran's PTSD symptoms caused or aggravated her sleep apnea including, but not limited to, excessive drinking. 

Finally, the Board notes that there appears to be outstanding VA treatment records regarding the Veteran's sleep apnea. In particular, the May 2022 VA polysomnography report indicates that it is an initial report, with the final report sent to VistA imaging. The Board notes that it does not have access to documents in VistA imaging. Any VA treatment records are within VA's constructive possession and are considered potentially relevant to the issue on appeal. A remand is required to obtain them.

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain the May 2022 VA polysomnography report noted to be located in "VistA Imaging" or the "VistA Imaging Display" tool. See VA Treatment Record received June 29, 2023. 

The Board reminds the AOJ that it does not have access to the VistA Imaging system, or the VistA Imaging Display tool, so any documentation of the aforementioned records must be printed from those systems and added to the Veteran's VBMS or c-file.

2. Obtain an addendum opinion, with examination only if deemed necessary by the clinician, as to the nature and etiology of the Veteran's diagnosed sleep apnea. The entire claims file, as well as a copy of this Remand, must be made available to the examining clinician and the clinician shall indicate in the report that the claims file was reviewed. 

Thereafter, the clinician should respond to the following:

(a.) Whether it is at least as likely as not (whether the likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's OSA had its onset in, or is otherwise related to, either period of her active duty service. 

In doing so, the clinician must consider (1) the total potential exposure to particulate matter and burn pit toxins through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and (2) the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities (TERA) of the Veteran. 

This includes any potential risk factors for sleep apnea that may develop as a result of exposure to both particulate matter and burn pits during the Veteran's deployment. 

(b.) If not, the clinician should opine as to whether the Veteran's service-connected PTSD, with alcohol use disorder (including any symptoms or medications associated with her PTSD) caused the Veteran's current sleep apnea.

(c.) If not, the clinician should opine as to whether the Veteran's service-connected PTSD, with alcohol use disorder, (including any symptoms or medications associated with her PTSD) aggravated (worsened) the Veteran's current sleep apnea symptoms. 

In addressing (b.) and (c.), the clinician should address the Veteran's history of alcohol use as part of the Veteran's diagnosed PTSD and as noted in VA treatment records, including a July 2020 mental health interview.  

(Continued on the next page)

?

A fully articulated medical rationale for each opinion expressed must be set forth in the medical report. If the clinician cannot provide the requested opinions without resorting to speculation, then he/she should expressly indicate this and provide a supporting rationale as to why an opinion cannot be made without resorting to speculation.

 

 

Tiffany Dawson

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	O'Neil, A.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.