Citation Nr: A25034832
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 231109-394263
DATE: April 15, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for right knee strain (claimed as leg pain), for compensation purposes, is granted. 

Entitlement to service connection for tinnitus is granted.

Entitlement to service connection for left hip disability is denied. 

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for migraines (to include as secondary to service-connected tinnitus), and to include for treatment purposes only under Chapter 17, Title 38 U.S.C. and 38 C.F.R. § 3.360(a), is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral shoulder pain, to include for treatment purposes only under Chapter 17, Title 38 U.S.C. and 38 C.F.R. § 3.360(a), is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral elbow pain, to include for treatment purposes only under Chapter 17, Title 38 U.S.C. and 38 C.F.R. § 3.360(a), is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for right hip pain, to include for treatment purposes only under Chapter 17, Title 38 U.S.C. and 38 C.F.R. § 3.360(a), is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for back pain (to include as secondary to hip pain), and to include for treatment purposes only for under Chapter 17, Title 38 U.S.C. and 38 C.F.R. § 3.360(a), is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for left leg pain (to include as secondary to hip pain and/or service-connected right knee strain), and to include for treatment purposes only under Chapter 17, Title 38 U.S.C. and 38 C.F.R. § 3.360(a), is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral plantar fasciitis (to include as secondary to hip pain), and to include for treatment purposes only under Chapter 17, Title 38 U.S.C. and 38 C.F.R. § 3.360(a), is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran's service-connected right knee strain is resultant from an inservice injury that occurred during an honorable period of active duty for training.

2. Resolving reasonable doubt in favor of the Veteran, her tinnitus is related to her in-service noise exposure as a vehicle mechanic.

3. The record does not reflect a current diagnosis of a left hip disability.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for a right knee strain, for compensation purposes, have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.159, 3.303.

2. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for tinnitus, for compensation purposes, are met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.159, 3.303.

3. The criteria for service connection for a left hip disability have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303. 

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served in the National Guard from October 2008 to August 2014; she was discharged under other than honorable conditions.  During her service, Veteran had periods of active duty for training (ADT) and inactive duty for training (IDT) from January 23, 2009 to June 30, 2009, September 17, 2009 to September 27, 2009, July 10, 2010 to July 24, 2010, and from August 13, 2011, to August 27, 2011.

These matters come before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an October 2023 rating decision of the VA agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ).

In November 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) and elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the October 2023 AOJ decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, concerning the remanded claims, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

1. Entitlement to service connection for right knee strain (claimed as leg pain), for compensation purposes, is granted. 

The Veteran seeks entitlement to compensation benefits for her service-connected right knee disability.  In this case, in the rating decision on appeal, the Veteran was awarded service connection for a right knee disability, for treatment purposes only, based on a VA examiner's opinion that the Veteran's current disability is related to an inservice injury in April 2009.  Notably, this injury occurred during a period of ADT from which the Veteran was discharged honorably.  See October 2023 VA DoD Identity Repository (VADIR); April 2020 DPRIS at 44 (DD 214); see also 38 C.F.R. § 3.12(a); VA Gen. Coun. Prec. 6-2004 (July 12, 2004) (the character of discharge of a National Guard member who seeks disability compensation for an injury that incurred during ADT is based only on discharge or release from the ADT period).

Given that the AOJ has awarded service connection for a right knee disability related to an injury that occurred during an honorable period of ADT, the Board finds that entitlement to service connection for compensation purposes is warranted.  

2. Entitlement to service connection for tinnitus is granted.

The Veteran contends that she experiences tinnitus related to the loud noises she was exposed to in the motor pool.  See April 2023 Claim.  In her July 2023 VA examination, she reported that she could not report the specific onset of tinnitus, but it has gotten worse.  

A veteran is entitled to VA disability compensation if there is a current disability resulting from a personal injury suffered or disease contracted in the line of duty in active service, or for aggravation of a preexisting injury suffered or disease contracted in the line of duty in active service.  38 U.S.C. § 1131.

Generally, to establish a right to compensation for a present disability, a veteran must show: (1) a present disability; (2) an in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service, the so-called "nexus" requirement. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

For veterans who have served 90 days or more of active service during a war period or after December 31, 1946, certain chronic disabilities are presumed to have been incurred in service if manifest to a compensable degree within one year of discharge from service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 1112, 1137; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307, 3.309.  Bilateral sensorineural hearing loss (an "organic disease of the nervous system") is considered by VA to be a "chronic disease" listed under 38 C.F.R. § 3.309(a).  The United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) also issued a decision adding tinnitus (as an organic disease of the nervous system) to the list of disabilities explicitly recognized as "chronic" in 38 C.F.R. § 3.309(a).  See Fountain v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 258 (2015).

The Board has thoroughly reviewed all the evidence in the Veteran's claims file. Although the Board has an obligation to provide reasons and bases supporting this decision, there is no need to discuss, in detail, the evidence submitted.  See Gonzales v. West, 218 F.3d 1378, 1380-81 (Fed. Cir. 2000) (the Board must review the entire record but does not have to discuss each piece of evidence).

In making all determinations, the Board must fully consider the lay assertions of record.  A layperson is competent to report on the onset and continuity of his current symptomatology.  See Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 470 (1994) (a Veteran is competent to report on that of which he or she has personal knowledge).

When the evidence is evenly balanced or approximately so with regard to whether service connection is warranted, VA shall resolve reasonable doubt in favor of the claimant.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc).  To deny a claim on its merits, the evidence must persuasively weigh against the claim.  Id. (only when the evidence persuasively favors one side, or another is the benefit of the doubt doctrine not for application).

Following a review of the record and relevant law the Board finds that entitlement to service connection for tinnitus is warranted. 

As a preliminary matter, the Board notes that the Veteran has been awarded service connection for a right knee disability resultant from her period of ADT service from January 23, 2009, to June 30, 2009; therefore, that period it is now considered an active-duty period.

Next, a July 2023 VA examination report indicates that the Veteran is currently diagnosed with tinnitus.  The AOJ has also conceded inservice noise exposure (high).  Under the AMA, favorable findings made by the AOJ are binding on the Board absent clear and unmistakable evidence to the contrary.  Here, there is no evidence contrary to the AOJ's findings; therefore, the Board is bound by the AOJ's determinations.  Thus, the first element and second elements of service connection are met.

As for the third element of service connection, evidence of a nexus between the Veteran's tinnitus and service, the Board notes the evidence of record consists of credible statements from the Veteran.  The Veteran is competent to report that she has experienced tinnitus since service, and the Board finds her statements credible as they are not contradicted by any available evidence.  

Contrastingly, the July 2023 provided a negative nexus opinion.  The examiner explained that the Veteran had significant post-service noise exposure and her entrance and separation examinations indicated normal hearing thresholds. Furthermore, service treatment records (STRs) were negative for complaints of tinnitus or significant shifts in thresholds in service.  

The Board finds this opinion inadequate for adjudicative purposes.  The examiner fails to consider the Veteran's competent credible statements regarding continuous symptomology.  Moreover, although he states that the Veteran had post-service noise exposure, he fails to explain the relevance of this evidence with regard to whether her inservice noise exposure at least as likely as not caused her current tinnitus.  See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008)

In light of the above, having considered the evidence of record, the Board concludes that the evidence is at least, in approximate balance, as to whether the Veteran is entitled to service connection for tinnitus.  Resolving reasonable doubt in favor of the Veteran, the Board finds that her tinnitus was incurred during her period of ADT service (recognized as active duty for VA purposes) and the claim of entitlement to service connection for tinnitus is granted.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

3. Entitlement to service connection for a left hip disability is denied.

The appellant contends that she experiences left hip pain related to service.   See April 2023 Claim (seeking service connection for a bilateral hip condition).

A current diagnosis is the cornerstone of a service connection claim.  In the absence of a current disability, the first element of service connection, a claim for entitlement to service connection cannot be granted.  Brammer v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 223, 225 (1992). 

After a careful review of the record, the Board finds that entitlement to service connection for a left hip condition is not warranted as there is no medical evidence or lay statements indicating that the appellant has experienced a left hip disability or left hip pain resulting in functional impairment of earnings capacity during the appeal period, or at any time proximate thereto.  See generally Private Treatment Records. 

In this regard in July 2023 the Veteran was afforded a VA examination.  She reported an injury to her right hip during service and had no left hip complaints.  The examiner determined that there was no evidence of left hip condition such as to warrant a diagnosis.  

Given the above, the Board finds that the appellant is not currently diagnosed with a left hip disability or left hip pain resulting in functional impairment of earning capacity, and that the first element of service connection has not been met. 

In reaching this determination, the Board has considered that the appellant is competent to report observable symptoms.  See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 (Fed. Cir. 2007).  Furthermore, the appellant is competent to report a current diagnostic impression of pain.  See Charles v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 370, 374 (2002).  As such, to the extent that the appellant has asserted that she experiences pain, the Board has found such assertions credible and of probative value.  

However, although the Board finds the appellant's statements credible, considering the totality of the record, the Board finds the VA examiner's medical findings, as provided in the July 2023 examination report, in combination with the private treatment records, are more persuasive and outweigh the appellant's statements in support of her claim.  The medical examiner specifically considered the appellant's reports of symptoms to support his findings, that the Veteran is not currently diagnosed with a left hip disability.  Moreover, the Veteran does not assert, and the record does not show that any left hip pain has resulted in functional impairment of earning capacity.  

As such, the Board concludes that the appellant's has not experienced a left hip disability or left hip pain resulting in functional impairment in earning capacity during the appeal period, or proximate thereto, and entitlement to service connection must be denied.  As the persuasive evidence weighs against the appellant's claim, there is no reasonable doubt to be resolved.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to service connection for migraines (to include as secondary to service-connected tinnitus), and to include for treatment purposes only under Chapter 17, Title 38 U.S.C. and 38 C.F.R. § 3.360(a), is remanded.

The Veteran contends that she experiences migraines, with onset around 2010.  She associated her headaches with either the use of faulty or defective earplugs during service, or with her tinnitus.  See July 2023 VA Headaches Examination.

Following a review of the record, for the reasons below, the Board finds that a remand is required to correct a pre-decisional duty-to-assist error and obtain a VA medical opinion addressing the nature and etiology of the Veteran's migraines.  

In this regard, in this case, in a July 2023 VA opinion, an examiner opined that it is less likely than not that the Veteran's headaches are related to service.  He explained that there were no STRs indicating the Veteran experienced headaches.  There were also not records indicated she experienced headaches immediately after her service.  

This opinion is inadequate for adjudicative purposes.  See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008).  Here, the examiner appears to rely solely on the lack of treatment during service and provides no supporting rationale.  See Dalton v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 23, 40 (2007).  Moreover, the examiner fails to provide an opinion as to whether the Veteran's disability is proximately due to or aggravated by her service-connected tinnitus.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.310.  Accordingly, a remand is warranted. 

2. Entitlement to service connection for bilateral shoulder pain, to include for treatment purposes only under Chapter 17, Title 38 U.S.C. and 38 C.F.R. § 3.360(a), is remanded.

The Veteran contends she experiences bilateral shoulder pain since around 2009, related to her work as a mechanic during service.  See July 2023 VA Shoulders Examination.

Following a review of the record, for the reasons below, the Board finds that a remand is required to correct a pre-decisional duty-to-assist error and obtain a VA medical opinion addressing the nature and etiology of the Veteran's bilateral shoulder disability.   

In this regard, in this case, in a July 2023 VA opinion, an examiner opined that it is less likely than not that the Veteran's bilateral shoulder disabilities are related to service.  He explained that there were no STRs indicating the Veteran experienced bilateral shoulder pain.  

This opinion is inadequate for adjudicative purposes.  See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008).  Here, the examiner appears to rely solely on the lack of treatment during service and subsequent to service and provides no supporting rationale.  He also fails to consider the appellant's competent reports of pain during and since service or address the impact, if any, of the Veteran's MOS on any currently diagnosed bilateral shoulder pain.  See Dalton v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 23, 40 (2007).   Accordingly, a remand is warranted. 

3. Entitlement to service connection for bilateral elbow pain, to include for treatment purposes only under Chapter 17, Title 38 U.S.C. and 38 C.F.R. § 3.360(a), is remanded.

The Veteran contends she experiences bilateral elbow pain since around 2012, in correlation with increased physical activity.  See July 2023 VA Elbows Examination.

Following a review of the record, for the reasons below, the Board finds that a remand is required to correct a pre-decisional duty-to-assist error and obtain a VA medical opinion addressing the nature and etiology of the Veteran's bilateral elbow disability.   

In this regard, in this case, in a July 2023 VA opinion, an examiner opined that it is less likely than not that the Veteran's bilateral elbow disabilities are related to service.  He explained that there were no STRs indicating the Veteran experienced bilateral elbow pain.  

This opinion is inadequate for adjudicative purposes.  See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008).  Here, the examiner appears to rely solely on the lack of treatment during service and subsequent to service and provides no supporting rationale.  He also fails to consider the appellant's competent reports of pain during and since service or address the impact, if any, of the Veteran's MOS or inservice physical injury on any currently diagnosed bilateral elbow pain.  See Dalton v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 23, 40 (2007).   Accordingly, a remand is warranted. 

4. Entitlement to service connection for right hip pain, to include for treatment purposes only under Chapter 17, Title 38 U.S.C. and 38 C.F.R. § 3.360(a), is remanded.

The Veteran contends she experiences right hip pain since injuring herself on an obstacle course and being on crutches for two weeks.  See July 2023 VA Hips Examination; see also March 2009 STR; April 2009 STR.

Following a review of the record, for the reasons below, the Board finds that a remand is required to correct a pre-decisional duty-to-assist error and obtain a VA medical opinion addressing the nature and etiology of the Veteran's right hip disability.   

In this regard, in this case, in a July 2023 VA opinion, an examiner opined that it is less likely than not that the Veteran's right hip disability is related to service.  He explained that there has been no continuity of treatment since service.  

This opinion is inadequate for adjudicative purposes.  See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008).  Here, the examiner appears to rely solely on the lack of treatment subsequent to service and provides no supporting rationale.  He also fails to consider the appellant's competent reports of pain during and since service.  See Dalton v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 23, 40 (2007).   Accordingly, a remand is warranted. 

5. Entitlement to service connection for back pain (to include as secondary to hip pain), and to include for treatment purposes only for under Chapter 17, Title 38 U.S.C. and 38 C.F.R. § 3.360(a), is remanded.

The Veteran contends she began experiencing back pain with lower extremity radiculopathy in 2010 related to pick up objects and that she has sought treatment since approximately 2012.  See July 2023 VA Back Examination.  Alternatively, she contends that her back pain is secondary to her hip disability, as she has had to alter how she walks.  See April 2023 Claim.

Following a review of the record, for the reasons below, the Board finds that a remand is required to correct a pre-decisional duty-to-assist error and obtain a VA medical opinion addressing the nature and etiology of the Veteran's back disability and any associated lower extremity radiculopathy.   

In this regard, in this case, in a July 2023 VA opinion, an examiner opined that it is less likely than not that the Veteran's back disability is related to service.  He explained that there has been no continuity of treatment since service.  

This opinion is inadequate for adjudicative purposes.  See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008).  Here, the examiner appears to rely solely on the lack of treatment subsequent to service and provides no supporting rationale.  He also fails to consider the Appellant's competent reports of pain during and since service, or address the impact, if any, of the Veteran's MOS or inservice physical injury on any currently diagnosed back pain.  See Dalton v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 23, 40 (2007).   Accordingly, a remand is warranted. 

6. Entitlement to service connection for left leg pain (to include as secondary to hip pain and/or service-connected right knee strain), and to include for treatment purposes only under Chapter 17, Title 38 U.S.C. and 38 C.F.R. § 3.360(a), is remanded.

The Veteran contends she began experiencing bilateral knee pain in 2009.  See July 2023 VA Knee Examination.  Notably, a March 2009 bone scan revealed a suspected left mid tibia minor stress injury.  Alternatively, she contends that her left knee pain is secondary to her hip disability and knee disability, as she has had to compensate/alter how she walks.  See April 2023 Claim.

Following a review of the record, for the reasons below, the Board finds that a remand is required to correct a pre-decisional duty-to-assist error and obtain a VA medical opinion addressing the nature and etiology of the Veteran's left leg disability.   

In this regard, in this case, in a July 2023 VA opinion, an examiner opined that it is less likely than not that the Veteran's left knee disability is related to service.  He explained that there has been no continuity of treatment since service.  He explained that the results of the bone scan is felt to be an imaging finding, not currently clinically significant, and therefore not a diagnosis as there were no further records indicating any continuity of care and/or chronicity of care since service. 

This opinion is inadequate for adjudicative purposes.  See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008).  Here, the examiner appears to rely solely on the lack of treatment subsequent to service and provides no supporting rationale.  He also fails to consider the Appellant's competent reports of pain during and since service.  See Dalton v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 23, 40 (2007).   Finally, the examiner fails to provide an opinion as to whether the Veteran's disability is proximately due to or aggravated by her service-connected right knee disability.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.310.  Accordingly, a remand is warranted. 

7. Entitlement to service connection for bilateral plantar fasciitis (to include as secondary to hip pain), and to include for treatment purposes only under Chapter 17, Title 38 U.S.C. and 38 C.F.R. § 3.360(a), is remanded.

 The Veteran contends she began experiencing bilateral foot pain in 2009.  See July 2023 VA Foot Conditions Examination.  Notably, a March 2009 bone scan revealed showed a focal hot uptake at the base of the left third metatarsal, indicative of a stress fracture.  Alternatively, she contends that her bilateral foot pain is secondary to her hip disability, as she has had to compensate/alter how she walks.  See April 2023 Claim.

Following a review of the record, for the reasons below, the Board finds that a remand is required to correct a pre-decisional duty-to-assist error and obtain a VA medical opinion addressing the nature and etiology of the Veteran's bilateral foot disability.   

In this regard, in this case, in a July 2023 VA opinion, an examiner opined that it is less likely than not that the Veteran's bilateral foot disability is related to service.  He explained that there has been no continuity of treatment since service.  

This opinion is inadequate for adjudicative purposes.  See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008).  Here, the examiner appears to rely solely on the lack of treatment subsequent to service and provides no supporting rationale.  He also fails to consider the Appellant's competent reports of pain during and since service.  See Dalton v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 23, 40 (2007).   Accordingly, a remand is warranted. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1.  Obtain a medical opinion from a qualified clinician for the Veteran's migraines claim.  The electronic claims file must be made available to the clinician for review in connection with the request for an opinion.  If the reviewing clinician determines that an examination is needed to answer the questions posed, then such should be scheduled.

The AOJ should provide examiner with a summary in the claims file that delineates the Veteran's verified periods of AD, ADT, and IDT, to the extent possible.

After reviewing the claims file, to include a copy of this REMAND the reviewing clinician should address the following:

a)	Is it at least as likely as not that the current migraine headaches are related to service, to include use of defective earplugs?

b)	Is it at least as likely as not that the current migraine headaches were caused by the service-connected tinnitus?

c)	Is it at least as likely as not that the current migraine headaches were aggravated by (increased in severity) the service-connected tinnitus?

The examiner is asked to explain the reasons behind any opinions expressed and conclusions reached.  The examiner is reminded that the term "as likely as not" does not mean "within the realm of medical possibility," but rather that the likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher.  Note that the lack of documented treatment in service, or a long period after, while probative, cannot serve as the sole basis for a negative finding.  The Veteran's lay contentions must be considered and weighed in making the determination.

The examiner must provide a complete rationale for his or her opinion(s) in the examination report.  If any of the above requested opinions cannot be made without resort to speculation, the examiner must state this and provide a rationale for such conclusion.  In so doing, the reviewing clinician must explain whether the inability to provide a more definitive opinion is the result of a need for additional information, or that he or she has exhausted the limits of current medical knowledge in providing an answer to that question.

2. Obtain a medical opinion from a qualified clinician for the Veteran's (i) shoulder and (ii) elbow claims.  The electronic claims file must be made available to the clinician for review in connection with the request for an opinion.  If the reviewing clinician determines that an examination is needed to answer the questions posed, then such should be scheduled.

The AOJ should provide examiner with a summary in the claims file that delineates the Veteran's verified periods of AD, ADT, and IDT, to the extent possible.

After reviewing the claims file, to include a copy of this REMAND the reviewing clinician should address the following:

a)	Is it at least as likely as not that the current (i) shoulder and (ii) elbow claims are related to service, to include as due to the Veteran's MOS and/or increased physical activity during service?

The examiner is asked to explain the reasons behind any opinions expressed and conclusions reached.  The examiner is reminded that the term "as likely as not" does not mean "within the realm of medical possibility," but rather that the likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher.  Note that the lack of documented treatment in service, or a long period after, while probative, cannot serve as the sole basis for a negative finding.  The Veteran's lay contentions must be considered and weighed in making the determination.

The examiner must provide a complete rationale for his or her opinion(s) in the examination report.  If any of the above requested opinions cannot be made without resort to speculation, the examiner must state this and provide a rationale for such conclusion.  In so doing, the reviewing clinician must explain whether the inability to provide a more definitive opinion is the result of a need for additional information, or that he or she has exhausted the limits of current medical knowledge in providing an answer to that question.

3. Obtain a medical opinion from a qualified clinician for the Veteran's right hip pain.  The electronic claims file must be made available to the clinician for review in connection with the request for an opinion.  If the reviewing clinician determines that an examination is needed to answer the questions posed, then such should be scheduled.

The AOJ should provide examiner with a summary in the claims file that delineates the Veteran's verified periods of AD, ADT, and IDT, to the extent possible.

After reviewing the claims file, to include a copy of this REMAND the reviewing clinician should address the following:

a)	Is it at least as likely as not that the current right hip pain is related to service, to include as due to the Veteran's use of crutches/overcompensation during service?

The examiner is asked to explain the reasons behind any opinions expressed and conclusions reached.  The examiner is reminded that the term "as likely as not" does not mean "within the realm of medical possibility," but rather that the likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher.  Note that the lack of documented treatment in service, or a long period after, while probative, cannot serve as the sole basis for a negative finding.  The Veteran's lay contentions must be considered and weighed in making the determination.

The examiner must provide a complete rationale for his or her opinion(s) in the examination report.  If any of the above requested opinions cannot be made without resort to speculation, the examiner must state this and provide a rationale for such conclusion.  In so doing, the reviewing clinician must explain whether the inability to provide a more definitive opinion is the result of a need for additional information, or that he or she has exhausted the limits of current medical knowledge in providing an answer to that question.

4. Obtain a medical opinion from a qualified clinician for the Veteran's back pain claim.  The electronic claims file must be made available to the clinician for review in connection with the request for an opinion.  If the reviewing clinician determines that an examination is needed to answer the questions posed, then such should be scheduled.

The AOJ should provide examiner with a summary in the claims file that delineates the Veteran's verified periods of AD, ADT, and IDT, to the extent possible.

After reviewing the claims file, to include a copy of this REMAND the reviewing clinician should address the following:

a)	Is it at least as likely as not that the current back pain is related to service?

b)	If, and only if, the Veteran is service-connected for a hip disability, is it at least as likely as not that the current back pain was caused by the service-connected hip disability?

c)	If, and only if, the Veteran is service-connected for a hip disability, is it at least as likely as not that the current back pain was aggravated by (increased in severity) the service-connected hip disability?

The examiner is asked to explain the reasons behind any opinions expressed and conclusions reached.  The examiner is reminded that the term "as likely as not" does not mean "within the realm of medical possibility," but rather that the likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher.  Note that the lack of documented treatment in service, or a long period after, while probative, cannot serve as the sole basis for a negative finding.  The Veteran's lay contentions must be considered and weighed in making the determination.

The examiner must provide a complete rationale for his or her opinion(s) in the examination report.  If any of the above requested opinions cannot be made without resort to speculation, the examiner must state this and provide a rationale for such conclusion.  In so doing, the reviewing clinician must explain whether the inability to provide a more definitive opinion is the result of a need for additional information, or that he or she has exhausted the limits of current medical knowledge in providing an answer to that question.

5. Obtain a medical opinion from a qualified clinician for the Veteran's left leg pain claim.  The electronic claims file must be made available to the clinician for review in connection with the request for an opinion.  If the reviewing clinician determines that an examination is needed to answer the questions posed, then such should be scheduled.

The AOJ should provide examiner with a summary in the claims file that delineates the Veteran's verified periods of AD, ADT, and IDT, to the extent possible.

After reviewing the claims file, to include a copy of this REMAND the reviewing clinician should address the following:

a)	Is it at least as likely as not that the current left leg pain is related to service?

b)	Is it at least as likely as not that the current left leg pain headaches was caused by the service-connected right knee disability?

c)	Is it at least as likely as not that the current left leg pain was aggravated by (increased in severity) the service-connected right knee disability?

d)	If, and only if, the Veteran is service-connected for a hip disability, is it at least as likely as not that the current left leg pain headaches was caused by the service-connected hip disability?

e)	If, and only if, the Veteran is service-connected for a hip disability, is it at least as likely as not that the current left leg pain was aggravated by (increased in severity) the service-connected hip disability?

The examiner is asked to explain the reasons behind any opinions expressed and conclusions reached.  The examiner is reminded that the term "as likely as not" does not mean "within the realm of medical possibility," but rather that the likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher.  Note that the lack of documented treatment in service, or a long period after, while probative, cannot serve as the sole basis for a negative finding.  The Veteran's lay contentions must be considered and weighed in making the determination.

The examiner must provide a complete rationale for his or her opinion(s) in the examination report.  If any of the above requested opinions cannot be made without resort to speculation, the examiner must state this and provide a rationale for such conclusion.  In so doing, the reviewing clinician must explain whether the inability to provide a more definitive opinion is the result of a need for additional information, or that he or she has exhausted the limits of current medical knowledge in providing an answer to that question.

6. Obtain a medical opinion from a qualified clinician for the Veteran's bilateral foot disability claim.  The electronic claims file must be made available to the clinician for review in connection with the request for an opinion.  If the reviewing clinician determines that an examination is needed to answer the questions posed, then such should be scheduled.

The AOJ should provide examiner with a summary in the claims file that delineates the Veteran's verified periods of AD, ADT, and IDT, to the extent possible.

After reviewing the claims file, to include a copy of this REMAND the reviewing clinician should address the following:

a)	Is it at least as likely as not that the current bilateral foot disability is related to service?  

b)	If, and only if, the Veteran is service-connected for a hip disability, is it at least as likely as not that the current bilateral foot disability was caused by the service-connected hip disability?

c)	If, and only if, the Veteran is service-connected for a hip disability, is it at least as likely as not that the current bilateral foot disability was aggravated by (increased in severity) the service-connected hip disability?

The examiner is asked to explain the reasons behind any opinions expressed and conclusions reached.  The examiner is reminded that the term "as likely as not" does not mean "within the realm of medical possibility," but rather that the likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher.  Note that the lack of documented treatment in service, or a long period after, while probative, cannot serve as the sole basis for a negative finding.  The Veteran's lay contentions must be considered and weighed in making the determination.

The examiner must provide a complete rationale for his or her opinion(s) in the examination report.  If any of the above requested opinions cannot be made without resort to speculation, the examiner must state this and provide a rationale for such conclusion.  In so doing, the reviewing clinician must explain whether the inability to provide a more definitive opinion is the result of a need for additional information, or that he or she has exhausted the limits of current medical knowledge in providing an answer to that question.

 

 

KRISTI L. GUNN

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	M. Kaufer, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.