Citation Nr: A25034803
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 240625-451861
DATE: April 15, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for prostate cancer, to include as due to exposure to jet fuel fumes or possible asbestos, is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for bronchitis, to include as due to exposure to jet fuel fumes, is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for emphysema, diagnosed as restrictive lung disease, to include as due to exposure to jet fuel fumes, is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

The probative evidence of record weighs against finding that the Veteran's prostate cancer is due to active-duty service, to include exposure to jet fuel and asbestos.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to service connection for prostate cancer have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Navy from November 1973 to September 1977.

These matters come before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an October 2023 rating decision of a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO). 

In the June 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the October 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. However, because the Board is remanding the claims of entitlement to service connection for bronchitis and restrictive lung disease, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Remands

Under Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), a remand is only available in order to correct a (1) duty to assist error occurring prior to the date of the decision on appeal (i.e., pre-decisional duty to assist errors) and (2) errors in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty, if correction of such error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the claim. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

Entitlement to service connection for prostate cancer, to include as due to exposure to jet fuel fumes or possible asbestos.

The Veteran contends that his diagnosed prostate cancer is etiologically related to his active-duty service, to include exposure to jet fuel fumes or possible asbestos.

Service connection will be granted for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service. 38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303. The evidence must show (1) the existence of a current disability, (2) an in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury, and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166-67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any material issue, reasonable doubt will be resolved in favor of the Veteran. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49 (1990).

The Veteran has been diagnosed with prostate cancer. See October 2023 Rating Decision. Additionally, the Veteran credibly asserts that his prostate cancer came from exposure to jet fuel fumes during service. See August 2023 Fully Developed Claim. Thus, the only determination before the Board is whether there is a medical link, otherwise known as a "medical nexus," between the Veteran's diagnosed prostate cancer and his active-duty service.

Initially, the Board notes a September 2023 VA Toxic Exposure Risk Activity (TERA) Memorandum does not find the Veteran was exposed to asbestos while serving aboard the U.S.S. America (CVA/CV-66). Thus, the Board finds the probative evidence of record weighs against finding that the Veteran was exposed to asbestos during his active-duty service.

In a September 2023 VA medical opinion, the examiner concluded that the Veteran's diagnosed prostate cancer is less likely than not incurred in or caused by exposure to jet fuel fumes during service. As rationale, the examiner notes, in pertinent part, medical studies, literature, and a pathophysiological mechanism are lacking to show that exposure to jet fumes can directly cause prostate cancer.

Here, the Board affords great probative weight to the September 2023 VA medical opinion, as it considered all of the pertinent evidence of record, to include the Veteran's statements and his relevant medical history, and provided a complete rationale, relying on and citing to the records reviewed. Moreover, the examiner offered clear conclusions and supported such with data and a reasoned medical explanation. Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295 (2008) (it is the factually accurate, fully articulated, sound reasoning for the conclusion that contributes to the probative value of a medical opinion); Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 124 (2007) ("[A]medical opinion... must support its conclusion with an analysis that the Board can consider and weigh against contrary opinions"). Further, the opinion is consistent with the contemporaneous medical evidence of record. Bloom v. West, 12 Vet. App. 185, 187 (1999); Black v. Brown, 10 Vet. App. 284, 297 (1997). Notably, there is no opinion to the contrary.

The Board recognizes that the Veteran and his representative assert that there is a link between the Veteran's in-service exposure to jet fumes and possible asbestos, and his diagnosed prostate cancer. However, the Board notes that the Veteran does not have the training or credentials to provide a competent opinion as to etiology, diagnosis, or the onset date of a medical disability. See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 (Fed. Cir. 2007). Thus, his lay contentions are of markedly lower probative value than, and are outweighed by, the September 2023 VA medical opinion.

In sum, the record does not contain competent evidence linking the Veteran's diagnosed prostate cancer and his active-duty service. Consequently, the Board finds that the evidence of record weighs against his claim for entitlement to service connection for prostate cancer. As such, the benefit of the doubt doctrine is not applicable in the instant appeal, and the claim must be denied. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b).

REASONS FOR REMAND

Entitlement to service connection for bronchitis, to include as due to exposure to jet fuel fumes is remanded.

The Veteran contends that his diagnosed bronchitis is etiologically related to his active-duty service, to include exposure to jet fuel fumes or possible asbestos.

The Veteran has a current diagnosis of a bronchitis for the purposes of service connection. Additionally, the Veteran competently asserts that his diagnosed bronchitis is related to exposure to jet fuel fumes during active-duty service. To date, he has never been afforded a VA examination to evaluate the nature and likely etiology of his diagnosed bronchitis, and this constitutes a pre-decisional duty-to-assist error. McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 81 (2006).

Accordingly, a remand is necessary in order to schedule him for such examination and obtain a medical opinion regarding the likely etiology of his diagnosed bronchitis in order to remedy this pre-decisional duty to assist error.

Entitlement to service connection for emphysema, diagnosed as restrictive lung disease, to include as due to exposure to jet fuel fumes, is remanded.

The Veteran contends that his diagnosed restrictive lung disease is etiologically related to his active-duty service, to include exposure to jet fuel fumes or possible asbestos.

The Veteran obtained a September 2023 VA medical opinion regarding the likely etiology of his diagnosed restrictive lung disease. Unfortunately, this medical opinion is inadequate for the purposes of determining service connection. The Board finds the September 2023 VA opinion inadequate for adjudication purposes because the sole basis for the negative nexus opinion was the lack of evidence of restrictive lung disease in the Veteran's service treatment records. A medical opinion based solely on the absence of documentation in the service treatment records or that fails to consider lay statements is inadequate. See Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F. 3d 1331, 1336-37 (Fed. Cir. 2006).

Accordingly, a remand is necessary in order to obtain an addendum medical opinion regarding the likely etiology of his diagnosed restrictive lung disease in order to remedy this pre-decisional duty to assist error.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination by an appropriate clinician to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's diagnosed bronchitis, to include the potential relationship to exposure to jet fuel fumes. The examiner is asked to review the pertinent evidence, including the Veteran's lay assertions regarding his symptomatology, and undertake any indicated studies. Then, based on the results of the examination, the examiner is asked to address whether it is at least as likely as not (at least an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence) that the Veteran's diagnosed bronchitis is related to his military service, to include exposure to jet fuel fumes. A complete rationale must be provided. 

2. Obtain an addendum medical opinion from the September 2023 examiner (or, if unavailable, from a medical professional with appropriate expertise) to determine the etiology of the Veteran's diagnosed restrictive lung disease. The examiner is requested to review the record and address whether it is at least as likely as not (at least an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence) that the Veteran's diagnosed restrictive lung disease is related to his military service, to include exposure to jet fuel fumes. A complete rationale must be provided. 

 

A. C. MACKENZIE

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Wood, Paul T.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.