Citation Nr: A25034249
Decision Date: 04/14/25	Archive Date: 04/14/25

DOCKET NO. 240911-472137
DATE: April 14, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for high blood pressure is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for two stents in heart is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from March 1983 to January 1985, and was honored with multiple decorations for their service, including the Army Service Ribbon; Marksman Badge with M16 Rifle Bar; and Second Class Badge with Hand Grenade Bar.

The matter comes before the Board on appeal from a rating decision issued in August 2024 by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office. 

In the September 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal, the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the May 2024 rating decision that was subsequently subject to a Higher Level Review by the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ). 38 C.F.R. §?20.301.  

Additionally, the Board notes that the record contains recent pieces of returned mail that were addressed to the Veteran, but he has been represented by James Trieschmann since August 2024 during the pendency of this appeal. There is no indication in the record that his representatives lacked knowledge of the same mailings or lacked knowledge of the current status of the appeal so as to prejudice the Veteran pursuing the claims pending. The address listed on the returned mail is the most recent address on file with the VA. Thus, the Board will adjudicate the claim, but urges the Veteran to update his address with the VA.

1. Entitlement to service connection for high blood pressure.

2. Entitlement to service connection for two stents in heart.

The Veteran contends that his claimed high blood pressure and two stents in heart should be connected to his active service. 

The Board notes that although service treatment records (STRs) were retrieved and CAPRI records from Brooklyn HHS from June 2018 to December 2017 were retrieved, no other medical records were obtained or requested regarding the Veterans claimed conditions. Thus, there is a gap in records from the time the Veteran served until May 2024 rating decision. There are also no records that the AOJ made any attempts to obtain VA or private medical records regarding the Veterans claimed conditions, or if such attempts would be futile. Consequently, the Board finds that a remand is necessary to correct the pre-decisional duty to assist error and obtain all outstanding VA and private medical records associated with the Veteran's claims.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain the Veteran's VA treatment records for the period from January 1985 to present. 

(a.) Document all requests for information as well as all responses in the claims file. 

(b.) All reasonable attempts should be made to obtain such records. If any records cannot be obtained after reasonable efforts have been made, issue a formal determination that such records do not exist or that further efforts to obtain such records would be futile, which should be documented in the claims file. The Veteran must be notified of the attempts made and why further attempts would be futile, and allowed the opportunity to provide such records, as provided in 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(c) and 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(e).

2. Request that the Veteran identify the location and name of any private medical facility where he has received treatment for his claimed high blood pressure and two stents in heart, and complete appropriate authorization forms for the release of all such records.

(a.) Document all requests for information as well as all responses in the claims file.

(Continued on the next page)

?

(b.) Make at least two requests for the authorized records from such named practitioners/facilities, unless it is clear after the first request that a second request would be futile. If any records cannot be obtained after reasonable efforts have been made, issue a formal determination that such records do not exist or that further efforts to obtain such records would be futile, which should be documented in the claims file. The Veteran must be notified of the attempts made and why further attempts would be futile, and allowed the opportunity to provide such records, as provided in 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(b) and 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(e).

3. Thereafter, conduct any other development necessary and adjudicate the claims.

 

 

Melanie J. Mann

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Hageman Gaina, Samantha L.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.