Citation Nr: A25034539
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 240715-455153
DATE: April 15, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an initial rating greater than 20 percent for residuals of a right ankle fracture and lateral collateral ligament sprain with osteochondritis dissecans, to include osteochondral fracture and degenerative arthritis, status-post Brostrom surgery, is denied.

FINDING OF FACT

The record evidence shows that the Veteran's service-connected residuals of a right ankle fracture and lateral collateral ligament sprain with osteochondritis dissecans, to include osteochondral fracture and degenerative arthritis, status-post Brostrom surgery, is manifested by, at worst, complaints of right ankle pain, a feeling of giving way or instability on uneven surfaces, pain on weight-bearing and active and passive motion, tenderness to palpation, and post-surgical swelling.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for an initial rating greater than 20 percent for residuals of a right ankle fracture and lateral collateral ligament sprain with osteochondritis dissecans, to include osteochondral fracture and degenerative arthritis, status-post Brostrom surgery, have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.7, 4.71a, Diagnostic Code (DC) 5003-5271.  

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran had active U.S. Marine Corps service from May 1996 to May 2000, active U.S. Air Force service from December 2004 to May 2005, including in combat in Iraq in support of Operation Iraqi Freedom, and additional unverified U.S. Air National Guard service.  His medals include the Iraq Campaign Medal.

In April 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR), and requested review of a May 2022 decision.  In July 2023, the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the HLR decision on appeal which considered the evidence of record at the time of the prior May 2022 decision.  In the July 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board only may consider the evidence of record at the time of the May 2022 AOJ decision which was subsequently subject to HLR.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision which was subsequently subject to HLR, then the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

Evidence was added to the claims file during a period of time when new evidence was not allowed.  As the Board is deciding the claim listed above, it may not consider this evidence in its decision.  38 C.F.R. § 20.300.  If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, then he may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20 0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

The Board notes that, in the currently appealed AMA HLR rating decision issued in July 2023, the AOJ assigned a higher initial 20 percent rating effective October 15, 2019, for the service-connected residuals of a right ankle fracture.  The AOJ also sua sponte found clear and unmistakable error (CUE) in the disability rating and effective date initially assigned for the service-connected residuals of a right ankle fracture in the May 2022 rating decision.  The Veteran's attorney asserted in statements on the July 2024 VA Form 10182 that the AOJ's actions in the July 2023 rating decision meant that, in fact, the issue on appeal was whether the disability rating assigned for the service-connected residuals of a right ankle fracture was CUE.  The attorney also attached an appellate brief to the July 2024 VA Form 10182 in which he argued: (1) that the Veteran is entitled to separate compensable ratings for right foot disability and right ankle disability associated with his service-connected residuals of a right ankle fracture; and (2) the assignment of a single 20 percent rating for the service-connected residuals of a right ankle fracture in the July 2023 rating decision was CUE.  The allegation of CUE has not been adjudicated by the AOJ in the first instance.  The sua sponte decision by the AOJ in July 2023 to find CUE in a prior non-final rating decision issued in May 2022 does not transform this appeal into an appeal involving a valid CUE claim, however, because CUE cannot be asserted in any non-final rating action.  And it is undisputed that the July 2023 rating decision is not final.  Thus, the Board finds that there is no valid CUE claim currently before VA.  If the Veteran and/or his attorney wish to assert that any final rating action was the product of CUE, then they are invited to file this CUE claim at the AOJ.  The Board next notes that the Veteran never claimed entitlement to service connection for a right foot disability at any time during the appeal period before his attorney submitted the July 2024 appellate brief.  More importantly, service connection is not in effect for a right foot disability at any time during the appeal period.  Thus, the Board finds that the attorney's attempted appeal of a CUE claim and his assertions regarding service connection for a right foot disability in the July 2024 appellate brief are without merit and will not be addressed further.

The Court recently held that the Board is required to discount the ameliorative effects of medication unless such effects are otherwise contemplated in a particular DC.  See Ingram v. Collins, No. 23-1798, ___ Vet. App. ___ (2025).  Here, the Veteran's service-connected residuals of a right ankle fracture are evaluated under DC 5003-5271 which does not contemplate the ameliorative effects of medication.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, DC 5003-5271.  The service-connected residuals of a right ankle fracture were examined for VA adjudication purposes in January 2020 and in April 2022.  The VA examiners who conducted these examinations provided range of motion findings for the right ankle and noted and considered the Veteran's lay statements describing functional limitations when his right ankle pain and functional impairment are at their worst (e.g., during flare ups, on repetitive motion, due to lack of endurance, lack of coordination, etc.).  Neither of these examination reports indicate whether the Veteran was on any pain medications to treat his service-connected residuals of a right ankle fracture at the time of these examinations.  Nevertheless, a review of these VA examinations clearly shows that the examiners who conducted them also provided opinions estimating range of motion findings for the service-connected residuals of a right ankle fracture which discounted any potential ameliorative effects of medication.  As such, the Board finds that the medical evidence as a whole is adequate for VA adjudication purposes because it discounted the ameliorative effects of medication as required under Ingram.  Id.

Having reviewed the record evidence, the Board finds that the issue on appeal should be characterized as stated above.  Neither the Veteran nor his representative has raised any other issues nor have any other issues been reasonably raised by the record, to include entitlement to an additional disability rating, an extraschedular rating for a service-connected disability, service connection for another disability as secondary to a service-connected disability, or to a total disability rating based on individual unemployability (TDIU).  See Doucette v. Shulkin, 28 Vet. App. 366, 369 370 (2017) (confirming that Board not required to address issues unless specifically raised by claimant or reasonably raised by record evidence).

The Board is not persuaded that the evidence supports granting the Veteran's claim of entitlement to an initial rating greater than 20 percent for residuals of a right ankle fracture and lateral collateral ligament sprain with osteochondritis dissecans, to include osteochondral fracture and degenerative arthritis, status-post Brostrom surgery.  The Veteran and his attorney essentially contend that he experiences right foot disability and right ankle disability and is entitled to a higher initial rating for his service-connected residuals of a right ankle fracture and lateral collateral ligament sprain with osteochondritis dissecans, to include osteochondral fracture and degenerative arthritis, status-post Brostrom surgery ("residuals of a right ankle fracture").  He alternatively contends that he is entitled to a separate compensable rating for the right foot disability which he experiences as a result of his service-connected residuals of a right ankle fracture.  The Board disagrees.  Contrary to the Veteran's lay assertions, the record evidence shows that his service-connected residuals of a right ankle fracture are manifested by, at worst, complaints of right ankle pain, a feeling of giving way or instability on uneven surfaces, pain on weight-bearing and active and passive motion, tenderness to palpation, and post-surgical swelling.  These findings support the 20 percent rating currently and initially assigned effective October 15, 2019, for the service-connected residuals of a right ankle fracture under DC 5003-5271.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, DC 5003-5271.  The medical evidence also does not support assigning a separate compensable rating for right foot disability due to the service-connected residuals of a right ankle fracture.  The Board notes initially that the Veteran currently is in receipt of the maximum 20 percent rating available for his service-connected residuals of a right ankle fracture under DC 5003 5271.  Id.

The available service treatment records show that the Veteran fractured his right ankle in June 1996 during his first period of active service.  At that time, x-rays showed a right ankle fracture at the posterior process of the talus.  His fracture was treated and resolved by the time of his separation from service as clinical evaluation at his separation physical examination in January 2000, prior to his separation from service at the end of his first period of active service in May 2000, was within normal limits except for a cut on the right ankle.

The post-service evidence shows that, following his second (and final) service separation in May 2005, the Veteran had right ankle reconstructive surgery (open reduction internal fixation (ORIF) of the medial malleolus and Brostrom surgery) in July 2015. On outpatient treatment in October 2015, his surgery was noted.  It was noted that he "is making appropriate progress following his surgery....He is going to continue to advance his activities and return to firefighting."  Physical examination of the right ankle showed well-healed surgical wounds, no signs of infection, palpable pulses, intact sensation throughout, and "improved" motion and strength.  X-rays of the right ankle showed "good filling of periarticular cyst with stable internal fixation.  No evidence complication."  The diagnoses were right ankle instability and right ankle ganglion.

On VA ankle conditions Disability Benefits Questionnaire (DBQ) in January 2020, the Veteran's complaints included residual right ankle pain, decreased range of motion, and instability following post-service surgery.  The VA examiner reviewed the Veteran's electronic claims file, including service treatment records and post-service VA treatment records.  "The Veteran reports that post military he continues to experience right ankle pain that increases with weight bearing."  He also reported experiencing constant right ankle pain which he rated as 2/10 on a pain scale (with 0/10 being no pain) which increased to 4/10 "with weight bearing activities and 8-10/10 with exposure to cold damp weather."  He reported flare-ups of right ankle pain and functional loss or impairment which he described as, "Constant right ankle pain that increases with weight bearing activities and pain more intense with exposure to cold damp weather."  Range of motion testing of the right ankle showed dorsiflexion to 10 degrees and plantar flexion to 20 degrees with pain which "interferes with stair climbing and pivoting off right foot."  There was no additional limitation of motion on repetitive testing.  Physical examination of the right ankle showed pain on weight bearing, tenderness to palpation "at entire ankle," no crepitus, less movement than normal, disturbance of locomotion, interference with standing, 4/5 muscle strength, no muscle atrophy, no ankylosis, positive talar tilt test, and post-surgical residuals of pain and swelling.  The VA examiner stated that the examination was medically consistent with the Veteran's statements regarding functional loss with repetitive use over time and during flare-ups of pain.  None of the DeLuca factors significantly limited functional ability with repeated use over a period of time.  Pain significantly limited functional ability with flare-ups limited dorsiflexion to 7 degrees and plantar flexion to 15 degrees.  The Veteran occasionally used an ankle brace.  X-rays of the right ankle showed traumatic arthritis.  There was evidence of pain on passive range of motion testing.  There was no evidence of pain on non-weight bearing.  The VA examiner stated:

Pain is the functional limitation that could significantly limit functional ability during flare-ups and repeated use over time in terms of additional loss of range of motion.  During today's exam, the Veteran was able to perform repetitive range of motion maneuvers with limitation due to pain.

On VA ankle conditions DBQ in April 2022, the Veteran's complaints included "pain in the ankle with prolonged walking/standing or cold weather, going up or down inclines or uneven terrain."  He reported wearing "an ankle brace while at work."  He treated his service-connected right ankle fracture with "some stretching and heat" as needed "at home.  He does feel someone limited in his exercise capacity, but endorses that this has a lot to do with a knee meniscus and ligament injury he sustained."  The VA examiner reviewed the Veteran's electronic claims file, including service treatment records and post-service VA treatment records.  The Veteran reported flare-ups and functional loss or impairment of the right ankle.  A history of right ankle instability "improved since Brostrom [but] does sometimes feel on uneven terrain it is going to give out."  Range of motion testing of the right ankle showed plantar flexion to 20 degrees and dorsiflexion to 30 degrees with pain on dorsiflexion.  Physical examination of the right ankle showed pain on weight-bearing, active and passive motion, and causing functional loss, no crepitus, mild tenderness to palpation along the lateral ankle, less movement than normal, swelling, disturbance of locomotion, interference with standing, no muscle atrophy, and no ankylosis.  The DeLuca factors of pain, fatigability, and lack of endurance were present which significantly limited functional ability with repeated use over time and during flare-ups.  The VA examiner stated that the Veteran was "[l]imited in terms of prolonged walking over uneven surfaces....He may not be able to walk or stand for as long."  The Veteran regularly used an ankle brace to support his right ankle while at work.  The VA examiner described the functional impact of the Veteran's right ankle disability as, "He may need to stretch or offload the ankle after prolonged walking or standing."  The diagnoses were chronic/recurrent right lateral collateral ligament sprain, right ankle osteochondritis dissecans, to include osteochondral fracture, right ankle degenerative arthritis, and right ankle, status-post Bostrom surgery for ankle instability.

The Board again notes that the Veteran currently is in receipt of the maximum 20 percent rating for his service-connected residuals of a right ankle fracture available under DC 5003-5271.  Id.  Contrary to the Veteran's lay assertions, the record evidence shows that his service-connected residuals of a right ankle fracture are manifested by, at worst, complaints of right ankle pain, a feeling of giving way or instability on uneven surfaces, pain on weight-bearing and active and passive motion, tenderness to palpation, and post-surgical swelling.  These findings support the 20 percent rating currently and initially assigned for the service-connected residuals of a right ankle fracture under DC 5003-5271.  Id.  The medical evidence also does not support assigning a separate compensable rating for right foot disability due to the service-connected residuals of a right ankle fracture.  VA examination in January 2020 documented the Veteran's complaints of pain, decreased range of motion, and instability in the right ankle along with pain on weight-bearing, tenderness to palpation, swelling, 4/5 muscle strength, and pain on passive range of motion.  Subsequent VA examination in April 2022 documented the Veteran's complaints of pain and a feeling of giving way or instability in the right ankle on uneven surfaces.  There was pain on weight-bearing, active and passive motion, and causing functional loss along with mild tenderness to palpation, pain, fatigability, and lack of endurance.  Because the Veteran currently is in receipt of the maximum 20 percent rating available under DC 5271 for his service-connected residuals of a right ankle fracture, the Board must determine whether another DC is potentially applicable and could result in a higher initial rating for this disability.  Critically, there was no evidence of ankylosis at either of these examinations as is required for a disability rating greater than 20 percent for ankle ankylosis under DC 5270.  See also 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, DC 5270.

As noted in the Introduction, the Veteran's attorney asserted in the July 2024 appellate brief that a separate compensable rating was warranted for right foot disability due to the service-connected residuals of a right ankle fracture.  However, a review of the claims file shows that the Veteran included a claim of service connection for a right foot disability in statements on a VA Form 21 526EZ date-stamped as received by VA on October 15, 2019.  The AOJ granted service connection for fractured right lateral talar with degenerative process, claimed right foot condition, and assigned an initial 10 percent rating effective October 15, 2019, under DC 5284 in a February 2020 rating decision which was not appealed and became final.  38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.302, 20.1103.  The Veteran also did not submit any relevant evidence or argument within 1 year of the February 2020 rating decision which would render it non-final for VA adjudication purposes.  See Buie v Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 242, 251-52 (2011).  He initiated his current appeal for service connection for residuals of a right ankle disability more than 1 year later when he included this claim in statements on a VA Form 21-526EZ date-stamped as received by VA on December 7, 2021.  

The AOJ essentially concluded in the July 2023 rating decision that, although the February 2020 rating decision granted service connection for residuals of a right ankle fracture (which was characterized as fractured right lateral talar with degenerative process, claimed right foot condition), an incorrect DC was used to evaluate the severity of this service-connected disability.  The AOJ then noted that it corrected this error by assigning an initial 10 percent rating effective December 7, 2021, for the service-connected residuals of a right ankle fracture in the May 2022 rating decision which was subject to HLR in the July 2023 rating decision.  The AOJ further noted that, because compensating a Veteran twice for the same symptomatology is prohibited, the Veteran could not be in receipt of separate initial 10 percent ratings for his service-connected residuals of a right ankle fracture under both DC 5284 (stemming from the February 2020 rating decision) and under DC 5271 (stemming from the May 2022 rating decision).  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.14; see also Esteban v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 259, 261 62 (1994).  Resolving any reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor in the July 2023 rating decision, the AOJ assigned a single higher initial 20 percent rating effective October 15, 2019, for the service-connected residuals of a right ankle fracture under DC 5003 5271.  

The selection of the appropriate DC for evaluating a service-connected disability is within the discretion of the AOJ or the Board.  There is no indication that the Veteran experienced right foot disability which is separately compensable from his service-connected residuals of a right ankle fracture at any time during the appeal period.  The AOJ specifically found in the July 2023 rating decision that "a right talar process fracture is a fracture of the lower bone of the ankle on the outside (lateral)aspect of this bone (talus))."  In other words, the AOJ decision to grant service connection for fractured right lateral talar with degenerative process, claimed right foot condition, and assign an initial 10 percent rating effective October 15, 2019, under DC 5284 in February 2020 resulted in the service-connected residuals of a right ankle fracture being evaluated incorrectly under a DC for other foot injuries.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, DC 5284.  The AOJ corrected this error by assigning a higher initial 20 percent rating effective October 15, 2019, for the Veteran's service-connected residuals of a right ankle fracture under DC 5003 5271 in the July 2023 rating decision.  This decision ultimately is more favorable to the Veteran than the original incorrect evaluation of his service-connected residuals of a right ankle fracture (which the AOJ characterized as "fractured right lateral talar with degenerative process, claimed right foot condition") in the February 2020 rating decision.  The Board reiterates that service connection is not in effect for a right foot disability at any time during the appeal period.  The record evidence also does not show that the Veteran experiences any current right foot disability due to his service-connected residuals of a right ankle fracture.  Thus, the Board finds that the argument presented by the Veteran's attorney in the July 2024 appellate brief that a separate compensable rating is warranted for right foot disability due to the service-connected residuals of a right ankle fracture is without merit.  

Taken together, the record evidence as a whole supports the initial 20 percent rating effective October 15, 2019, for the service-connected residuals of a right ankle fracture.  The Veteran and his attorney otherwise have not identified or submitted any evidence demonstrating his entitlement to an initial rating greater than 20 percent for residuals of a right ankle fracture.  The evidence persuasively weighs against the claim.  Therefore, the benefit of the doubt rule does not apply.  Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc).  In summary, the Board finds that the criteria for an initial rating greater than 20 percent for residuals of a right ankle fracture and lateral collateral ligament sprain with osteochondritis dissecans, to include osteochondral fracture and degenerative arthritis, status-post Brostrom surgery, have not been met.  The appeal is denied.

 

 

S. Sorathia 

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Michael T. Osborne, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.