Citation Nr: A25034627
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 240701-452951
DATE: April 15, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to an initial compensable rating for the Veteran's service-connected left knee disability is remanded.

Entitlement to an initial compensable rating for the Veteran's service-connected right knee disability is remanded.

Entitlement to an initial compensable rating for the Veteran's service-connected left shoulder disability is remanded.

Entitlement to an initial compensable rating for the Veteran's service-connected right shoulder disability is remanded.

Entitlement to an initial compensable rating for the Veteran's service-connected left ankle disability is remanded.

Entitlement to an initial compensable rating for the Veteran's service-connected right ankle disability is remanded.

Entitlement to an initial compensable rating for the Veteran's service-connected right hip disability is remanded.

Entitlement to an initial compensable rating for the Veteran's service-connected lumbar spine disability is remanded.

Entitlement to an initial compensable rating for the Veteran's service-connected bilateral pes planus with plantar fasciitis is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from January 2003 to January 2007 and November 2008 to November 2009.  

This case comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a July 2023 rating decision by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In July 2024 VA Forms 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the July 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

Since the Board is remanding the Veteran's claims herein any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

The Board notes that the Veteran filed a subsequent Intent to File on April 9, 2024, followed by additional claims for increased ratings on June 22, 2024, and November 2, 2024.  Accordingly, the appellate period for the service-connected disabilities identified in the subsequent claims ends as of the date of the respective claim or Intent to File.

1. Entitlement to an initial compensable rating for the Veteran's service-connected left knee disability is remanded.

2. Entitlement to an initial compensable rating for the Veteran's service-connected right knee disability is remanded.

3. Entitlement to an initial compensable rating for the Veteran's service-connected left shoulder disability is remanded.

4. Entitlement to an initial compensable rating for the Veteran's service-connected right shoulder disability is remanded.

5. Entitlement to an initial compensable rating for the Veteran's service-connected left ankle disability is remanded.

6. Entitlement to an initial compensable rating for the Veteran's service-connected right ankle disability is remanded.

7. Entitlement to an initial compensable rating for the Veteran's service-connected right hip disability is remanded.

8. Entitlement to an initial compensable rating for the Veteran's service-connected lumbar spine disability is remanded.

9. Entitlement to an initial compensable rating for the Veteran's service-connected bilateral pes planus with plantar fasciitis is remanded.

In April 2023, the Veteran submitted a statement in support of his claim for each of the service-connected disabilities addressed in this remand.  In each statement, the Veteran identified the specific treatment that he used for each disability.  He treated himself with Tylenol for all of the disabilities addressed in.  He also varyingly utilized physical therapy, massages, acupuncture, sports medicine, ice, heat, and rest with some, or all of these treatments used for each respective disability.

However, during his May 2023 VA examinations, the VA examiner noted that the Veteran had no treatment, medication, or surgery for each of his service-connected disabilities addressed herein.  

On remand the VA examiner must consider the Veteran's reported use of Tylenol and other treatments.  As the applicable diagnostic codes and special musculoskeletal regulations do not reference medication, the Board must discount beneficial medication effects when assigning an evaluation. See Ingram v. Collins, __ Vet. App. __, No. 23-1798, 2025 U.S. App. Vet. Claims LEXIS 327, *1 (Mar. 12, 2025).  Here, the medical evidence of record is inadequate to the extent it is unclear whether the ameliorative effects of the Veteran's reported use of Tylenol, if any, were discounted in determining the severity of the Veteran's service-connected right hip, lumbar spine, bilateral shoulder, bilateral ankle, and bilateral knee disabilities. See Jones v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 56 (2012). As such, a remand is necessary to correct the pre-decisional duty to assist error.

The Board also notes that the Veteran filed a subsequent Intent to File on April 9, 2024, followed by additional claims for increased ratings on June 22, 2024, and November 2, 2024.  Accordingly, the appellate period for the service-connected disabilities identified in the subsequent claims ends as of the date of the respective claim or Intent to File. For the claims addressed in this remand, the appellate period ended with the filing of the April 9, 2024, Intent to File.  Accordingly, the VA examiner should only consider the ameliorative effects of medication and the severity of the Veteran's service-connected disabilities for the period from April 4, 2023, to April 9, 2024.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain an opinion from an appropriate clinician to determine the severity of the Veteran's service-connected right hip, lumbar spine, bilateral shoulder, bilateral ankle, bilateral knee, and bilateral pes planus with plantar fasciitis disabilities for the period from April 4, 2023, to April 9, 2024.  An examination should only be scheduled if the clinician deems one is necessary to provide the requested opinions. 

a). The examiner should indicate whether any medications used by the Veteran during the period on appeal were productive of ameliorative effects on the respective service-connected disability. 

b). If so, the examiner must identify each medication and clearly explain what the Veteran's symptoms and ranges of motions would be without the medication in all relevant measurements, to include during flare-ups or with repeated use over time.

c). In so opining the examiner should consider the lay and medical evidence of record. 

A rationale for all opinions must be provided. If the examiner cannot provide an opinion without resort to speculation, he or she must explain why an opinion cannot be provided (e.g., lack of sufficient information or evidence, the limits of medical knowledge, etc.).

 

 

D. SMART

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	J. Palombi, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.