Citation Nr: A25034257
Decision Date: 04/14/25	Archive Date: 04/14/25

DOCKET NO. 241010-486254
DATE: April 14, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a left knee condition is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a right knee condition is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from July 1996 to May 1998.  He appeals an October 2023 rating decision by the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) that denied service connection for a bilateral knee condition.  

The Veteran requested that his appeal be placed on the direct review docket.  See October 2024 VA Form 10182.  Under the direct review docket, the Board is only authorized to review the evidence of record at the time of the AOJ's October 2023 rating decision.  38 C.F.R. ยง 20.301.

Entitlement to service connection for a bilateral knee condition

The Veteran seeks service connection for a bilateral knee condition.  To establish service connection, a claimant must show (1) the existence of a present disability, (2) an in-service incurrence or aggravation of an injury or disease, and (3) a causal relationship or "nexus" between the present disability and the in-service injury or disease.  Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166-67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

The Veteran has been diagnosed with degenerative arthritis in both knees.  See October 2023 rating decision.  Thus, the question in this case is whether the Veteran's bilateral knee condition is related to his service.

The Veteran was given a VA examination in which an examiner considered whether service connection was warranted on a secondary basis.  See August 2021 VA examination.  Service connection may be established on a secondary basis for a disability which is due to or the result of service-connected disease or injury.  38 C.F.R. ยง 3.310(a).  Establishing service connection on a secondary basis requires evidence sufficient to show (1) that a current disability exists and (2) that the current disability was either (a) caused by or (b) aggravated by a service-connected disability.  See Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439, 448 (1995) (en banc); see also Spicer v. McDonough, 61 F.4th 1360, 1365 (Fed. Cir. 2023).

The examiner considered a relationship between the Veteran's knee condition and his service-connected foot and ankle conditions.  See August 2021 VA examination.  He concluded that the Veteran's knee condition was not "proximately due to or the result" of the Veteran's service-connected conditions, reasoning that a knee condition would only occur if the service-connected conditions resulted in a pronounced limp or altered gait, which they did not.  Id.  

Following the initial denial of his claim, the Veteran filed a supplemental claim and provided a lay statement concerning the nature of his service and its possible relation to his knee condition, as well as an article regarding foot marching and load carrying activities and their relation to knee injuries.  See March 2023 statement and correspondence.  The AOJ did not order a new medical examination, and again denied the Veteran's claim.  See October 2023 rating decision.  

The Board finds that remand is necessary for several reasons.  First, the August 2021 VA opinion concerning secondary service connection is inadequate.  While the examiner found that the Veteran's knee condition was not "proximately due to" his service-connected conditions, this is not the correct standard.  Establishing service connection on a secondary basis only requires a showing of but-for causation, which encompasses multi-link causal chains.  See Spicer, 61 F.4th at 1363.  Furthermore, secondary service connection may also be established based on aggravation, and the examiner did not consider whether the Veteran's service-connected disabilities aggravated his knee condition.  See Atencio v. O'Rourke, 30 Vet. App. 74, 91 (2018).  

Second, the Veteran's lay statement was not considered in the initial examination, and it indicates that service connection on a direct basis may be warranted.  As the initial examination did not consider service connection on a direct basis, the AOJ erred by not ordering a new examination or opinion following the Veteran's supplemental claim.  See McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 81 (2006); 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.802.  Accordingly, remand is necessary for a new examination or opinion.  

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Obtain an opinion from an appropriately qualified reviewing clinician to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's bilateral knee condition.  The evidentiary record, including a copy of this remand, must be made available to and reviewed by the clinician.  The opinion must include a notation that this record review took place.  It is up to the discretion of the reviewing clinician as to whether a new examination is necessary to provide an adequate opinion.

After review, the clinician is to answer the following medical question:

Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's bilateral knee condition was incurred in, or is otherwise related to, his active service?

Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's bilateral knee condition was caused OR aggravated by his service-connected disabilities?

The clinician is advised that the Veteran is competent to report his symptoms and history, and that such reports must be considered in formulating an opinion.  The clinician must also consider the article concerning foot marching and load-carriage activities and injury risk submitted by the Veteran.  

The complete rationale for all opinions should be set forth and a discussion of the facts and medical principles involved would be of considerable assistance to the Board.  If an opinion cannot be provided without resorting to mere speculation, the reviewing clinician must provide a complete explanation for why an opinion cannot be rendered.  In doing so, the clinician must explain whether the inability to provide a more definitive opinion is the result of a need for additional information, or that he or she has exhausted the limits of current medical knowledge in providing an answer to the question.

 

 

DONNIE R. HACHEY

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Moore, Thomas J.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.1303.