Citation Nr: A25034150
Decision Date: 04/14/25	Archive Date: 04/14/25

DOCKET NO. 240924-475641
DATE: April 14, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to an increased disability rating for a duodenal ulcer to include chronic active gastritis, gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) with Barrett's esophagus, and intestinal metaplasia in excess of 10 percent prior to May 8, 2023.

Entitlement to an increased disability rating for a duodenal ulcer to include chronic active gastritis, GERD with Barrett's esophagus, and intestinal metaplasia in excess of 40 percent from May 8, 20213, is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The appellant served on active duty in the United States Army from February 1964 to July 1966.

Procedural History

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from an appeal of an August 2023 rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs' (VA) Veterans Benefits Administration, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ).  The appellant timely filed a VA Form 10182, Notice of Disagreement (NOD) in September 2024, electing the Hearing Docket.

In January 2025, the appellant, through his authorized representative withdrew his hearing request and requested the appeal decided based on the evidence and arguments already of record.  See Appellant's Correspondence, January 7, 2025.  

Evidentiary Windows

As the appellant selected the Hearing Docket, the Board may only consider the evidence of record before the AOJ at the time of its decision on the issue on appeal, evidence submitted by the appellant or his or her representative at the Board hearing, to include testimony provided at the hearing; and evidence submitted within 90 days following the Board hearing.  38 C.F.R. § 20.300(a), 302(a).  If the hearing request is withdrawn pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 20.704(e), the Board's decision will be based on a review of evidence of record at the time of the AOJ's decision on the issue on appeal, and evidence submitted within 90 days following receipt of the withdrawal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.302(b).  If additional evidence was submitted between the dates of the AOJ decision and the date the hearing request is withdrawn, the Board will not consider it unless it is resubmitted during the 90 days following receipt of the withdrawal request.  If the appellant would like VA to consider any evidence that was added to the claims file that the Board could not consider, the appellant may file a supplemental claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a supplemental claim are included with this decision.  See also Cook v. McDonough, 36 Vet. App. 175 (2023).  However, because the Board is remanding the claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Reasons for Remand

The issues are remanded to correct a duty to assist error that occurred prior to the August 2023 rating decision.

The Board may only remand issues to the AOJ to correct pre-decisional duty to assist errors.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802 (a). 

The AOJ obtained a June 2021 VA stomach and duodenal conditions examination report prior to the August 2023 rating decision on appeal.  However, this examination report did not adequately consider all of the appellant's symptomology associated with his disabilities.  

The appellant's duodenal ulcer is rated under 38 C.F.R. § 4.114, Diagnostic Code 7305, which addresses the rating criteria for the digestive system.  This regulation provides that combining ratings under diagnostic codes 7301 to 7329 is prohibited.  A single evaluation will be assigned under the diagnostic code which reflects the predominant disability picture, with elevation to the next higher evaluation where the severity of the overall disability warrants such evaluation.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.114.  

The June 2021 VA examination only pertained to the appellant's disabilities associated with the appellant's stomach and duodenal conditions but did not address symptoms related to GERD or Barrett's esophagus.  See VA Stomach and Duodenal Conditions Disability Benefits Questionnaire (DBQ), June 24, 2021.  As such, the Board cannot rely on this examination alone to properly address the severity of the appellant's service-connected digestive system disabilities.  The AOJ also obtained VA medical examinations in May 2023 in regard to all the appellant's disabilities of the digestive system, to include stomach and doudenal and esophagus.  However, neither examination address the severity of the appellant's symptoms prior to May 2023.  As noted in the August 2023 rating decision on appeal, an increased disability rating was assigned to the appellant's duodenal ulcer and associated disabilities based on the May 2023 VA examinations.  

As such, a remand is required to obtain a retrospective opinion on the nature and severity of the appellant's service-connected duodenal ulcer and associated disabilities prior to May 8, 2023.  

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the appellant for a VA examination with the appropriate clinician to determine the current severity of the appellant's several service-connected digestive disabilities, to include duodenal ulcer, GERD, Barrett's esophagus, and intestinal metaplasia, and obtain a medical opinion on the severity of the disabilities beginning June 1, 2020.  Any and all indicated studies deemed necessary by the clinician should be accomplished.  

The clinician is asked to address the following based on the evidence of record, to include the appellant's lay assertions from June 1, 2020, to the present:

(a.) In assessing the severity of the disorders, the clinician should attempt to specify the predominant disability and detail its symptoms.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.114 (in rating multiple digestive disabilities, separate and combined ratings are generally not permitted a single evaluation will be assigned under the DC that reflects the predominant disability picture).

(b.) The clinician must opine on whether the appellant's duodenal ulcer, gastritis, Barrett's esophagus, intestinal metaplasia, or GERD is the predominant disability from a medial perspective.

The clinician is asked to consider, address, and discuss the appellant's treatment records and examinations noting diagnoses, symptoms, treatment, and findings of duodenal ulcer, gastritis, Barrett's esophagus, intestinal metaplasia, and GERD. 

If the reviewing clinician is unable to provide the requested opinions without resort to speculation, it must be so stated, and he or she must provide the reasons why an opinion would require speculation.  It is essential that the examiner offer a rationale for the conclusion that an opinion could not be provided without resort to speculation, together with a statement as to whether there is additional evidence that could enable an opinion to be provided, or whether the inability to provide the opinion is based on the limits of medical knowledge.

The clinician should discuss the pertinent supporting clinical data and medical/scientific data upon which the opinion is based.  Moreover, if the clinician has a medical reason to accept or reject the proposition that the appellant's reports of his current symptoms and treatment for his service-connected conditions on appeal, this reasoning should be provided and explained.

A rationale for all opinions expressed should be provided.

2. After the above development, and any additionally indicated development, has been completed, readjudicate the issues on appeal.

 

 

K.A. KENNERLY

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	K. McDuffie, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.