Citation Nr: A25034587
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 220119-212235
DATE: April 15, 2025

ORDER

Service connection for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is granted.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for tremors, to include as due to exposure to contaminated water and other toxins, is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for breathing disorder, to include as due to exposure to contaminated water and other toxins, is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

Resolving all doubt in the Veteran's favor, he has PTSD that is causally related to his military service.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for service connection for PTSD have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.304.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from August 1968 to August 1970.

These matters are before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a December 2021 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office.

In the January 2022 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Hearing docket.  A Board hearing was held on December 4, 2024.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the December 2021 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or representative at the hearing or within 90 days following the hearing.  38 C.F.R. § 20.302(a).  If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal and prior to the Board hearing, or (2) more than 90 days following the hearing, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.302(a), 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the service connection claims for tremors and breathing disorder, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the readjudication of those claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Entitlement to service connection for PTSD.

The Veteran contends that his diagnosed PTSD is due to service.  In this regard, the Veteran testified that he joined the Marines under the buddy system, and his friend died in Vietnam.  He was also attacked by a group of Marines during racial riots in 1969, stating that he had to go to the infirmary and was transferred to another area of Camp LeJeune for his own safety.  

Service connection may be granted for disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service.  38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.  Establishing service connection generally requires evidence of (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a nexus between the claimed in-service disease or injury and the present disability.  Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163 (Fed. Cir. 2004); 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.

Service connection may be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge, when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).

To establish service connection for PTSD, there must be: (1) medical evidence diagnosing PTSD; (2) credible supporting evidence that the claimed in-service stressor actually occurred; and (3) medical evidence of a link between current symptomatology and the claimed in-service stressor.  38 C.F.R. § 3.304(f).

It is the policy of VA to administer the law under a broad interpretation, consistent with the facts in each case with all reasonable doubt to be resolved in favor of the claimant; however, the reasonable doubt rule is not a means for reconciling actual conflict or a contradiction in the evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.102.  The claimant is entitled to the benefit of the doubt when the evidence is in "approximate" balance (i.e., nearly equal) but does not require that the evidence be in exact equipoise.  Lynch v. McDonough, 999 F.3d 1391, 1394 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

VA treatment records submitted during the evidentiary window show a current diagnosis of PTSD.  Furthermore, the December 2021 rating decision noted that the Veteran's stressors - a friend passing away in Vietnam and his presence at Camp LeJeune during the period from November 20, 1968, to September 29, 1969, - were favorable findings; the Board is bound by the AOJ's favorable findings absent clear and unmistakable evidence to the contrary, which is not present in the current case.  38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).

As the criteria for the first two elements of 38 C.F.R. § 3.304(f) are established, the only element that remains is establishing medical evidence of a link between the Veteran's current symptomatology and the in-service stressors.

In this regard, the Board notes that the Veteran was not afforded a VA examination in connection with his service connection claim.  However, in support of his claim, the Veteran submitted information regarding the resting place and circumstances of his friend's death, and as noted above, found by the AOJ to be favorable.  Furthermore, the Veteran submitted a number of newspaper articles dated August 1969 that described the racial tensions and a July 20, 1969, riot at Camp Lejeune.  Also noted above, the Veteran was stationed at Camp Lejeune during this incident.  

The Veteran's service treatment records are silent for any complaints, treatment, or diagnosis of PTSD or other psychiatric disorder, to include the August 1969 report of medical examination.  However, the Veteran testified at his December 2024 hearing that he believed his medical records were incomplete, stating that he had gone to a field hospital or infirmary a number of times during service and spent the night at the infirmary after the riot.  

Post-service treatment records show the Veteran established care with VA in February 2021 and had been receiving psychiatric care with VA since at least January 2024.  Importantly, Dr. B.P. from a VA Outreach Clinic provided a letter in April 2024.  Dr. B.P. stated that the Veteran had been diagnosed and treated at VA for PTSD that was related to his military trauma involving being badly beaten by black Marines during racial tensions.  

Upon review, and resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Board finds that the evidence for the Veteran's entitlement to service connection for PTSD is in approximate balance.  Here, the Board finds the evidence to be consistent with the circumstances, places, and types of the Veteran's service.  There is no evidence in the file to contradict the Veteran's statements, so the Board finds the Veteran's account of his in-service stressors to be credible.  Dr. B.P.'s letter, while not discussing the impact of the death of the Veteran's friend, established a link between his current symptomatology and the claimed in-service stressor of his experiences during the riot while stationed at Camp Lejeune.  Therefore, the benefit of the doubt must be resolved in favor of the Veteran, and service connection for PTSD is granted.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch, 999 F.3d at 1394.

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to service connection for tremors, to include as due to exposure to contaminated water and other toxins, is remanded.

2. Entitlement to service connection for breathing disorder, to include as due to exposure to contaminated water and other toxins, is remanded.

The Veteran contends that he has tremors and a breathing disorder, to include residuals of lung cancer, due to service.  Here, the Veteran testified that his tremors, which could potentially progress to Parkinson's disease, were caused by Camp Lejeune chemical exposure.  Regarding his breathing disorder, which was described as residuals of lung cancer, the Veteran felt that being at Camp Lejeune and his exposure to the water and asbestos in his barracks caused a third of his right lung to be removed for possible lung cancer.  

The Veteran's service treatment records are silent for any complaints, treatment, or diagnoses referable to tremors or a breathing disorder.  However, as noted above, the Veteran testified that he believed his medical records were incomplete.  In this regard, as the failure to obtain a complete set of the Veteran's service treatment records constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error, a remand is warranted to attempt to obtain such.  Moreover, VA conceded the Veteran's exposure to contaminated water based on his presence at Camp LeJeune during the period from November 20, 1968, to September 29, 1969.

With respect to current disabilities, post-service treatment records show that the Veteran reported 25 years of worsening progression of his tremors in May 2021.  In February 2024, the Veteran underwent a right lower lobectomy. 

The Board notes the Veteran was not afforded a VA examination in connection with the service connection claims for tremors and a breathing disorder.  Based on the aforementioned evidence of current disorders and in-service events, the Board finds the failure to afford the Veteran appropriate VA examinations constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error that must be corrected on remand.

Moreover, the Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxics Act of 2022 (PACT Act), effective August 10, 2022, was passed during the pendency of the appeal, to include Section 303 which implemented 38 U.S.C. § 1168 and required a disability examination and medical opinion be requested for certain non-presumptive conditions involving a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA).  For such claims, VA is required to provide a disability examination and medical opinion when the Veteran submits a claim for compensation, has evidence of a disability, had evidence of participation in a TERA, and such evidence is not sufficient to establish service connection for the disability.  While failure to provide an opinion with respect to TERA is not a pre-decisional duty to assist error, a remand is also necessary for correction of any other error by the AOJ in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty if correction of the error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the Veteran's claim.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).  Thus, although the rating decision on appeal was issued prior to the enactment of the PACT Act, a remand is warranted under 38 C.F.R. § 20.802 to satisfy a regulatory or statutory duty, specifically in light of the 2022 enactment of the PACT Act.

In this case, the Veteran testified that he felt his exposure to contaminated water and asbestos led to his tremors and breathing disorder.  In addition, a TERA Memo was associated with the Veteran's file in April 2025 confirming his exposure to Camp Lejeune water contamination.  The Board notes that a March 2025 request for the Veteran's Individual Longitudinal Exposure Record (ILER) was unavailable, which should be corrected on remand.  Given the record outlined above, the Board finds there is a reasonable possibility that an examination and medical opinion would aid in substantiating the Veteran's claims.  As such, the matters are also remanded to obtain a VA opinion with respect to the Veteran's participation in a TERA, considering his total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments, and the synergistic, combined effect of all TERA.

The matters are REMANDED for the following actions:

1. Obtain, to the extent possible, the Veteran's complete service treatment records, to include those dated from November 20, 1968, to September 29, 1969.

2. Obtain an updated ILER, if available.

3. Then, schedule the Veteran for an appropriate examination to determine the nature and etiology of his tremors.  Following a review of the record, to include a copy of this Remand, and all necessary testing, the examiner should address the following:

(a.) Identify the nature of the Veteran's tremors, to include whether such is related to a diagnosis of Parkinson's disease.

(b.) Provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's tremors had their onset in, or are otherwise related to his military service, to include in-service exposure to any verified TERA or other toxin.

The clinician is asked to address the total potential exposure through all applicable deployments and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran, to include his exposure to water contamination and potential asbestos exposure while stationed at Camp Lejeune.

A rationale should be provided for each opinion offered.

4. Then, schedule the Veteran for an appropriate examination to determine the nature and etiology of any current breathing disorder.  Following a review of the record, to include a copy of this Remand, and all necessary testing, the examiner should address the following:

(a.) Identify the nature of any current breathing disorder, to include residuals of lung cancer.

(b.) For each diagnosis, provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that such is related to the Veteran's military service, to include in-service exposure to any verified TERA or other toxin.

The clinician is asked to address the total potential exposure through all applicable deployments and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran, to include his exposure to water contamination and potential asbestos exposure while stationed at Camp Lejeune.

A rationale should be provided for each opinion offered.

 

 

M. M. Celli

Acting Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	K. Garey

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.