Citation Nr: A25034387
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 240416-433582
DATE: April 15, 2025

ORDER

A rating in excess of 70 percent prior to October 18, 2022, for posttraumatic stress disorder and major depressive disorder with alcohol use disorder and traumatic brain injury (TBI) (hereinafter "PTSD with TBI") is denied. 

A rating in excess of 70 percent from October 18, 2022, for PTSD with TBI is denied. 

FINDINGS OF FACT

1.  Prior to October 18, 2022, the Veteran's PTSD with TBI was manifested by occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas; total occupational and social impairment was not shown.

2.  From October 18, 2022, the Veteran's PTSD with TBI has been manifested by occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas; total occupational and social impairment has not been shown.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. Prior to October 18, 2022, the criteria for a rating in excess of 70 percent for PTSD with TBI were not met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107(b), 5110; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411.

2.  From October 18, 2022, the criteria for a rating in excess of 70 percent for PTSD with TBI have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107(b), 5110; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.124a, 4.130, Diagnostic Codes 8045-9411.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from May 2007 to June 2008.  

These matters come before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from April 2023 and July 2023 rating decisions by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).  

The April 2023 rating decision was issued in response to a VA Form 21-8940, Application for Increased Compensation Based on Unemployability, that was received by VA on October 18, 2022. In addition to addressing the claim for TDIU (which was granted), the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) also sua sponte raised and denied a rating in excess of 70 percent for PTSD with TBI.

Notably, when the Veteran filed his claim for TDIU, he had also submitted already a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR) in March 2023, to request review of an April 2022 rating decision, which had denied a rating in excess of 70 percent for PTSD with TBI.  In response to the request for HLR, the AOJ issued the July 2023 rating decision, which considered the evidence of record at the time of the prior April 2022 decision and continued the 70 percent rating assigned for the Veteran's PTSD with TBI. 

In the April 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket and specifically appealed the April 2023 and July 2023 rating decisions that denied entitlement to higher ratings for PTSD with TBI.  The appeal of the same issue in the April 2023 and July 2023 rating decisions results in two separate appeal periods.  Therefore, the issue seeking an increased rating for PTSD with TBI has been bifurcated into two periods, before and after the October 18, 2022 increased rating claim.  

Due to the Veteran's election of the Direct Review docket, for the issue of entitlement to a rating in excess of 70 percent prior to October 18, 2022, for PTSD with TBI, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the April 2022 AOJ decision on appeal, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review.  For the issue of entitlement to a rating in excess of 70 percent from October 18, 2022, for PTSD with TBI, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the April 2023 AOJ decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decisions on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Entitlement to ratings in excess of 70 percent for PTSD with TBI.

Disability ratings are determined by applying the criteria set forth in VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities, which is based on the average impairment of earning capacity.  Individual disabilities are assigned separate diagnostic codes.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1.  The basis of disability evaluations is the ability of the body as a whole, or of the psyche, or of a system or organ of the body to function under the ordinary conditions of daily life including employment.  38 C.F.R. § 4.10.

In determining the severity of a disability, the Board is required to consider the potential application of various other provisions of the regulations governing VA benefits, whether or not they were raised by the veteran, as well as the entire history of the veteran's disability.  38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2; Schafrath v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 589, 595 (1991).

In deciding this appeal, the Board has considered whether separate ratings for different periods of time, based on the facts found, are warranted, a practice of assigning ratings referred to as "staging the ratings."  See Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007).

If the disability more closely approximates the criteria for the higher of two ratings, the higher rating will be assigned; otherwise, the lower rating is assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7.

The Veteran seeks a higher rating for his service-connected PTSD with TBI, which is rated under Diagnostic Codes 8045-9411.  Hyphenated diagnostic codes are used when a rating under one code requires use of an additional diagnostic code to identify the basis for the evaluation assigned.  38 C.F.R. § 4.27.  Diagnostic Code 8045 pertains to residuals of a traumatic brain injury.  38 C.F.R. § 4.124a. Diagnostic Code 9411 pertains to PTSD.  Thus, essentially, the Veteran has been assigned his current 70 percent rating based on his psychiatric disorder symptoms that have been attributed to the TBI and used a hyphenated diagnostic code to evaluate the condition.  The Board, nonetheless, will look to maximize the rating under each of the Diagnostic Codes 8045 and 9411.  The Board must maximize the Veteran's evaluation but may not assign evaluations under more than one diagnostic code where there is duplicative of or overlapping with the symptomatology justifying an evaluation under another diagnostic code.  Esteban v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 259, 262 (1994).  The impermissible evaluation of the same disability or set of symptoms under more than one diagnosis is often referred to as "pyramiding."

Under 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8045, there are three main areas of dysfunction listed that may result from traumatic brain injuries and have profound effects on functioning: cognitive (which is common in varying degrees after traumatic brain injury), emotional/behavioral, and physical. Each of these areas of dysfunction may require evaluation.

Cognitive impairment is defined as decreased memory, concentration, attention, and executive functions of the brain.  Executive functions are goal-setting, speed of information processing, planning, organizing, prioritizing, self-monitoring, problem-solving, judgment, decision-making, spontaneity, and flexibility in changing actions when they are not productive.  Not all of these brain functions may be affected in a given individual with cognitive impairment, and some functions may be affected more severely than others.  In a given individual, symptoms may fluctuate in severity from day to day. Cognitive impairment is to be evaluated under the table, Evaluation of Cognitive Impairment and Other Residuals of TBI Not Otherwise Classified ("Table").

Subjective symptoms may be the only residual of a traumatic brain injury or may be associated with cognitive impairment or other areas of dysfunction.  Subjective symptoms that are residuals of a traumatic brain injury, whether or not they are part of cognitive impairment, are to be evaluated under the subjective symptoms facet in the Table.

Any residual with a distinct diagnosis that may be evaluated under another diagnostic code (such as migraine headache or Ménière's disease) must be separately evaluated, even if that diagnosis is based on subjective symptoms, rather than under the Table.

Emotional/behavioral dysfunction must be evaluated under § 4.130 (schedule of ratings for mental disorders) when there is a diagnosis of a mental disorder.  When there is no diagnosis of a mental disorder, emotional/behavioral symptoms are evaluated under the criteria in the Table.

Physical (including neurological) dysfunction is evaluated based on the following list under an appropriate diagnostic code: motor and sensory dysfunction, including pain, of the extremities and face; visual impairment; hearing loss and tinnitus; loss of sense of smell and taste; seizures; gait, coordination, and balance problems; speech and other communication difficulties, including aphasia and related disorders, and dysarthria; neurogenic bladder; neurogenic bowel; cranial nerve dysfunctions; autonomic nerve dysfunctions; and endocrine dysfunctions.  The list of types of physical dysfunction does not encompass all possible residuals of a traumatic brain injury.  For residuals not listed here that are reported on an examination, evaluation should take place under the most appropriate diagnostic code.  Each condition must be evaluated separately, as long as the same signs and symptoms are not used to support more than one evaluation, and the evaluations for each separately rated condition should be combined under § 4.25.  The evaluation assigned based on the Table will be considered the evaluation for a single condition for purposes of combining with other disability evaluations.

Each of these areas of dysfunction may require evaluation under listed facets.  38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8045.  Each facet shall be assigned a level of impairment, ranging from 1 to 3.  The disability rating assigned shall be based on the facet with the highest level of impairment.

The Table contains 10 important facets of a traumatic brain injury related to cognitive impairment and subjective symptoms.  It provides criteria for levels of impairment for each facet, as appropriate, ranging from 0 to 3, and a 5th level, the highest level of impairment, labeled "total."  However, not every facet has every level of severity.  The consciousness facet, for example, does not provide for an impairment level other than "total," since any level of impaired consciousness would be totally disabling.  A 100 percent evaluation is assigned if "total" is the level of evaluation for one or more facets. If no facet is evaluated as "total," the overall percentage evaluation is assigned based on the level of the highest facet as follows: 0 = 0 percent; 1 = 10 percent; 2 = 40 percent; and 3 = 70 percent.  For example, a 70 percent evaluation is assigned if 3 is the highest level of evaluation for any facet.

The manifestations of conditions evaluated pursuant to the Table may overlap with manifestations of a comorbid mental or neurologic or other physical disorder that can be separately evaluated under another diagnostic code.  In such cases, more than one evaluation should not be assigned based on the same manifestations.  If the manifestations of two or more conditions cannot be clearly separated, a single evaluation is to be assigned under whichever set of diagnostic criteria allows the better assessment of overall impaired functioning due to both conditions.  If, however, the manifestations are clearly separable, a separate evaluation should be assigned for each condition.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8045.

Symptoms listed as examples at certain evaluation levels in the table are only examples and are not symptoms that must be present in order to assign a particular evaluation.  38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8045, Note (2).

Instrumental activities of daily living refers to activities other than self-care that are needed for independent living, such as meal preparation, doing housework and other chores, shopping, traveling, doing laundry, being responsible for one's own medications, and using a telephone. Those activities are distinguished from activities of daily living, which refers to basic self-care and includes bathing or showering, dressing, eating, getting in or out of bed or a chair, and using the toilet. 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8045, Note (3).

The terms mild, moderate, and severe TBI, which may appear in medical records, refer to a classification of TBI made at, or close to, the time of injury rather than to the current level of functioning.  That classification does not affect the rating assigned under diagnostic code 8045.  38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8045, Note (4).

The evidence shows that the Veteran has been diagnosed with acquired psychiatric disorders, to include PTSD that is related to his TBI.  As will be explained more fully below, the Veteran's psychiatric symptoms overlap and are not differentiable from the symptoms of TBI.  See April 2022 and February 2023 VA Examination reports.  Therefore, his cognitive impairment and emotional/behavioral dysfunction is to be rated under 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411, and a single evaluation will be assigned. 

Diagnostic Code 9411 is rated under the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders.  Under the General Rating Formula, a 70 percent rating is warranted for a mental disorder that results in occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a work-like setting); and inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.  38 C.F.R. § 4.130.

A 100 percent rating is assigned when the condition results in total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name.  Id.

If the disability more closely approximates the criteria for the higher of two ratings, the higher rating will be assigned; otherwise, the lower rating is assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7.

Importantly, evaluations under § 4.130 are symptom-driven, meaning that symptomatology should be the fact-finder's primary focus when deciding entitlement to a given disability rating under that regulation.  Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 116-17 (Fed. Cir. 2013).  Severity and duration of the symptoms also play an important role in determining the rating.  Id. at 117.  The Board notes however that the list of symptoms under the rating criteria are meant to be examples of symptoms that would warrant the rating and are not meant to be exhaustive.  The Board need not find all or even some of the symptoms to award a specific rating. 38 C.F.R. § 4.21; Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436, 442-43 (2002).  If the evidence shows the Veteran suffers symptoms listed in the rating criteria or symptoms of similar severity, frequency, and duration, that cause occupational or social impairment equivalent to what would be caused by the symptoms listed in the criteria for a particular rating, the appropriate equivalent rating will be assigned.  Mauerhan, 16 Vet. App. at 443.

When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding the merits of an issue material to the determination of the matter, the benefit-of-the doubt in resolving each such issue shall be given to the veteran.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

The Veteran is currently rated at 70 percent for his service-connected PTSD with TBI.  As will be discussed more fully below, the Board finds that a higher rating both prior to October 18, 2022, and from that date is not warranted.

In January 2022, the Veteran underwent a VA examination to evaluate his TBI symptoms.  The Veteran reported current symptoms consisting of migraine headaches, blurred vision, and difficulty concentrating.  Upon evaluation, the examiner found objective evidence of mild impairment of memory, attention, concentration, or executive functions resulting in mild functional impairment; normal judgment; social interactions were routinely appropriate; always oriented to person, time, place, and situation; normal motor activity; and normal visual spatial orientation. The Veteran had three or more subjective symptoms that mildly interfered with work; instrumental activities of daily living; or work, family or other close relationships consisting of headaches with nausea, vomiting, and sensitivity to light and sound.  There were no neurobehavioral effects.  Lastly, the examiner indicated that, while the Veteran had an additional diagnosis for PTSD and there was some overlap of symptoms, it was more likely than not that the Veteran's reported symptoms of panic attacks, verbal aggression with coworkers, and becoming easily aggravated were due to his psychiatric diagnosis, and not residuals of TBI. 

In April 2022, the Veteran underwent a VA examination to evaluate his PTSD with TBI.  The Veteran reported that he had been married for 5 years.  He also reported that he tried to stay away from people because he became easily agitated and irritable around others.  The examiner documented symptoms consisting of intense/prolonged psychological distress at exposure to internal/external cues, persistent negative emotional state, marked physiological reactions to internal/external cues, markedly diminished interest or participation in significant activities, persistent and exaggerated negative beliefs, feelings of detachment or estrangement for others, persistent inability to experience positive emotions, irritable behavior or angry outbursts, reckless or self-destructive behavior, problems with concentration, hypervigilance, suspiciousness, depressed mood, anxiety, panic attacks more than once a week, impairment of short and long term memory, flattened affect, speech intermittently illogical/obscure/irrelevant, disturbance of motivation and mood, difficulty establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances including work or work like setting, inability to establish and maintain effective relationships, suicidal ideations, obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities, and intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene.  The examiner indicated that such symptoms would result in occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking and/or mood.  

In an April 2022 addendum opinion, the same VA examiner who conducted the April 2022 VA examination indicated that the Veteran TBI symptoms differentiated from his mental health symptoms in that the Veteran had additional symptoms of migraine headaches, occasional blurred vision, and difficulty concentrating.  

In February 2023, the Veteran underwent a VA examination to evaluate his PTSD with TBI.  The Veteran reported that he had been living with his third wife for 6 years and they had a great relationship and were supportive of each other.  The Veteran also reported that he kept in touch with his children, occasionally played pool, and worked out regularly.  The examiner documented symptoms consisting of intense/prolonged psychological distress at exposure to internal/external cues, persistent negative emotional state, markedly diminished interest or participation in significant activities, persistent and exaggerated negative beliefs, feelings of detachment or estrangement for others, persistent inability to experience positive emotions, irritable behavior or angry outbursts, hypervigilance, exaggerated startle response, suspiciousness, depressed mood, anxiety, panic attacks more than once a week, near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function, mild memory loss, chronic sleep impairment, speech intermittently illogical/obscure/ irrelevant, disturbance of motivation and mood, impaired judgment, difficulty establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, and difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances including work or work like setting.  The examiner indicated that such symptoms would result in occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking and/or mood.  

In April 2023, the Veteran underwent another VA examination to evaluate his TBI symptoms.  The Veteran reported current worsening fatigue, headaches, memory loss, mood swings, and panic attacks.  The examiner diagnosed the Veteran with acute TBI, resolved.  The examiner concluded that the Veteran's ongoing progressive neurobehavioral symptoms were due to ongoing psychiatric/general medical conditions. 

The Veteran's contemporaneous VA treatment records reflect continuous treatment for PTSD with symptoms of depression, anxiety, panic attacks, difficulty concentrating, little interest or pleasure, and trouble sleeping.  These records also reflect the Veteran's continuous denial for symptoms of suicidal ideations.  

PTSD with TBI prior to October 18, 2022.  

Based on the foregoing evidence, for the period prior to October 18, 2022, the Board finds that an increased rating is not warranted for the Veteran's PTSD with TBI.  In pertinent part, during this period, the Veteran did not demonstrate symptomatology reflective of the criteria for the next higher 100 percent rating.  The Board recognizes that, during the April 2022 VA examination the Veteran was noted to have intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene.  While this symptom may be associated with a higher rating, the record does not reflect that this symptom, considered in combination with his other psychiatric symptoms, rendered the Veteran totally impaired socially.  In that regard, although the Veteran reported that he tried to stay away from people because he became easily agitated and irritable around others, he also reported that he had been married for 5 years.  As such, the Board finds that the Veteran's psychiatric symptomatology is not adequately described in terms of total social impairment.  The Board also acknowledges that, while the Veteran expressed suicidal ideations during the April 2022 VA examination, and that symptom is similar to persistent danger of self-harm (i.e., the criteria for a 100 percent rating), such symptom was infrequent and consistently denied in the Veteran's contemporaneous VA treatment records.  Moreover, the April 2022 VA examiner specifically left blank the box for persistent danger of hurting self or others, indicating that this symptom was not present on examination.  Accordingly, the severity, frequency, and duration of the Veteran's suicidal ideation did not rise to the level contemplated by the 100 percent disability rating.  See Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 10, 22 (2017).  The April 2022 VA examiner also objectively considered the Veteran's psychiatric symptomology and concluded that the Veteran had occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood (i.e., the criteria for a 70 percent rating).  The Board assigns this medical opinion significant probative value as it is based on examination of the Veteran and review of the claims file.  Therefore, the criteria for 100 percent rating are not met and the claim for a rating in excess of 70 percent for PTSD with TBI prior to October 18, 2022, is denied.

As previously noted, when there is an overlap of symptoms from a TBI with symptoms of a mental disorder, if the manifestations of the two conditions cannot be clearly separated, a single rating should be assigned under whichever set of diagnostic criteria allows the better assessment of overall impaired functioning due to both conditions.  Here, the April 2022 VA examiner concluded the Veteran's TBI symptoms only differentiated from his mental health symptoms in that the Veteran had additional symptoms of migraine headaches, occasional blurred vision, and difficulty concentrating.  The Board notes that the Veteran is separately service-connected for migraine headaches, rated 50 percent disabling (effective from June 19, 2013).  The Board also notes that the symptom of difficulty concentrating overlaps with the symptoms attributable to his psychiatric disorder.  Therefore, the Board has considered whether the Veteran may be entitled to a higher rating under Diagnostic Code 8045 for residuals of TBI.  Nevertheless, a higher rating is not warranted under Diagnostic Code 8045 as the Veteran's symptoms would not warrant a total rating in any of the 10 facets in the table of "Evaluation of Cognitive Impairment and Other Residuals of TBI Not Otherwise Classified" (i.e., the criteria for a higher 100 percent rating).  Rather, the record shows that, at most, the Veteran symptoms would warrant a 2 based on objective evidence of mild impairment of memory, attention, concentration, and executive functions and three or more subjective symptoms that mildly interfere with work.  Therefore, a higher rating is not warranted under Diagnostic Code 8045.

PTSD with TBI from October 18, 2022.

Based on the above evidence, for the period from October 18, 2022, the Board finds that an increased rating is not warranted for the Veteran's PTSD with TBI.  The Board notes that the foregoing analysis is largely the same as the above analysis for the Veteran's PTSD with TBI prior to October 18, 2022, due to the overlapping periods of review (which includes a one-year lookback period prior to the October 2022 claim for increase).  The Board finds similarly that the Veteran has not demonstrated symptomatology reflective of the criteria for the next higher 100 percent rating.  The Board recognizes that, during the April 2022 VA examination the Veteran was noted to have intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene.  While this symptom may be associated with a higher rating, the record does not reflect that this symptom considered in combination with his other psychiatric symptoms rendered the Veteran totally impaired socially.  In that regard, the Veteran reported during the February 2023 VA examination that he was in a great relationship with his wife of 6 years, and they were supportive of each other.  He also maintained his relationships with his children, played pool occasionally and worked out regularly.  

As such, the Board finds that the Veteran's psychiatric symptomatology is not adequately described in terms of total social impairment.  The Board also acknowledges that, while the Veteran expressed suicidal ideations during the April 2022 VA examination, and that symptom is similar to persistent danger of self-harm (i.e., the criteria for a 100 percent rating), such symptom was infrequent and was not shown in the Veteran's contemporaneous VA treatment records or February 2023 VA examination report.  Moreover, the April 2022 VA examiner specifically left blank the box for persistent danger of hurting self or others, indicating that this symptom was not present on examination.  Accordingly, the severity, frequency, and duration of the Veteran's suicidal ideation did not rise to the level contemplated by the 100 percent disability rating.  See Bankhead, 29 Vet. App. at 22.  The April 2022 and February 2023 VA examiners also objectively considered the Veteran's psychiatric symptomology and concluded that the Veteran had occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood (i.e., the criteria for a 70 percent rating).  The Board assigns these medical opinions significant probative value as they are based on examination of the Veteran and review of the claims file.  Therefore, the criteria for 100 percent ratings are not met and the claim for a rating in excess of 70 percent, from October 18, 2022, for PTSD with TBI is denied.

As indicated, when there is an overlap of symptoms from a TBI with symptoms of a mental disorder, if the manifestations of the two conditions cannot be clearly separated, a single rating should be assigned under whichever set of diagnostic criteria allows the better assessment of overall impaired functioning due to both conditions.  Here, the April 2022 VA examiner concluded the Veteran's TBI symptoms only differentiated from his mental health symptoms in that the Veteran had additional symptoms of migraine headaches, occasional blurred vision, and difficulty concentrating.  The Veteran is separately service-connected for migraine headaches and the Board also notes that the symptom of difficulty concentrating overlaps with the symptoms attributable to his psychiatric disorder.  Therefore, the Board has considered whether the Veteran may be entitled to a higher rating under Diagnostic Code 8045 for residuals of TBI.  Nevertheless, a higher rating is not warranted under Diagnostic Code 8045 as the Veteran does not warrant a total rating in any of the 10 facets in the table of "Evaluation of Cognitive Impairment and Other Residuals of TBI Not Otherwise Classified" (i.e., the criteria for a higher 100 percent rating).  Rather, the record shows that, at most, the Veteran symptoms would warrant a 2 based on objective evidence of mild impairment of memory, attention, concentration, and executive functions and three or more subjective symptoms that mildly interfere with work.  Therefore, a higher rating is not warranted under Diagnostic Code 8045.

(Continued on the next page)

?

Lastly, the Board acknowledges that the Veteran appears to have other TBI residuals consisting of headaches and blurred vision, which do not otherwise overlap with his psychiatric symptoms.  As indicated above, however, the evaluation of the Veteran's PTSD with TBI is limited to those residuals which are not already separately rated.  In this case, as discussed above, the Veteran is already separately rated for headaches.  Moreover, while the Veteran submitted correspondence in March 2023 indicating that the Veteran was not already separately rated for blurred vision, the medical evidence of record indicates that the Veteran's blurred vision is a symptom attributable to his service-connected headache disorder.  See January 2022 VA Examination report.  Likewise, a separate compensable rating for this symptom would constitute impermissible pyramiding.

 

 

A. ISHIZAWAR

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Metzner, Paul

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.