Citation Nr: A25034333
Decision Date: 04/14/25	Archive Date: 04/14/25

DOCKET NO. 240826-467412
DATE: April 14, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to an initial rating greater than 10 percent for lumbosacral strain is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Navy from October 1984 to October 2004.  For her meritorious service, the Veteran was awarded (among other decorations) the Navy and Marine Corps Achievement Medal.

This matter is before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal of a September 2023 rating decision from a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

Given the date of the rating decision on appeal, the Veteran's appeal is governed by the modernized review system, known by the Board as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA).  38 C.F.R. §§ 3.2400, 19.2. 

In the August 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement (NOD)), the Veteran elected the direct review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the September 2023 rating decision (i.e., agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision) on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim for entitlement to an initial rating greater than 10 percent for lumbosacral strain, any evidence the Board could not consider may be considered on readjudication of the claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

As for the matter of representation, the Board notes that the Veteran was previously represented by a private attorney in this matter.  In a February 2025 letter, after the appeal to the Board was filed and docketed, the attorney submitted a motion to withdraw as the Veteran's representative due to her failure to cooperate with the proper preparation and presentation of her appeal.  The attorney has provided good cause for the withdrawal and the required notice to the Veteran.  The Veteran did not file a response to the motion within 30 days.  Accordingly, the motion for withdrawal is granted.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.6, 20.1304.

Entitlement to an initial rating greater than 10 percent for lumbosacral strain 

The Veteran is seeking an initial rating greater than 10 percent for her service-connected lumbosacral strain, associated with right hip dysplasia/osteoarthritis, with limitation of flexion.  The Veteran argues that at least a 20 percent rating is warranted due to muscle spasms and guarding severe enough to result in an altered gait.  See August 2024 Appellant Brief.  

In a July 2023 statement, the Veteran reported her lumbar spine condition was secondary to her service-connected left and right hip disabilities; and the pain and discomfort in her hips causes her to walk unevenly, increasing pain and discomfort in her lower back.  The Veteran indicated that she experiences daily low back pain, as well as muscle spasms 4-5 times per week, and flare-ups.  She described her back pain as aching, stabbing, throbbing, shooting pain, and as a pins-and-needles sensation.  See July 2023 Veteran Statement. 

With regard to treatment, the Veteran reported taking over the counter (OTC) medication and methocarbamol, meloxicam, and methylprednisolone for back pain.  When experiencing flare-ups, she wears a back brace, gets cortisone injections, and uses ice or heat for her back.  At the time of her statement, the Veteran had a referral for acupuncture as well, but had not begun treatment.  The Veteran reported missing at least a week of work in the last 12 months, and experiencing functional limitations due to back pain.  For example, she has pain with leaning back or bending sideways, and her pain is aggravated with prolonged walking, prolonged standing, prolonged sitting, running, jogging, using stairs, yardwork, cleaning her house, long car rides, sports or recreational activities, lifting or carrying objects of more than low weight, and sex.  Id.

In August 2023, the Veteran underwent a VA examination for back (thoracolumbar spine) conditions.  During the examination, the Veteran reported a history of low back pain due to gait compensation from the hips, with a 2019 onset, that has progressed and/or worsened since onset.  Her current symptoms included daily low back pain without radiculopathy, and her current treatment consisted of steroid injections in the lumbar spine, NSAIDS as needed, and acupuncture.  She reported the functional loss, or functional impairment, from her back disability as difficulty running, climbing ladders and/or stairs, bending, lifting, carrying, and walking, standing, or sitting for long periods of time.  

The August 2023 VA examiner indicated the Veteran did not report flare-ups of the thoracolumbar spine, and the examination was not performed during a flare-up.  Nevertheless, the Veteran exhibited abnormal and painful initial active range of motion in all directions, and passive range of motion testing was not performed because it was medically contraindicated (e.g., it may cause the Veteran severe pain or the risk of further injury).  There was evidence of pain with weight-bearing and active motion.  However, the examiner found there was no loss of function or range of motion after repetitive use testing.  The Veteran did not have localized tenderness or guarding.  While she did experience muscle spasms, it did not result in an abnormal gait or abnormal spinal contour.  The examiner noted that strains led to spasms.      

The August 2023 VA examination is inadequate because the examiner failed to reconcile inconsistencies between his findings and the Veteran's lay statements.  See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007) (holding that when VA undertakes to provide a VA examination or obtain a VA opinion, it must ensure that the examination or opinion is adequate). 

For instance, during the examination, the Veteran endorsed having functional loss due to her back disability, to include difficulty running, bending, lifting, and walking, standing, or sitting for long periods of time.  Despite the Veteran's reports, the examiner concluded the procured evidence (statements from the Veteran) did not suggest pain, fatigability, weakness, lack of endurance, or incoordination which significantly limits functional ability with repeated use over time.  However, the examiner failed to reconcile the inconsistency between his finding and the Veteran's reports of functional loss.  Additionally, the examiner's findings failed to reconcile the Veteran's report of flare-ups, made in the month prior to the examination, in her July 2023 statement.  

An adequate examination is necessary to address the aforementioned deficiencies, as well as to discount the impact of treatment (i.e., oral or topical medication, injections) on the Veteran's back disability, and provide corresponding estimates of range of motion.  As discussed, the Veteran reports taking medication and receiving steroid injections to treat her back disability.  See Ingram v. Collins, No. 23-1798, 2025 U.S. App. Vet. Claims LEXIS 327 (Vet. App. Mar. 12, 2025) (indicating the holding of Jones v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 56 (2012), applies when evaluating musculoskeletal disabilities where the relevant diagnostic code does not reference medication use, and the Board must discount the beneficial effects (i.e., ameliorative effects of medication) and evaluate the baseline severity of each disability).  

In the September 2023 AMA rating decision, the AOJ denied the claim without obtaining an adequate examination.  This was a pre-decisional duty to assist error, and a remand is necessary to correct it.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a). 

Moreover, the Board notes the Veteran's contentions that she experiences muscle spasms and guarding severe enough to result in an altered gait, warranting a 20 percent rating.  See August 2024 Appellant Brief.  While the Veteran is competent to report events capable of lay observation, see Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 469 (1994), the Board finds she has not been shown to have the requisite medical knowledge to be deemed competent to offer an opinion that her muscle spasms cause an altered gait.  In addition, this report constitutes post-decisional evidence, which the Board may not consider.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301 ("For appeals in which the appellant requested, on the Notice of Disagreement, direct review by the Board without submission of additional evidence and without a Board hearing, the Board's decision will be based on a review of the evidence of record at the time of the [AOJ] decision on the issue or issues on appeal.").

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination to determine the nature and severity of her service-connected lumbosacral strain.  The entire claim file, to include all electronic files, must be reviewed by the examiner.

The examiner must provide an estimated range of motion that discounts the impact of medication (i.e., oral or topical medication, injections).  

The Veteran's lay contentions must be considered, and where necessary, the examiner must reconcile those contentions with findings from the examination.

In offering this opinion, the examiner must specifically consider the following: (1) The July 2023 Veteran Statement, in which the Veteran reported lower back pain and discomfort from walking unevenly, muscle spasms 4-5 times per week, and flare-ups that are treated with cortisone injections; and (2) The August 2024 Appellant Brief, in which the Veteran reports having muscle spasms that affect her gait solely due to her back disability.  

The examination report must include a complete rationale for all opinions expressed.  If the examiner feels that a requested opinion cannot be rendered without resorting to speculation, the examiner must state whether the need to speculate is caused by a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (i.e., no one could respond given medical science and the known facts) or by a deficiency in the record or the examiner (i.e., additional facts are required, or the examiner does not have the needed knowledge or training). 

 

M. C. WILSON

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	C. Neal, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.