Citation Nr: A25034105
Decision Date: 04/14/25	Archive Date: 04/14/25

DOCKET NO. 240213-416629
DATE: April 14, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for neuropathy/nerve damage of the right upper extremity - right hand and shoulder (claimed as neuropathy and nerve damage) is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for neuropathy of the left upper extremity, left hand is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for sinusitis is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Marine Corps from February 2010 to October 2013 with additional service in the Marine Corps Reserve to March 2018.  The Veteran additional served on active duty in the United States Army from January 2021 to October 2022.  

This matter comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a March 2023 rating decision issued by a VA Regional Office, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ).  

In the February 2024 VA Form 10182 Notice of Disagreement (NOD), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  However, because the Board is remanding the Veteran's claims, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

By way of background, the Board notes that prior to the Veteran's discharge from his second period of active duty, he was a participant in the Integrated Disability Evaluation System (IDES) program.  The IDES program is a joint program between VA and the Department of Defense and is part of VA's pre-discharge system that allows service members to file claims for disability compensation prior to separation or retirement from active duty or full-time National Guard or Reserve duty.  When service members enroll in IDES, they are evaluated for continued fitness for duty, and if found medically unfit for duty, IDES provides a proposed VA disability rating.  

A proposed rating decision for IDES purposes was issued in August 2022 regarding the Veteran's service connection claims.  The decision, in relevant part, did not propose service connection for nerve damage related to the Veteran's right shoulder or neuropathy of the Veteran's left and right hands.  The decision, however, proposed granting service connection for allergic rhinitis (claimed as allergic rhinitis and sinusitis).  August 2022 Proposed Rating Decision.  The AOJ thereafter issued a November 2022 rating decision denying, in relevant part, the Veteran's service connection claims for nerve damage to the right shoulder and neuropathy of the left and right hands.  Service connection for allergic rhinitis (claimed as allergic rhinitis, sinusitis) was granted.  November 2022 Rating Decision.

The AOJ thereafter issued the March 2023 rating decision on appeal which stated that the August 2022 rating decision contained errors in that sinusitis was claimed and should have been denied separately and further that the Veteran's right shoulder nerve damage should have been included with the Veteran's neuropathy claim of the right upper extremity.  The AOJ then denied the Veteran's service connection claim for sinusitis, neuropathy of the left hand, and neuropathy/nerve damage of the right upper extremity to include the right hand and shoulder.  March 2023 Rating Decision.  

1. Entitlement to service connection for neuropathy/nerve damage of the right upper extremity - right hand and shoulder (claimed as neuropathy and nerve damage) is remanded.

2. Entitlement to service connection for neuropathy of the left upper extremity, left hand is remanded.

3. Entitlement to service connection for sinusitis is remanded.

The Veteran claims that his sinusitis is due to burn pit exposure during his service in Afghanistan and that his neuropathy and nerve damage is due to an injury suffered during physical training in October 2021.  March 2022 VA 21-526EZ.  The Veteran has qualifying Persian Gulf service in Afghanistan and Jordan ranging from May 2011 through April 2012.  See, e.g., January 2023 VA Memo.  

The Board finds these matters must be remanded for correction of a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  Specifically, it is unclear from the record whether the Veteran has missing service treatment records (STRs) and whether efforts to obtain these records were exhausted.   

A March 2022 VA 21-0819 Form for Referral to IDES indicates the Veteran suffered a right shoulder acute latissimus dorse tendon tear at humerus insertion and a right shoulder acute inferior labrum tear which were medical conditions to be considered for a fitness for duty determination.  The VA 21-0819 indicates that the STRs provided with the form contains a complete history of documented healthcare, including entrance and applicable exit physicals, and healthcare documented from the electronic health record.  

STRs associated with the claims file at the same time as the March 2022 VA 21-0819 form include treatment records from each of the Veteran's active-duty periods.  STRs from October 2021 through March 2023 indicates the Veteran suffered a significant tendon rupture of the right shoulder during training which led to regional injury of the nerves and function of the rotator cuff and shoulder.  Moreover, an August 2011 STR relevantly indicates the Veteran complained of chest and sinus congestion with shortness of breath.     

The same March 2022 VA 21-0819 form, however, indicated that there were nonetheless missing medical records from 2010-2020.  March 2022 VA 21-0819.  The form indicates that the missing documents were requested from the Veteran and Winn Medical and that both provided negative responses.  Id.  There is no further evidence of record that any additional efforts were undertaken to obtain the missing treatment records identified in the March 2022 VA 21-0819 form or whether the STRs associated with the claims file were otherwise complete.  

Although there are STRs in the claims file currently, it remains unclear from the record whether there are any outstanding STRs.  Indeed, after the Veteran filed his March 2022 service connection claim, a March 2022 IDES Exit Interview Checklist simply cites the VA Form 21-0819 which outlined efforts to obtain the identified missing records.       

While the VA Form 21-0819 outlined that missing STRs were requested from the Veteran and Winn Medical, the Board finds that such efforts alone do not satisfy the VA's duty to assist.  Significantly, the record contains no notice to the Veteran that the VA concluded, after continued efforts to obtain the Veteran's missing Federal records, that it is reasonably certain that the Veteran's records do not exist or that further efforts to obtain the Veteran's records would be futile.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(e)(1).  Indeed, it does not appear any continued efforts to obtain the Veteran's service treatment records were made beyond that outlined in the initial VA Form 21-0819.

Given the forgoing, remand is warranted for further attempts to obtain any missing service treatment records to correct this pre-decisional duty to assist error. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Undertake reasonable efforts in associating outstanding service treatment records, if any, with consideration of the Veteran's separate periods of active-duty service and his service in the Marine Corps Reserve.

If these records cannot be located despite continued efforts, a notation memorializing a negative response should be provided.

For federal records, all reasonable attempts should be made to obtain such records.  If any records cannot be obtained after reasonable efforts have been made, issue a formal determination that such records do not exist or that further efforts to obtain such records would be futile, which should be documented in the claims file.  The Veteran must be notified of the attempts made and why further attempts would be futile, and allowed the opportunity to provide such records, as provided in 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(b)(2) and 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(e).

2. After the above development, and any additionally indicated development, has been completed, readjudicate the issues on appeal.

 

 

SHEREEN M. MARCUS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Knopp, Derek A.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.