Citation Nr: A25034326
Decision Date: 04/14/25	Archive Date: 04/14/25

DOCKET NO. 240523-443286
DATE: April 14, 2025

REMANDED

Service connection for rhinitis is remanded.

Service connection for anxiety disorder is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from February 1989 to February 1993.  

The rating decision on appeal was issued in December 2023 and constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.  

In the May 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the December 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims entitlement to service connection for rhinitis and entitlement to service connection for anxiety, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

During the pendency of the appeal, the AOJ issued a March 2025 rating decision which granted the Veteran service connection for rhinitis with a noncompensable rating effective November 20, 2024. In that rating decision, the AOJ awarded service connection based upon the presumptive association of rhinitis with exposure to toxins in accordance with the liberalizing provisions of the PACT Act.  The award of service connection for rhinitis renders an appeal for service connection for rhinitis moot from that date forward. However, in accordance with a recent decision of our superior court, the Veteran's current appeal for service connection for rhinitis is not moot as it relates to a potential grant of an earlier effective date for his claim on a non-presumptive basis. See Johnson v. Collins, No. 23-7589 (Vet App 2025).

Service connection for rhinitis is remanded

The Veteran contends his rhinitis is due to his service. Specifically, he stated "I have had terrible sinus issues since serving in the military. I take [over-the-counter medications] to help, but I am experiencing worse congestion, and it affects my sleep." See August 2023 Claim. 

The Veteran's enlistment examination reports normal results. His service treatment record reports no treatment for or diagnosis of rhinitis.

A January 2023 VA Memorandum reports the Veteran is a Persian Gulf Veteran with qualifying service under 38 U.S.C. §1117.

A December 2022 VA Memorandum reports the Veteran is a covered veteran under 38 U.S.C. § 1119 due presumed toxic exposures during his deployment to the Southwest Asia theater of operations.

At the time of the December 2023 decision on appeal, the Veteran did not have a current diagnosis of rhinitis. 

A December 2023 VA examiner cited the lack of service treatment records reporting the Veteran's in-service sinus issues and reported that the Veteran treated his sinus symptoms with over-the-counter medication.  The examiner noted that the Veteran was asymptomatic at the time of the examination but did not address the Veteran's lay statements regarding the in-service onset and continuation of his symptoms since service. For these reasons, the opinion is inadequate. Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295 (2008). 

The AOJ's reliance on this inadequate opinion is a pre-decisional duty to assist error requiring remand to correct. 

Service connection for anxiety disorder is remanded

The Veteran generally contends his anxiety disorder is due to his service. See August 2023 Claim. 

The Veteran's enlistment examination reports normal results. His service treatment record reports no treatment for or diagnosis of a mental health disability.

In a March 2, 2023, mental health note, the Veteran reported long-standing difficulties trusting others since he left the military in 1993 and attributed his hypervigilance to his military training. See September 2023 VA Treatment Record. 

The Board notes prior to the December 2023 decision on appeal, the Veteran had not been afforded a VA examination for his claimed anxiety disorder. That a present disability "may be associated" with service is generally a low threshold analysis. McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 83 (2006). Thus, the Board determines that the Veteran's claim must be remanded for an examination.

The AOJ issued the December 2023 decision on the Veteran's claim without affording the Veteran a VA examination. This is a pre-decisional duty to assist error requiring remand to correct.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain an addendum opinion from an appropriate examiner. The clinician must review the claims file.  

The examiner must address the following: 

(A) The examiner must identify all current diagnoses of sinus related disabilities, to include rhinitis (current: since August 2023). 

(B) The examiner must address whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's current disability is related to his TERA? 

In answering this question, the clinician must consider the following: 1) the total potential exposure through all applicable deployments; and 2) the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran.  

(C) The examiner must also opine whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's sinus disability was due directly to his service. 

2. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination for his mental health disability, to include anxiety. The examiner must review the claims file.  

(A) The examiner must identify all current mental health disability diagnoses (current: since August 2023). 

(B) The examiner must determine whether it is at least as likely as not (the likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) the Veteran's mental health disability was caused or aggravated by his service. 

The examiners are asked to explain their reasons behind any opinions expressed and conclusions reached. The examiners are reminded that the term "as likely as not" does not mean "within the realm of medical possibility," but rather that the likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher. Note that the lack of documented treatment in service, or a long period after, while probative, cannot serve as the sole basis for a negative finding. The Veteran's lay contentions must be considered and weighed in making the determination.

 

 

JIMMY L. BARDIN

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Danilowicz, B.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.