Citation Nr: A25034625
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 201227-133271
DATE: April 15, 2025

ORDER

Service connection for an acquired mental health disorder, to include posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is granted.

REMANDED

Service connection for a traumatic brain injury (TBI) secondary to head trauma (also claimed as head trauma secondary to assault) is remanded.

Service connection for an endocrine disorder, to include as secondary to a TBI, is remanded.

Service connection for a neurological disorder, to include as secondary to a TBI, is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran's acquired mental health disorder, to include PTSD is at least as likely as not due to in-service military sexual trauma (MST).

CONCLUSION OF LAW

Resolving all doubt in favor of the Veteran, the criteria for entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include PTSD as due to MST been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1131, 5107, 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.304(f)(5).

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from February 1980 to February 1983. 

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a March 2020 Higher Level Review (HLR) rating decision by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In a December 2020 VA Form 10182, the Veteran requested Board review of the March 2020 HLR rating decision under the evidence review docket. Under evidence review, a Board decision is based on the evidence at the time of the prior decision, as well as evidence submitted by a claimant or their representative within 90 days of the election to appeal to the Board. 38 C.F.R. § 20.303. Accordingly, the Board may only consider the evidence of record as of March 10, 2020, the date of the rating decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or his representative between December 27, 2020, and March 27, 2021.

For the reasons explained below, as it relates to the claims for service connection for a TBI, endocrine disorder, and neurological disorder, the Board finds that there has been a pre-decisional duty to assist error requiring further evidentiary development before the claims can be adjudicated. As the Board is remanding for further development, the AOJ will consider the additional evidence which added to the claims file during the period of time when new evidence was not allowed.

1. Service connection for acquired mental health disorder, to include posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is granted. 

The Veteran contends that he is entitled to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, as related to an incident of MST. Specifically, in an October 2013 statement, the Veteran reported that shortly after being deployed to Germany in November 1980, he was sexually assaulted. He contends that his current mental health disorder is directly related to his in-service MST. 

Establishment of service connection for PTSD requires: (1) medical evidence diagnosing PTSD; (2) credible supporting evidence that the claimed in-service stressor occurred; and (3) medical evidence of a link between current symptomatology and the claimed in-service stressor. 38 C.F.R. § 3.304 (f). See also Cohen v. Brown, 10 Vet. App. 128 (1997).

If a PTSD claim is based on in-service personal assault, evidence from sources other than the veteran's service records may corroborate the veteran's account of the stressor incident. Examples of such evidence include but are not limited to the following: records from law enforcement authorities, rape crisis centers, mental health counseling centers, hospitals, or physicians; pregnancy tests or tests for sexually transmitted diseases, and statements from family members, roommates, fellow service members, or clergy. Evidence of behavior changes following the claimed assault is one type of relevant evidence that may be found in these sources. Examples of behavior changes that may constitute credible evidence of the stressor include but are not limited to: a request for a transfer to another military duty assignment; deterioration in work performance; substance abuse; episodes of depression, panic attacks, or anxiety without an identifiable cause; or unexplained economic or social behavior changes. 38 C.F.R. § 3.304 (f)(5).

In the case at hand, the Board initially notes that a December 2019 rating decision contained the favorable finding that a stressor was conceded based on evidence of behavior and other markers in the Veteran's service treatment records. The AOJ also found that VA treatment records contained a diagnosis of PTSD as well as other mental health conditions. The Board is bound by the favorable findings contained in the May 2021 rating decision. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).

The question before the Board is whether the Veteran current psychiatric disorder is at least as likely as not related to his conceded in-service stressor. For the reasons explained below, the Board finds that service connection is warranted. 

Turning to the evidence of record, in March 2013, a private opinion from Dr. D.S. was added to the claims file. Dr. D.S. noted that during her assessment, the Veteran reported that while on active duty in 1980 he was brutally sexually attacked by several men after leaving a bar. The Veteran reported that after leaving service, he continued to experience ongoing symptoms of depression and anxiety. The examiner's assessment was PTSD, chronic, which developed as a direct result of the Veteran's sexual assault. 

In a December 2013 VA mental health outpatient treatment note, the Veteran reported that he experienced PTSD as a result of the assault in Germany. The examiner noted that the Veteran got uncomfortable, restless and anxious when he discussed the incident. The examiner, a psychiatrist, diagnosed PTSD, anxiety and a history of bipolar disorder. 

The Veteran was afforded a VA PTSD examination in March 2014. The examiner declined to provide a diagnosis or medical opinion, noting that there were inconsistencies in the evidence, and a lack of credible evidence regarding the Veteran's subjective concerns and their severity. 

The Veteran was afforded another VA mental health examination in February 2020. The examiner noted a diagnosis of unspecified mental disorder. The examiner commented that the Veteran did not report symptoms of PTSD, or any other mental disorder related to his military service during the examination. The examiner explained that the Veteran's previous PTSD diagnoses appeared to be made based on self-reports, as there was no documentation of a systemic assessment for the DSM criteria. The examiner stated that the Veteran has been diagnosed with various mental health disorders, including Avoidant Personality Disorder; Bipolar I Disorder, Most Recent Episode Hypomanic; Insomnia; Depression and PTSD. The examiner also explained that due to his history of medical problems, this may complicate symptoms presentation, and this has made it more difficult to make an accurate mental health diagnosis. The examiner stated that no other opinion could be made about the presence or absence of any of the other disorders the Veteran had been diagnosed with without resorting to mere speculation. The examiner also stated that there was no association between the Veteran's unspecified mental disorder and his military service or reported MST without resort to mere speculation as the Veteran reported that he was assaulted in 1980, and STRs which showed that he suffered from a penile frenulum tear was not documented until 1983. 

In January 2021, during an open evidentiary window, a private medical opinion for Dr. J.G., a former VA C&P Psychologist, was added to the claims file. Upon review of the claims file, and a clinical interview of the Veteran, Dr. J.G. opined that the Veteran's clinical presentation was consistent with typical presentations of PTSD, secondary to MST per DSM-5 criteria. The examiner stated that the marker evidence in support of the claimant's MST was consistent with the Veteran's MST, and include in-service changes in his behavior or personality, changes in his relationships, decline in work performance, difficulty with attention, isolation/avoidance, promiscuity, and sudden onset of mental health symptoms. The examiner ultimately opined that it was at least as likely as not that the Veteran's PTSD was the result of his MST.

In weighing the opinions of record, the Board first looks to the opinion of the February 2020 VA examiner. When opining that the claimed mental health disorder was not related to his reported in-service MST, the examiner's rationale, in citing to the fact that the Veteran's frenulum tear was noted three years after the assault, appears to hinge on the premise that there was no documentation to find in-service markers to substantiate the Veteran's claim. Importantly, however, the examiner failed to account for the fact that VA had already found that a stressor was conceded based on evidence of behavior and other markers in the Veteran's service treatment records in the December 2019 rating decision. For this reason, the Board affords this opinion limited probative value. 

In contrast, the Board finds the January 2021 private examiner's opinion to be probative to the issue of the etiology of the Veteran's PTSD. Specifically, the examiner reviewed the pertinent evidence of record and noted such review of relevant records on the examination reports. Moreover, the examiner had the requisite medical expertise and had sufficient facts and data on which to base their conclusions. As such, the Board affords the examination findings great probative weight.

When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, the Secretary shall give the benefit of the doubt to the veteran. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; see also Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49, 53 (1990)

Here, the Board finds that there is medical evidence diagnosing PTSD, a conceded in-service stressor, and medical evidence of a link between the Veteran's current symptomatology and the in-service stressor based on the January 2021 private examination of record. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.304 (f); See also Cohen v. Brown, 10 Vet. App. 128 (1997).

Therefore, the Board finds the evidence is sufficient to find that the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder, to include PTSD is related to his military sexual trauma. Accordingly, service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include PTSD is warranted. 38U.S.C. § 5107, 38C.F.R. §3.304(f)(5)

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Service connection for a traumatic brain injury (TBI) secondary to head trauma (also claimed as head trauma secondary to assault) is remanded.

The Veteran is claiming service connection for a TBI, claiming that this condition is related to his active-duty service, to include as a related to a head injury as due to the November 1980 in-service assault. 

The Veteran was most recently afforded a VA TBI examination in February 2020. At that time the examiner opined that it was "less likely than not that the veteran suffered a traumatic brain injury secondary to his subjective report of the assault that occurred in 11/1980."  In providing a rationale, however, the examiner stated that there was no evidence that the November 1980 attack occurred, or that the Veteran presented with symptoms that could have been related to such an attack. It is clear that the February 2020 examiner assessed the credibility of the Veteran's lay statements when providing the negative etiological opinion. The credibility and weight to be attached to such opinions are within the province of the Board as adjudicator. Guerrieri v. Brown, 4 Vet. App. 467 (1993). It is the Board's role, not the examiner's, to provide reasons and bases and make credibility determinations as the fact finder; the examiner's role is to make medical determinations. See Moore v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 211, 218 (2007), rev'd on other grounds sub nom. Moore v. Shinseki, 555 F.3d 1369 (Fed. Cir. 2009). Further, the examiner failed to account for fact that VA had already conceded November 1980 in-service MST. For these reasons, the Board finds that this opinion is inadequate for adjudication purposes at this time. 

Failing to provide the Veteran with an adequate VA medical opinion is a pre-decisional duty to assist error. Barr v. Nicholson, 21?Vet. App.?303 (2007). Accordingly, this matter must be remanded to obtain an addendum medical opinion to address the nature and etiology of his claimed TBI.

2. Service connection for endocrine disorder, to include as secondary to a TBI is remanded.

AND

3. Service connection for a neurological disorder, to include as secondary to a TBI is remanded.

The Veteran is claiming service connection for an endocrine disorder and a neurological disorder, claiming that these conditions are related to his active-duty service, to include as secondary to his claimed TBI. 

The Board finds that these claims are inextricably intertwined with the claim of service connection for a TBI, as remanded herein. The appropriate remedy where a pending claim is inextricably intertwined with a claim currently on appeal is to defer adjudication of the claim on appeal pending the adjudication of the inextricably intertwined claim. Harris v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 180(1991). Thus, for that reason alone, the issues of entitlement to service connection for an endocrine disorder and a neurological disorder must also be remanded.

Additionally, as it relates to the endocrine disorder, the Board notes that the March 2020 rating decision includes the favorable finding that the Veteran has been diagnosed with hypothyroidism as well as hypogonadism and hypopituitarism. As it relates to the claimed neurological condition, the March 2020 rating decision also includes the favorable finding that the Veteran was diagnosed with headaches. Thus, the Board is bound by these favorable findings. 

As it relates to the claimed endocrine disorder, the Veteran was most recently afforded a VA Thyroid and Parathyroid examination in February 2020. At that time the examiner provided a negative etiological opinion for service connection for the claimed endocrine disorder. For the following reasons, however, the Board finds that this opinion is inadequate for adjudication purposes. First, while the examiner opines that it was less likely than not that the Veteran's hypopituitarism was incurred as a result of his active-duty service, the examiner fails to address the other diagnosed endocrine disorders. The examiner also fails to adequately address the Veteran's lay statements as made during a March 2014 VA examination that he began to experience symptoms of a thyroid disorder in 1984, within a year of leaving service, and has been on thyroid medication since then. Additionally, during the February 2020 TBI examination, a VA examiner acknowledges that the Veteran's endocrine disorder could be related to head trauma, the examiner concludes, without clear rationale, that the causative agent for the endocrine abnormalities should be the Veteran's known history of tuberculosis. Finally, the VA examiner failed to consider the Veteran's representative's argument, as well as supporting medical treatise evidence, as put forth in a February 2018 brief, that the Veteran's INH therapy that he received during active-duty service to treat his tuberculosis may have caused his current hypothyroidism. The Board must address all theories of entitlement raised by a claimant or reasonably raised by the record. See Robinson v. Peake, 21 F.3d 545, 553 (Fed. Cir. 2008). VA must consider all lay and medical evidence of record. 38 U.S.C. § 1154 (a); 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.

As it relates to the claimed neurological disorder, on the February 2020 TBI examination, the VA examiner noted that the complaints of headaches were not documented in the Veteran's treatment records, or his post-service records until 2013. While the examiner acknowledged the Veteran's lay reports in the March 2013 private treatment note that he had been suffering continuously from headaches since the November 1980 assault, the examiner appears to discount this evidence due to the fact that the service and post-service treatment records were silent for the mention of headaches until 33 years post-service. It is not sufficient to base an opinion on a mere lack of documentation. See Dalton v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 23, 30-31 (2007) (examination inadequate where examiner relied solely on the lack of evidence in service treatment records and ignored the Veteran's lay statements to provide negative opinion); see also Miller v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 249, 262 (2020).

Failing to provide the Veteran with an adequate VA medical opinion is a pre-decisional duty to assist error. Barr v. Nicholson, 21?Vet. App.?303 (2007). Accordingly, this matter must be remanded to obtain an addendum medical opinion to address the etiology of his claimed endocrine and neurological disorders. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain an addendum opinion from a qualified physician to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's claimed TBI and residuals and claimed neurological disorder. The entire claims file, including a copy of this REMAND, must be made available to the examiner for review in connection with the addendum opinion.

Following a review of the claims file the examiner is asked to provide an addendum opinion on the following:

a)	 The examiner is asked to either diagnose or rule-out residuals of a head injury, to include TBI.

b)	As to any diagnosed residuals of a head injury to include TBI, the examiner must opine whether it is approximately as least as likely as not that any diagnosed disability had its clinical onset during active service or is related to any in-service disease, event, or injury, including the conceded November 1980 in-service attack.

c)	Whether it is approximately as least as likely as not that the claimed neurological disorder, to include the diagnosed headaches, had its clinical onset during active service or is related to any in-service disease, event, or injury, including the conceded November 1980 in-service attack.

The examiner should address the Veteran's lay reports of continuity of headache symptoms since service. 

2. Obtain an addendum opinion from a qualified physician to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's diagnosed endocrine disorder. The entire claims file, including a copy of this REMAND, must be made available to the examiner for review in connection with the addendum opinion.

Following a review of the claims file the examiner is asked to provide an addendum opinion on the following:

a)	Whether it is approximately at least as likely as not that the claimed endocrine disorder, including the diagnosed hypothyroidism, hypogonadism OR hypopituitarism, had its clinical onset during active service or is related to any in-service disease, event, or injury, including the conceded November 1980 in-service attack OR the Veteran's in-service INH therapy to treat his tuberculosis. 

The examiner is asked to address the medical treatise evidence submitted with the Veteran's representative's February 2018 brief. 

The examiner should also address and discuss the Veteran's lay reports that he was diagnosed with a thyroid disability in 1984 and has been on thyroid medication since then. 

For all opinions provided above, the examiners are requested to provide a clear rationale and explain in detail the underlying reasoning for any opinions expressed. A discussion of the facts and medical principles involved would be of considerable assistance.

The examiners are reminded that the absence of documented treatment in service or thereafter is not fatal to a service connection claim, and the absence of evidence in the service treatment records is an insufficient basis, by itself, for a negative opinion. See Ledford v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 87, 89 (1992). 

 

Ardie A. Bland

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	T. Nettey, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.