Citation Nr: A25034912
Decision Date: 04/16/25	Archive Date: 04/16/25

DOCKET NO. 240905-474173
DATE: April 16, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral hip and thigh strain disabilities (claimed as left and right level 2 femur stress fractures) are remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from July 2015 to December 2015.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO) July 2024 rating decision.

Although the Veteran initially requested Higher-Level Review when submitting the April 2023 VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review, the Higher-Level Reviewer determined that there had been a duty to assist error and transferred the claim to the Supplemental Claim decision review option for additional development. In July 2024, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the supplemental claim decision on appeal and denied the claim based on the evidence of record at the time of that decision.  

In the September 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the July 2024 AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of entitlement to service connection for bilateral hip and thigh strain disabilities (claimed as left and right level 2 femur stress fractures), any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

As explained in more detail below, the Veteran originally filed her service connection claim for left and right level 2 femur stress fractures. She explained in a later VA examination that she has pain in both hips and thighs based on femur stress fractures incurred during service. Based on the VA examination report results, the Board has expanded this claim to include bilateral hip and thigh strain disabilities. Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1, 5 (2009). Thus, the Board has recharacterized the claim as reflected on the cover page.

The Board notes that pursuant to Williams v. McDonough, No. 21-7363 (U.S. Vet. App. June 21, 2024), due to the possibility of a docket switch, the Board cannot adjudicate an appeal until after one year from the date the AOJ mailed the decision on appeal, or 60 days from the date the Board received the VA Form 10182, whichever is later. Although the Veteran's period of time to request a docket switch has not expired, the instant decision is a remand and thus there is no due process concern or prejudice to the Veteran in proceeding with the appeal. See July 22, 2024, VA 20-8993 notification letter and September 5, 2024, VA 10182 notice of disagreement.

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral hip and thigh strain disabilities (claimed as left and right level 2 femur stress fractures) are remanded.

The Veteran contends that she acquired bilateral stress fractures on her femurs during basic training in service. The Veteran reports suffering inflamed daily pain from both stress fractures whenever engaging in physical activities or standing for long periods. The Veteran reported being treated in service for a bilateral femur stress fracture in 2015.  See September 2022 VA 21-526EZ claim and September 2022 statement in support of claim.  

Service connection requires evidence of three elements: (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship or nexus between the current disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during active service. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166-67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

Under the AMA, the Board may only remand an issue for the correction of (1) duty to assist errors occurring prior to the date of the AOJ decision on appeal (i.e., pre-decisional duty to assist errors) and (2) AOJ errors in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty, if correction of such error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the appellant's claim. See 38 C.F.R. §20.802(a).

The Board notes that the RO made favorable findings that the Veteran's service treatment records (STR) reflect hip pain during service, and that the Veteran has been diagnosed with bilateral hip and thigh strain. See July 2024 rating decision. The Board is bound by these favorable findings absent a finding of clear and unmistakable error. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104 (c).

The Veteran's STRs reflect medical treatment entries and a diagnosis for bilateral femur stress injury (grade 2-3) in September, October and November 2015.  The Veteran's separation report of medical history reflects notes of stress fractures on both femurs in September 2015 and a medical discharge for stress fractures in femurs in November 2015.  See November 2015 report of medical history and November 2015 memorandum for commander.

In October 2022, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination for her bilateral femoral stress fractures. During the examination the Veteran stated that she suffers from bilateral thigh pain, that had its onset during service in 2015 and that she was treated in-service for her bilateral thigh pain. The Veteran stated that she suffers pain while laying down, sitting, standing, walking and that her pain condition has progressed since onset.  Additionally, the Veteran indicated that she suffers flareups in her hips and thighs on a weekly basis.  The examiner reviewed the Veteran's treatment records, service records, along with examining the Veteran and diagnosed the Veteran with bilateral hip strain and thigh strain disabilities.  The examiner noted that the Veteran had been diagnosed in 2015 for bilateral thigh splints. The examiner concluded that the Veteran's bilateral hip and thigh disabilities were less likely than not (less than 50 percent probability) incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event or illness.  The examiner stated as the rationale for the negative nexus opinions that "the separation exam did not reveal any abnormality.  Also, no post-discharge record was found confirming chronicity of the symptoms." The Board finds this opinion conclusionary and lacking a detailed rationale.

Additionally, the Board finds that the October 2022 VA medical opinions are inadequate because the opinions lacked a rationale on why the Veteran's in-service bilateral level 2 femur stress fracture conditions did not cause her currently diagnosed bilateral hip and thigh strain disabilities.  The examiner did not consider and address the Veteran's specific lay statements in the record regarding treatment for painful thigh and femur conditions during service. The examiner failed to provide a detailed rationale why the lack of treatment records since service were insufficient for a nexus opinion regarding the Veteran's bilateral hip and thigh strain disabilities or correlate or explain the relevance of the lack of treatment records since service.  Additionally, the examiner failed to address in the examiner's rationale the Veteran's STRs in September, October and November 2015 for bilateral femur stress fractures during service. Based on the evidence of record, the Board finds these medical opinions inadequate. 

In July 2023, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination for her bilateral femoral stress fractures. The examiner reviewed the Veteran's treatment records, service records, and concluded that the Veteran's bilateral level 2 femur stress fractures were less likely than not (likelihood is less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event or illness.  The examiner stated as a rationale for the negative nexus opinions that there is a lack of substantiating evidence supporting a nexus between the bilateral hip and thigh strain disabilities and miliary service.  The examiner noted a 7-year gap from service to the Veteran's reporting and relied on a lack of medical records.  The Board finds this opinion conclusionary and lacking a detailed rationale.

Additionally, the Board finds that the July 2023 VA medical opinions are inadequate because the opinions lacked a rationale on why the Veteran's in-service bilateral level 2 femur stress fracture conditions did not cause her currently diagnosed bilateral hip and thigh strain disabilities.  The examiner did not consider and address the Veteran's specific lay statements in the record regarding treatment for painful thigh and femur conditions during service. The examiner failed to provide a detailed rationale on why the lack of treatment records since service were insufficient for a nexus opinion regarding the Veteran's bilateral hip and thigh strain disabilities or correlate or explain the relevance of the lack of treatment records since service.  Additionally, the examiner failed to explain the difference between the Veteran's in service diagnoses for level 2 bilateral stress fractures and the October 2022 diagnoses of bilateral hip and thigh strain disabilities. Based on the evidence of record, the Board finds these medical opinions inadequate.

Not obtaining an adequate VA medical opinion constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error. Accordingly, remand is warranted for correction of such errors.

The Board notes that the Veteran reported seeking medical treatment post service for her bilateral femur stress fractures and reported that a medical provider recommended that she be treated with full casts on both legs.  See September 2022 statement in support of claim. The record does not contain documentation that VA attempted to obtain authorization from the Veteran to provide medical evidence in this instance. In this instance VA's failure to attempt to obtain medical records related to this matter constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error. Accordingly, efforts must be made to identify and obtain these records. As such, remand is required for corrective action. 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c).

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Provide the Veteran with a VA Form 21-4142 authorizing VA to secure for the record complete clinical records of all evaluations and treatment she has received relating to bilateral hip and thigh strain disabilities (claimed as left and right level 2 femur stress fractures). Document all requests for information as well as all responses in the claims file.

2. Following the above development, obtain medical addendum opinions from an appropriate clinician to determine whether the Veteran's bilateral hip and thigh strain disabilities (claimed as left and right level 2 femur stress fractures) are at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) had its onset in, is caused by, or is otherwise related to the Veteran's military service?

The examiner must specifically address the Veteran's STR's to include the September, October and November 2015 treatment records for bilateral femur stress fractures, and any related lay-observable symptoms to include the additional symptom of pain. The examiner should consider the Veteran's lay statements regarding her bilateral hip and thigh strain disabilities' onset during service. For the purpose of this examination and opinion only, the examiner must assume that the Veteran's statements are credible and accurate unless there is a medical reason to conclude otherwise. If this is the case, the examiner must provide a thorough explanation.

A full rationale must be provided for all medical opinions provided.

 

 

S. Sorathia 

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Feldmann, Charles E.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.