Citation Nr: A25034347
Decision Date: 04/14/25	Archive Date: 04/14/25

DOCKET NO. 241223-495260
DATE: April 14, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an evaluation in excess of 70 percent for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is denied.

Entitlement to a total disability rating for individual unemployability (TDIU) is granted.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. Throughout the period on appeal, the Veteran's PTSD symptoms were severe resulting in deficiencies in family and work relations, judgment, thinking, and mood; neglect of his personal appearance and hygiene; psychomotor impairment, with minimal speech and a monotonous flat affect; chronic sleep impairment; hypervigilance; nearly continuous panic and depression affecting his ability to function independently, appropriately, and effectively; suicidal ideation; impaired impulse control, as shown by frequent angry outbursts; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances, particularly in a work setting; and an inability to establish and maintain effective relationships, as shown by his strained relationships with family members.  

2. Throughout the period on appeal, the evidence of record shows the Veteran's PTSD symptoms did not include gross impairment in his thought processes or communication, persistent delusions or hallucinations, grossly inappropriate behavior, persistent danger of hurting himself or others, disorientation to time or place, or memory loss relating to the names of close relatives, his own occupation, or his own name.  

3. The Veteran's PTSD prevented him from securing and maintaining a substantially gainful occupation.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for an evaluation in excess of 70 percent for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1105, 5107 (2024); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.3, 4.7, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411 (2024).  

2. The criteria for a total disability rating for individual unemployability (TDIU) have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1105, 5107 (2024); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.340, 3.341, 4.16 (2024).  

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served honorably in the U.S. Army from June 1966 to June 1969.  

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a March 2024 rating decision by the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ).  

In the December 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Evidence Submission docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2024 AOJ decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or his representative with, or within 90 days from receipt of, the VA Form 10182.  38 C.F.R. § 20.303.  If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal and prior to the date the Board received the VA Form 10182, or (2) more than 90 days following the date the Board received the VA Form 10182, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.303, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

1. Entitlement to an evaluation in excess of 70 percent for PTSD

The Veteran contends that he should be granted an increased rating for the period on appeal.  See December 2024 Notice of Disagreement.  For the following reasons, the Board finds that a rating in excess of 70 percent for PTSD is not warranted.  

Disability ratings are determined by applying the criteria set forth in VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities.? Individual disabilities are assigned separate diagnostic codes.? See U.S.C. §1155;?38?C.F.R. §?4.1.? When there is a question as to which of two evaluations applies, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for the rating.? Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned. ?38?C.F.R. §?4.7.??In every instance where the ratings schedule does not provide a zero percent evaluation for a diagnostic code, a zero percent evaluation shall be assigned when the requirements for a compensable evaluation are not met.  38 C.F.R. § 4.31.  

In evaluating a disability's severity, it is essential to consider its history.? 38?C.F.R. §?4.1; Peyton v. Derwinski,?1?Vet. App.?282?(1991).? Where entitlement to compensation has already been established and an increase in the disability rating is at issue, the present level of disability is of primary importance.? Francisco v. Brown,?7?Vet. App.?55, 58?(1994).? That said, higher evaluations may be assigned for separate periods based on the facts found during the appeal period.? See Fenderson v. West,?12?Vet. App.?119, 126?(1999).? This practice is known as staged ratings.? Id.???? 

When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding the degree of disability, VA shall resolve any reasonable doubt in favor of the claimant.? 38?U.S.C. §?5107;?39 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.3.??

During the period on appeal, the Veteran's PTSD is rated under the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders, Diagnostic Code 9411.  Under Diagnostic Code 9411, a 70 percent evaluation is warranted where there is occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas (such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood).  This may be due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately, and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a worklike setting); inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.  38 C.F.R. 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411.  

A 100 percent evaluation is warranted for total occupational and social impairment.  This may be due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name.  Id.

The list of symptoms in the General Formula is not intended to constitute an exhaustive list but provides examples of the type and degree of symptoms, or their effects, that would justify a particular rating.  Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436 (2002).  However, a Veteran may only qualify for a given disability rating under § 4.130 by demonstrating the particular symptoms associated with that percentage, or others of similar severity, frequency, and duration.  Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112 (Fed. Cir. 2013).  Furthermore, when evaluating the level of disability from a mental disorder, the rating agency will consider the extent of social impairment but shall not assign an evaluation solely on the basis of social impairment.  38 C.F.R. § 4.126.  

During the December 2023 VA examination, the Veteran's PTSD symptoms included depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks that occur weekly or less often, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss (such as forgetting names, directions or recent events), flattened affect, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a work like setting), inability to establish and maintain effective relationships, and neglect of personal appearance and hygiene.  The examiner indicated that the Veteran exhibited psychomotor impairment, with minimal speech and a monotonous flat affect.  Based on this evaluation of the Veteran, the VA examiner concluded that the Veteran exhibited occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, and mood.  

In December 2024, the Veteran submitted an opinion from a private clinician along with a PTSD Disability Benefits Questionnaire (DBQ).  In the DBQ, the clinician concluded that the Veteran displayed occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, and mood.  In the opinion, the clinician described the Veteran as cooperative yet guarded during their interview, with a depressed mood and a flat affect.  The clinician noted that the Veteran's thought processes and speech content were coherent, but he had difficulty elaborating on his responses.  The Veteran denied having any delusions and there was no evidence of perceptual disturbances or thought disorders, however, the Veteran admitted to having morbid thoughts and passive suicidal ideation without any intent to harm himself.  The Veteran rated his typical mood as a 3 or 4 out of 10.  He reported having low motivation, neglecting his personal hygiene, and feeling suspicious of others.  He also stated that he slept poorly and experienced daytime fatigue, intrusive thoughts, and nightmares.  The Veteran stated that he checks and rechecks the locks on his windows and doors, avoids crowds, and is estranged from his children and sister due to his angry outbursts.  He reported that quick to anger and frustration and lost his last job because of this issue.  The Veteran does not receive therapy or other forms of treatment, but volunteers with area homeless shelters.  The Veteran described his volunteer efforts as his therapy and "what keeps [him] alive.'"

The Board finds both the December 2023 VA examination and the December 2024 private opinion and DBQ adequate for appellate review.  There is no evidence the examiners were not competent or credible, and as the reports are based on the Veteran's statements, in-person examinations, and the examiners' observations, the Board finds they are entitled to significant probative weight.  See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 302-05 (2008).

Based on the evidence of record, the Board finds that a 70 percent rating most closely approximates the severity and frequency of the Veteran's symptoms.  Both the December 2023 VA examination and the December 2024 private opinion indicated the Veteran neglects his personal appearance and hygiene and experiences nearly continuous panic or depression, as well as suicidal ideation.  The Veteran's frequent angry outbursts are evidence of impaired impulse control to such an extent that he is estranged from close family members and has lost at least one job due to this issue.  However, while the Veteran does struggle with his personal hygiene, there is no evidence in the record, and the Veteran has not asserted, that he exhibits any of the other symptoms associated with a 100 percent rating, such as gross impairment in thought processes or communication, persistent delusions or hallucinations, grossly inappropriate behavior, persistent danger of hurting himself or others, disorientation to time or place, or memory loss relating to the names of close relatives, his own occupation, or his own name.  Indeed, the December 2024 private opinion submitted by the Veteran specifically notes that the Veteran's thought processes and speech were coherent and that the Veteran did not experience any delusions, perceptual disturbances, or thought disorders.  In addition, while the December 2024 private opinion indicates that the Veteran experiences passive suicidal ideation, it specifically notes that the Veteran denied any intent to harm himself.  Based on this evidence, the Board finds that a rating in excess of 70 percent is not warranted.  

2. Entitlement to a TDIU

The Veteran contends that he is unable to secure and follow substantially gainful employment because of his PTSD symptoms.  See December 2024 Third Party Correspondence.  For the following reasons, the Board finds that a TDIU is warranted.  

VA regulations allow for the assignment of a total disability rating based on individual unemployability (TDIU) when a veteran is unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation because of service-connected disabilities.? To meet the schedular criteria for entitlement to TDIU, the Veteran must have either (1) one disability rated at 60 percent or more, or (2) two or more disabilities, with at least one disability rated at 40 percent or more, and sufficient additional disability to bring the combined rating to 70 percent or more.? 38?C.F.R. §?4.16(a).???? 

The central inquiry is "whether the veteran's service-connected disabilities alone are of sufficient severity to produce unemployability." Hatlestad v. Brown, 5?Vet. App.?524, 529 (1993).  Consideration may be given to their level of education, special training, and previous work experience, but advancing age and any impairment caused by nonservice-connected disabilities are not to be considered in determining whether a total disability rating is warranted.? See 38?C.F.R. §§?3.341, 4.16, 4.19.???? 

In determining whether a veteran can secure and follow a substantially gainful occupation, the veteran's employment history, education, skill, and training must be considered along with whether the veteran has the physical and mental ability to perform the type of activities required by the occupation at issue.? Ray v. Wilkie, 31?Vet. App.?58, 73?(2019).? Factors that may be relevant to the evaluation of the Veteran's physical abilities include, but are not limited to, the veteran's limitations, if any, concerning lifting, bending, sitting, standing, walking, climbing, grasping, typing, and reaching, as well as auditory and visual limitations.? Id.? Factors that may be relevant to the Veteran's mental abilities include, but are not limited to, the veteran's limitations, if any, concerning memory, concentration, ability to adapt to change, handle work-place stress, get along with coworkers, and demonstrate reliability and productivity.? Id.? The ultimate question of whether a Veteran is capable of substantial gainful employment is an adjudicatory determination, not a medical one.? See Geib v. Shinseki,?733 F.3d 1350, 1354?(Fed. Cir. 2013). 

First, the Board notes that the Veteran meets the schedular criteria for TDIU in that his PTSD is rated as 70 percent disabling.  See March 2024 Rating Decision - Codesheet.  Therefore, the issue before the Board is whether the Veteran's service-connected PTSD unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation consistent with his education, skill, and training.   

The Veteran graduated from high school and attended some college.  See December 2024 PTSD DBQ.  During the Veteran's military service, his military occupational specialty (MOS) was in supply.  See Form DD214.  After service, the Veteran worked in various positions, including car washer, painter, dishwasher, construction worker, and railroad yard clerk.  See December 2024 PTSD DBQ.  The Veteran has been unemployed since 2017 and, as mentioned above, currently volunteers with various local homeless shelters.  See October 2024 Private Opinion.  

The Board finds that the Ray factors support granting TDIU in this case.? In both the December 2023 VA examination and the December 2024 private opinion, the examiners indicate that the Veteran has difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships and adapting to stressful circumstances, such as those that might occur in a work setting.  The VA examiner noted that the Veteran neglects his personal appearance and hygiene, and exhibits psychomotor impairment, with minimal speech and a monotonous flat affect.  The December 2024 private examiner also described the Veteran as having low motivation, neglecting his personal hygiene, and feeling suspicious of others.  The private examiner noted that the Veteran becomes frustrated easily and is prone to angry outbursts.  Significantly, the Veteran lost his last job due to his angry outbursts and is also estranged from his family because of this issue.  

It is difficult to imagine a competitive workplace where the Veteran could be successful with this level of impairment.? Based on this evidence, the Board finds that the Veteran is unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation and TDIU is warranted in this case.?

Finally, the Board has considered whether the Veteran is entitled to Special Monthly Compensation based on housebound status (SMC(s)).  However, there is no evidence in the claims file, and the Veteran has not asserted, that the Veteran is substantially confined to his dwelling because of his-service connected disabilities.  38 C.F.R. § 3.350(i).  Indeed, the evidence of record suggests the Veteran is an active volunteer at local homeless shelters.  Therefore, the Veteran does not qualify for SMC(s).  

 

 

E. I. VELEZ

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Zimmerman, K.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.