Citation Nr: A25034784
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 221214-304817
DATE: April 15, 2025

REMANDED

Service connection for sleep apnea.

?

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from March 1974 to April 1998.

The case is on appeal from an October 2022 rating decision.

In the December 2022 notice of disagreement (NOD) on appeal, the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the October 2022 rating decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. ยง 20.301.

Service connection for sleep apnea.

The Veteran's service personnel records (SPRs) show that he served in Southwest Asia during the Gulf War.  His service treatment records (STRs) do not include reports of or treatment for sleep impairment.  In an April 1997 report of medical history completed pursuant to retirement, the Veteran denied having any history of frequent trouble sleeping.

In May 2021, the Veteran submitted a private sleep study showing a diagnosis of severe obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) in September 2006.  He also submitted a medical opinion from a private advanced practice registered nurse (APRN).  The APRN stated that it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's weight gain is due to service-connected left elbow and bilateral knee disabilities.  The APRN also stated that the Veteran's OSA is at least as likely as not secondary to or aggravated by weight gain.  The APRN noted that the Veteran weighed 225 pounds at enlistment, 245 pounds at discharge, and now weighs 297 pounds.  The APRN also noted that the Veteran claims he gained 77 pounds due to inactivity caused by left elbow and knee disabilities.  The APRN summarized several studies indicating a link between obesity and sleep apnea.

In June 2021, the RO obtained an examination for this claim.  However, the examiner did not provide a sufficient rationale for finding that the Veteran's OSA is less likely than not caused by left elbow or knee disabilities.  The examiner also did not provide an opinion in regard to aggravation.

In June 2022, the Veteran submitted an opinion from a private physician's assistant (PA).  The PA stated that it is at least as likely as not that the OSA is secondary to left elbow and knee disabilities.  The PA stated that these conditions cause the Veteran to be less physically active and more sedentary, contributing to weight gain.  The PA noted studies discussing an association between chronic pain and reduced physical activity.  The PA also noted studies discussing an association between chronic pain and sleep quality.

The Veteran was afforded another examination for this claim in October 2022.  However, the examiner also did not provide a sufficient rationale for finding that the Veteran's OSA is less likely than not caused by left elbow or knee disabilities.  The examiner also did not provide an opinion in regard to aggravation.

The Board finds that the Veteran has been diagnosed with OSA since September 2006.

The Board also finds that there was a duty to assist error in not obtaining a sufficient medical opinion to adjudicate this claim.  Therefore, a remand is required to obtain another medical opinion.

This claim is REMANDED for the following action:

Forward the claims file to an appropriate examiner to address the nature and etiology of the diagnosed obstructive sleep apnea.  The entire claims file should be reviewed by the examiner.  Thereafter, the examiner should:

(a.) State whether the sleep apnea at least as likely as not had its onset during service or is related to an in-service injury, event, or disease, to include the Veteran's in-service toxic exposure risk activities (TERA).  When providing this opinion, the examiner must consider the total potential exposure through all applicable deployments AND the synergistic, combined effect of all TERA of the Veteran.

(b.) State whether the obstructive sleep apnea is at least as likely as not caused or aggravated by chronic pain from the left elbow and right and left knee disabilities.  Aggravation means an increase in severity beyond the natural progress of the disease. 

(c.) State whether the Veteran's obesity was caused by left elbow degenerative arthritis.

(d.) State whether the Veteran's obesity was caused by right or left knee degenerative arthritis.

(Continued on the next page)

?

(e.) State whether the obstructive sleep apnea is at least as likely as not caused or aggravated by the Veteran's obesity, as an intermediary step.  Aggravation means an increase in severity beyond the natural progress of the disease. 

A rationale should be provided for opinions expressed that addresses the May 2021 and June 2022 private medical opinions and accompanying medical research.

 

 

RYAN T. KESSEL

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Jimerfield, David

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.1303.