Citation Nr: A25034565
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 230410-337935
DATE: April 15, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to a higher initial rating in excess of 60 percent for the service-connected kidney disease with hypertension associated with diabetes mellitus, type II, (hereinafter referred to as a kidney disability) from August 10, 2022 is remanded. 

Entitlement to a higher initial rating in excess of 20 percent for the service-connected left lower extremity peripheral neuropathy in the femoral nerve from August 10, 2022 is remanded. 

Entitlement to a higher initial rating in excess of 20 percent for the service-connected right lower extremity peripheral neuropathy in the femoral nerve from August 10, 2022 is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from June 1967 to June 1970. 

This matter is on appeal from a November 2022 rating decision issued by the Agency of Original Jurisdiction. The Veteran filed a timely Notice of Disagreement in April 2023 and requested a hearing before the Board. The Veteran testified at a virtual Board hearing in September 2023. The hearing transcript has been associated with the record. These issues were denied in a December 2023 Board Decision. The Veteran appealed the December 2023 Board Decision to the U.S. Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (CAVC). In a November 2024 Order, CAVC adopted a Joint Motion for Remand (JMR) filed by both parties.

1. Entitlement to a higher initial rating in excess of 60 percent for the service-connected kidney disease with hypertension associated with diabetes mellitus, type II, (hereinafter referred to as a kidney disability) from August 10, 2022 is remanded. 

2. Entitlement to a higher initial rating in excess of 20 percent for the service-connected left lower extremity peripheral neuropathy in the femoral nerve from August 10, 2022 is remanded. 

3. Entitlement to a higher initial rating in excess of 20 percent for the service-connected right lower extremity peripheral neuropathy in the femoral nerve from August 10, 2022 is remanded.

In the November 2024 JMR, the parties agreed that the Board failed to remand the above-listed issues to correct duties to notify and assist errors. The parties explained that the record contains references to private treatment records that may include additional information about the Veteran's kidney disability, such as glomerular filtration rate (GFR) readings, during the period on appeal that were not in the claims file. See December 2021 VA Treatment Records (The Veteran receives ("receives care through Non-VA providers. Has a non-VA PCP"); May 2022 VA Treatment Records (The Veteran reported that he sought treatment from his "family doctor" for his liver); May 2022 VA Treatment Records (The Veteran reported that he has a personal doctor from St. Joseph's Hospital who collected bloodwork). Similarly, VA was on notice that relevant private treatment records exist pertaining to the Veteran's claims for lower extremity neuropathies, but these medical treatment records were also not in the claims file. See June 2021 VA Treatment Records (documenting the Veteran's report about receiving a steroid injection by Dr. Woo at Optim Orthopedics). The Board failed to notify the Veteran of these outstanding treatment records and failed to assist the Veteran in collecting these records for submission to the claims file. 

VA's duty to assist requires it to notify the Veteran that private treatment records may exist that may aid in substantiating claims and provide the Veteran with the appropriate record release forms in order to collect those records. See 38 C.F.R. ยง 3.159(e)(2). 

Based on the foregoing, remand is warranted to correct these pre-decisional duties to assist and notify errors. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

The Veteran should be given the opportunity to identify any outstanding private or VA treatment records relevant to the claim on appeal. After obtaining any necessary authorization from the Veteran, all outstanding records should be obtained, to include updated VA treatment records.

For private treatment records, make at least two (2) attempts to obtain records from any identified sources. If any such records are unavailable, inform the Veteran and his representative and afford him an opportunity to submit any copies in his possession.

For federal records, all reasonable attempts should be made to obtain such records. If any records cannot be obtained after reasonable efforts have been made, issue a formal determination that such records do not exist or that further efforts to obtain such records would be futile, which should be documented in the claims file. The Veteran must be notified of the attempts made and why further attempts would be futile, and allowed the opportunity to provide such records, as provided in 38 U.S.C. ยง 5103A (b)(2) and 38 C.F.R. ยง 3.159(e).

 

 

David H. Robertson

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Costantino, Danielle K.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.1303.