Citation Nr: A25034080
Decision Date: 04/14/25	Archive Date: 04/14/25

DOCKET NO. 240828-469187
DATE: April 14, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea, to include as secondary to service-connected back and right ankle disabilities and left and right lower extremity radiculopathy, is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from June 1988 to June 1991.

This case comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a September 2023 rating decision.

The Veteran filed a VA Form 10182 in August 2024 and elected the direct review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the September 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision.  If evidence was submitted during the time period after the AOJ issued that decision, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  However, the AOJ will be able to consider any additional evidence that the Board could not consider because the case is being remanded.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

The Veteran is now represented by the above-named accredited representative, and a VA Form 21-22a is of record.

On review, the Board finds that additional development is necessary to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error.

The Veteran was provided a VA home sleep study and subsequent examination in July 2023 in connection with the claim.  The examiner addressed the medical opinion request and determined that there was no association between the currently diagnosed obstructive sleep apnea and the Veteran's military service; however, the noted onset history appears inconsistent with the Veteran's contention otherwise of record that the disorder was caused by weight gain from decreased exercise due to his service-connected back disability, left and right lower extremity radiculopathy, and right ankle disability.  See, e.g., June 2023 written statement.  The examiner also noted that the results of the sleep study were not available at the time of the examination and did not address that secondary causal theory.  The record shows that the Veteran has reported limitations in physical activity due to those disabilities, and the AOJ granted service connection for them in a March 2023 rating decision.  See, e.g., historical and current written statements from May 2022, February 2023, and July 2023.  Based on the foregoing, the Board finds that an additional examination and medical opinion were needed.

The Board acknowledges the June 2023 private medical opinion from Dr. Z.M. (initials used to protect privacy) addressing obesity as an intermediate step between the Veteran's service-connected disabilities and his sleep apnea.  However, the private medical opinion is not adequate to decide the case by itself, as it appears that the diagnosis provided is based on an obstructive sleep apnea screening tool from the Veteran's reported symptoms, rather than review of an actual sleep study.  In addition, the self-described screening tool Dr. Z.M. used indicates that the Veteran reported having various other risk factors, such as his neck circumference measurement and high blood pressure, while he also denied the listed risk factor of having a body mass index (BMI) greater than 35, without discussion of those factors.  See Reonal v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 458, 460-61 (1993); Swann v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 229, 233 (1993); Black v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 177, 180 (1993) (an opinion based on an inaccurate (or unsubstantiated) factual premise has limited, if any, probative value); Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008) (most of the probative value of a medical opinion comes from its reasoning).

The case is REMANDED for the following action:

The AOJ should afford the Veteran a VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of his obstructive sleep apnea.  

The examiner is requested to review all pertinent records associated with the claims file.

It should be noted that the Veteran is competent to attest to factual matters of which he has first-hand knowledge, including observable symptomatology.  If there is a medical basis to support or doubt the history provided by the Veteran, the examiner should provide a fully reasoned explanation.

The examiner should address the following:

(a) Whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea was caused by or resulted from his service-connected back disability, left and right lower extremity radiculopathy, and/or right ankle disability.  He or she should address whether the obstructive sleep apnea would have been less severe but for those disorders, to include any worsening of functionality.

(b) Whether the Veteran's weight gain or obesity was an intermediate step between his service-connected back disability, left and right lower extremity radiculopathy, and/or right ankle disability and his obstructive sleep apnea.  In so doing, the examiner should state whether the Veteran's service-connected back disability, left and right lower extremity radiculopathy, and/or right ankle disability caused or worsened his obesity.  If so, the examiner should provide an opinion as to whether the obesity was a substantial factor in causing the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea.  He or she should also provide an opinion as to whether the obstructive sleep apnea would not have occurred but for obesity caused by or worsened by his service-connected back disability, left and right lower extremity radiculopathy, and/or right ankle disability.

The Veteran and his representative have asserted that his obstructive sleep apnea was caused by weight gain from decreased exercise due to the above service-connected disabilities.  See, e.g., written statements from June 2023 and August 2024.  A July 2023 VA home sleep study provided in connection with the claim shows a diagnosis of mild obstructive sleep apnea.  VA examination reports from 2022 and 2023 show information about the Veteran's functionality related to the service-connected disabilities, and 2023 VA mental health examination reports show potentially relevant reported sleep issues as well.

A clear rationale for all opinions should be provided.

 

 

J.W. ZISSIMOS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	M. Postek, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided.  This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability.  38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.