Citation Nr: A25034083
Decision Date: 04/14/25	Archive Date: 04/14/25

DOCKET NO. 211213-203936
DATE: April 14, 2025

REMANDED

The claim for service connection for stage III chronic kidney disease with recurrent pyelonephritis is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served in the United States Army from August 1967 to April 1969. 

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a November 2021 rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO). 

In March 2021, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, and requested readjudication of his claim for service connection for kidney disease, most recently addressed in a February 2021 rating decision. In November 2021, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the supplemental claim decision on appeal, which found that new and relevant evidence had been received and denied the claim based on the evidence of record at the time of that decision.  

In the December 2021 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Evidence Submission docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the November 2021 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) supplemental claim decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or representative with, or within 90 days from receipt of, the VA Form 10182. 38 C.F.R. § 20.303. If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the supplemental claim decision on appeal and prior to receipt of the VA Form 10182, or (2) more than 90 days following receipt of the VA Form 10182, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.303, 20.801.

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of entitlement to service connection for kidney disease, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

1. The claim for service connection for stage III chronic kidney disease with recurrent pyelonephritis is remanded.

The Board regrets the delay associated with this remand. However, based on a review of the evidence of record, the Board finds that a remand is necessary to allow the AOJ to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error and failure to satisfy a statutory or regulatory duty. 

For necessary context, the Board will first give a brief summary of the Veteran's medical history and the procedural history of this claim. 

The Veteran underwent a cystoprostatectomy in March 2006 due to a history of bladder cancer, and a neobladder was installed. Shortly after the surgery, the Veteran began experiencing chronic urinary tract infections and kidney infections, and concerns of renal insufficiency were expressed by his urology providers. In September 2006, the Veteran's left kidney was found to be operating at just 14 percent, while his right kidney function had decreased to 86 percent. In March 2007, the Veteran was diagnosed with stage III kidney disease. In April 2008, the Veteran's left kidney was removed with a left open simple nephrectomy. He continued to be treated by a nephrologist through 2019. 

The Veteran has continuously pursued his claim for chronic kidney disease since submitting a supplemental claim in February 2021, which was denied in a February 2021 rating decision. The Veteran then submitted a new supplemental claim in March 2021. Before that claim could be decided, a prior March 2010 claim for "papillary transitional cell bladder cancer status post-cystoprostatectomy with residual urinary incontinence and status post-simple left nephrectomy" was reviewed de novo due to a federal court order in Nehmer v. Department of Veterans Affairs. In September 2021, the Veteran was granted service connection for this claim under the Nehmer order, and a 60 percent rating was assigned based on residuals of voiding dysfunction pursuant to Diagnostic Code 7528 and 38 C.F.R § 4.115a.

Because this claim for bladder cancer and residuals had been granted, the Veteran's claim for chronic kidney disease was then deferred for a VA examination and opinion as to whether his kidney disease was more likely than not "proximately due to or the result of papillary transitional cell bladder cancer status post-cystoprostatectomy with residual urinary incontinence and status post-simple left nephrectomy."

The Veteran then underwent an October 2021 VA examination. In response to the RO's request for opinion, the VA examiner provided a negative nexus opinion focusing mostly on the Veteran's left nephrectomy. The examiner emphasized that any remaining kidney disease symptoms from the Veteran's right kidney were not a result of his left nephrectomy, and that, in fact, the removal of his failing left kidney had stabilized his kidney function: 

The veteran chronic kidney disease is not a new issue-the veteran had worse kidney function prior to his LT kidney removal. Kidney function is stable per the nephrologist. There is no medical evidence of recurrent pyelonephritis in the veterans medical records and veteran verifies no issues related to this claimed condition now or at any time since 4/8/2008 when LT kidney was removed.

On the basis of the VA examiner's opinion, the AOJ denied service connection for chronic kidney disease in a November 2021 rating decision.

The Board finds that the AOJ erred in processing the Veteran's claim as one for service connection, and as a result failed to properly assist the Veteran in developing his claim. The Board will remand for correction of the error. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802 (a)

The Veteran is already service connected for his kidneys as of the AOJ's September 2021 rating decision, which granted service connection and assigned a 60 percent initial rating for "papillary transitional cell bladder cancer status post-cystoprostatectomy with residual urinary incontinence and status post-simple left nephrectomy." In its decision, the AOJ included a list of symptoms that contributed to its choice of rating. These symptoms included decrease in kidney function and the required use of an appliance for voiding issues. This decision makes it clear that kidney disease, which led to the removal of the Veteran's left kidney, has already been considered, assessed, and rated as a residual of the papillary transitional cell bladder cancer.

Therefore, the Veteran, in asserting that his right kidney symptoms have not been considered by the current ratings, is not making a claim for service connection for a new disability, but a claim for an increased or separate rating for an existing disability. The Veteran's genitourinary system dysfunction is already service connected and rated at 60 percent, and the Veteran is asking that additional symptoms or manifestations of that dysfunction be considered. In other words, the AOJ has service connected the Veteran's genitourinary system with consideration given to the left kidney and assigned a 60 percent rating; the AOJ should now give consideration to the Veteran's right kidney and consider whether an increased or separate rating is warranted. 

Accordingly, the Board finds that remand is necessary to remedy the mischaracterization of the Veteran's claim.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Recharacterize the Veteran's claim for service connection as a claim for an increased or separate rating, assist in developing the claim as appropriate, and readjudicate the claim as an increased rating claim.

 

 

JONATHAN B. KRAMER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Utter, Margaret M.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.