Citation Nr: A25034369
Decision Date: 04/14/25	Archive Date: 04/14/25

DOCKET NO. 240320-425160
DATE: April 14, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an initial rating of 70 percent, but no higher, for service-connected posttraumatic stress disorder with major depressive disorder and panic disorder (previously rated as anxiety disorder) ("acquired psychiatric disability") from November 4, 2016, to present, is granted.

Entitlement to an effective date of May 1, 2021, but no earlier, for the award of a total disability rating based on individual unemployability due to service-connected disabilities (TDIU) is granted.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran's service-connected PTSD symptoms resulted in occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas but did not more nearly approximate total occupational and total social impairment.

2. The Veteran's combined service-connected disabilities precluded her from obtaining or maintaining substantial, gainful employment from September 15, 2022, to present.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for an initial rating of 70 percent, but no higher, for acquired psychiatric disability from November 4, 2016, to present have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § §§ 4.3, 4.7, 4.130, DC 9411.

2. The criteria for entitlement to a TDIU from September 15, 2022, to present, have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5103, 5103A, 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.340, 3.341, 4.16.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the Army from January 2004 to May 2005.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a February 2024 rating decision by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO), also known as the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).

In the March 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the February 2024 AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim[s], considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

Increased Ratings

Disability ratings are determined by applying the criteria set forth in VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities, which is based on the average impairment of earning capacity. Individual disabilities are assigned separate diagnostic codes. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1. The basis of disability ratings is the ability of the body as a whole, or of the psyche, or of a system or organ of the body, to function under the ordinary conditions of daily life, including employment. 38 C.F.R. § 4.10.

The determination of whether an increased rating is warranted is based on review of the entire evidence of record and the application of all pertinent regulations. Schafrath v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 589 (1991). Where there is a question as to which of two ratings shall be applied, the higher rating will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria for that rating. Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7. However, the evaluation of the same disability under various diagnoses, known as pyramiding, is to be avoided. 38 C.F.R. § 4.14.

While the Veteran's entire history is reviewed when making a disability determination, where service connection has already been established and increase in the disability rating is at issue, it is the present level of the disability that is of primary concern. Francisco v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 55. However, staged ratings are appropriate for an increase rating claim when the factual findings show distinct time periods where the service-connected disability exhibits symptoms that would warrant different ratings. Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119; Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505.

1. Entitlement to an initial rating of 70 percent, but no higher, for service-connected posttraumatic stress disorder with major depressive disorder and panic disorder (previously rated as anxiety disorder) ("acquired psychiatric disability") from November 4, 2016, to present 

The Veteran contends that her service-connected acquired psychiatric disability warrants an increased rating prior to February 14, 2023, and from February 14, 2023, to present.  See March 2024 NOD.  The Veteran's acquired psychiatric disability is currently rated at 30 percent from November 4, 2016, to February 14, 2023, and at 70 percent from February 14, 2023, to present.  

By way of background, the Veteran initially applied for service connection for a psychiatric disability by submitting a VA Form 21-526EZ on November 4, 2016.  The Veteran was granted service connection for anxiety disorder by rating decision dated April 23, 2019.  The Veteran timely appealed the April 2019 rating decision to the Board, which remanded the claim in a September 2022 decision.  The AOJ denied an increased rating for this claim by rating decision dated January 10, 2023.  The Veteran then filed a VA Form 20-0995 Supplemental Claim on February 14, 2023.  In a rating decision dated July 13, 2023, the AOJ increased the Veteran's rating for her acquired psychiatric disability to 70 percent, effective as of February 14, 2023, the date on which the Veteran filed her Supplemental Claim.  The Veteran then filed a VA Form 20-0996 Request for Higher-Level Review on October 16, 2023.  In the February 2024 rating decision currently on appeal before the Board, the AOJ increased the Veteran's rating for her acquired psychiatric disability for the period prior to February 14, 2023, to 30 percent.  The Veteran timely appealed in the March 2024 NOD.

Under the AMA, a determination on a claim by the AOJ becomes final unless the claimant continuously pursues the claim by filing a supplemental claim, a request for higher-level review, or an appeal to the Board within one year of the date the AOJ mails notice of the decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.1103, 3.2500(c)(1). If a claimant continuously pursues an issue by filing one of these administrative review options within one year, the effective date will be the date of receipt of the initial claim or the date entitlement arose, whichever is later. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2500(h)(1). If a supplemental claim is received more than one year after the date on which the AOJ issued notice of a decision, the effective date will be the date of receipt of the supplemental claim, or the date entitlement arose, whichever was later. 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.400, 3.2500(h)(2).

In light of the foregoing, the Board finds that as a procedural matter, the Veteran's claim for an increased rating for her service-connected acquired psychiatric disability has been continuously pursued since the filing of her November 4, 2016, VA Form 21-526EZ.  The Veteran's February 14, 2023, Supplemental Claim was filed within 12 months of the issuance of the January 10 2023, rating decision denying an increased rating for this condition, which was issued in response to the September 2022 remand by the Board of the April 2019 rating decision which initially granted the Veteran service connection for this claim.  Under the AMA, therefore, the Veteran properly continuously pursued this claim.

Turning to the issue of whether the evidence of record supports a rating in excess of 30 percent from November 4, 2016, to February 14, 2023, and in excess of 70 percent from February 14, 2023, to present, the Veteran's service-connected acquired psychiatric disability is rated under Diagnostic Code (DC) 9411, which falls under the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders.

Under the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders:

A 10 percent rating is assigned when mild or transient symptoms which decrease work efficiency and ability to perform occupational tasks only during periods of occasional stress, or symptoms controlled by medication cause occupational and social impairment.

A 30 percent rating where there is occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks (although generally functioning satisfactorily, with routine behavior, self-care, and conversation normal), due to such symptoms as: depressed mood; anxiety; suspiciousness; panic attacks (weekly or less often); chronic sleep impairment; and mild memory loss (such as forgetting names, directions, recent events).

A 50 percent rating is warranted when there is occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity, due to such symptoms as: flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short- and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships.

A 70 percent rating is warranted when there is occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or work-like setting); and inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.

A 100 percent rating is warranted when there is total occupational and social impairment due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent ability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; and memory loss for names of closest relatives, own occupation, or own name.

Under the General Formula, the Board must conduct a "holistic analysis" that considers all associated symptoms, regardless of whether they are listed as criteria. Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 10, 22 (2017). The use of the term "such symptoms as" in 38 C.F.R. § 4.130 indicates that the list of symptoms that follows is non-exhaustive, but rather are to serve as examples of the type and degree of the symptoms, or their effects, that would justify a particular rating. See Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 115 (Fed. Cir. 2013); see also Sellers v. Principi, 372 F.3d 1318, 1326-27 (Fed. Cir. 2004); Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436 (2002). When determining the appropriate disability evaluation to assign, however, the Board's "primary consideration" is the Veteran's symptoms. Vazquez-Claudio, 713 F.3d at 118.

Further, in Bankhead, the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) held the presence of suicidal ideation alone may cause occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas (a 70 percent disability rating under 38 C.F.R. § 4.130).  The rating criteria make no distinction between passive and active suicidal ideation.

Turning to the evidence of record, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination for her mental disorders in May 2018.  The Veteran was diagnosed with unspecified anxiety disorder.  She reported no history of trauma, abuse, or neglect growing up.  She reported that she currently has daily contact with her children and grandchildren, as well as goes to church and has contact with a friend.  The Veteran reported an average of 5 hours of broken and restless sleep per night; feels easily irritated and impatient; often feels tense and anxious; feels restless; no suicidal thoughts; has a history of panic attacks.  On mental status examination (MSE), the examiner found that the Veteran was alert, oriented times three; had good hygiene; good eye contact; mood was anxious and tearful; affect was appropriate; denied suicidal or homicidal ideations; no psychosis or mania.

The Veteran was afforded another VA examination for her mental disorders in August 2019.  The Veteran was diagnosed with anxiety disorder and assessed her with occupational and social impairment due to mild or transient symptoms which decrease work efficiency and ability to perform occupational tasks only during periods of significant stress, or; symptoms controlled by medication.  She reported that she has limited contact with one friend, and yearly contact with her children; she has no hobbies but used to bowl and socialize.  She reported that she takes psychiatric medications, has difficulty sleeping; feels angry thinking about her life, relationships and the military; no active suicidal thoughts, no intent reported; feels hopeless, sense of doom, tends to isolate recurrent memories about military; she reported experiencing verbal aggression and intimidation while in the service.  She reported that she experiences panic attacks.  On MSE, the examiner found that the Veteran was alert, oriented times three; had good hygiene and good eye contact; mood was anxious; affect was tearful; denied suicidal or homicidal ideations; no psychosis or mania noted.  The examiner found that the Veteran has symptoms of anxiety, panic attacks that occur weekly or less often, chronic sleep impairment, and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships.

In a November 2019 private treatment record, the Veteran was seen for mental health care.   She reported with symptoms of PTSD and panic attacks; that she has dreams and flashbacks of a traumatic event in the military; has no desire or motivation to do any social activities; sleep is poor; has passive suicidal thoughts; has only worked about 3 months this year and last year; she has a son and daughter and is close with them but not as close as she used to be when she would host family gatherings but feels like she can no longer do so.  

In January 2020, the Veteran submitted a March 2019 private mental disorder disability benefits questionnaire by Dr. E.M.T.  In her DBQ, Dr. E.M.T. found that the Veteran had a diagnosis of adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood; that the Veteran was alienated from others; had strained relationships; and overall serious symptoms resulting in total occupational and social impairment.  Dr. E.M.T. assessed the Veteran with symptoms of depressed mood, anxiety, panic attacks that occur weekly or less, near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriate and effectively, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss, such as forgetting names, directions or recent events, flatted affect, impaired judgment, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work like setting, inability to establish and maintain effective relationships, suicidal ideation, impaired impulse control, such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence, neglect of personal appearance and hygiene.  

The Veteran was afforded another VA examination for her mental disorders in February 2020.  The Veteran was diagnosed with panic disorder; major depressive disorder, recurrent, moderate; and other specified trauma and stressor related disorder.  The examiner found that the Veteran has occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, and/or mood.  The Veteran reported that she isolates and does not do anything; she reported having a hard time with motivation, including completing ADLs; has a hard time connecting to her family and friends and does not want to be around people anymore; feels sad and down most days; has panic attacks 2-3 times a week; is fearful of employment because of concern of having a panic attack while at work; rarely leaves the house; has poor concentration; has trouble sleeping; reported having regular suicidal ideations.  The examiner assessed the Veteran with symptoms of depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks more than once a week, mild memory loss, flatted affect, circumstantial, circumlocutory or stereotyped speech, impaired abstract thinking, disturbances of motivation or mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work like setting, suicidal ideation, neglect of personal appearance and hygiene, and intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living, including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene.  On MSE the examiner found that the Veteran: dressed casually; was cooperative and maintained appropriate eye contact; speech was normal in rate and rhythm; affect was congruent with the content of the evaluation; mood was dysthymic and anxious; thought processes were circumlocutory and tangential; no perceptual disturbances were noted or reported; insight was poor; judgment was appropriate/good.

The Veteran was afforded another VA examination for her mental disorders in May 2023.  The Veteran was diagnosed with PTSD; panic disorder; and major depressive disorder, recurrent, moderate.  The examiner assessed the Veteran with occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking and/or mood.  The Veteran reported that she lives alone; has 2 adult children; that she wants to be able to have family gatherings again and see her children and grandchildren; has not had dating relationships since 2010; has pushed away friends and does not answer the phone most of the time when her one friend calls.  She reported attempting to work over the years but being quickly terminated on numerous occasions.  Reported that her symptoms are the same as they were in prior mental disorder examinations.  She reported that she continues to take psychiatric medications and has suicidal thoughts.  The examiner assessed the Veteran with symptoms of depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks more than once a week, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss, such as forgetting names, directions, or recent events, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work like setting, inability to establish and maintain effective relationships, neglect of personal appearance and hygiene.  On MSE, the examiner found that the Veteran's: affect was tearful, hyperventilating at various times; mood was depressed and anxious; thought processes logical but not consistently goal directed with no evidence of psychosis; oriented x4; casually dressed; open and cooperative with evaluation process; pressed rate of speech; denied suicidal ideations.

After carefully reviewing the foregoing, the Board finds that the Veteran is entitled to a rating of 70 percent, but no higher, for the entire period on appeal, from November 4, 2016, to present.  The Veteran's March 2019 private examination for mental disorders documents that the Veteran has been having suicidal ideations since at least as early as 2018-2019, with the Veteran reporting to the VA examiner in the May 2023 VA examination for mental disorders that her mental symptomatology was the same as it had been for the prior VA examinations for mental disorders.  As noted above, in Bankhead, the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) held the presence of suicidal ideation alone may cause occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas (a 70 percent disability rating under 38 C.F.R. § 4.130).  The rating criteria make no distinction between passive and active suicidal ideation.  When evaluating a claim for an increased rating, the benefit of the doubt goes to the veteran. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.3.

Additionally, as previously outlined above, the Veteran was granted an increased rating of 70 percent for her service-connected acquired psychiatric disability effective February 14, 2023. The Board notes, however, that it appears that the AOJ arbitrarily set the date of this increase based on the date of the February 14, 2023, submission of the Veteran's Supplemental Claim, a practice that was explicitly rejected in Swain v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 219 (2015). The Veteran's lay statements, VA and private treatment notes, the VA mental examinations, and the March 2019 private examination for mental disorders, all indicate that the Veteran's symptomatology and limitations have been consistent prior to, and subsequently to, February 14, 2023.  In light of the Board's finding, above, that this claim has been continuously pursued since November 4, 2016, the Board finds that the rating of 70 percent for acquired psychiatric disability should be effective as of November 4, 2016.

The probative evidence of record, however, persuasively weighs against finding that the level of occupational and social impairment more closely approximated total occupational and social impairment as a result of the type of symptoms listed in the general rating schedule or symptoms of a similar degree. There have been no significant deficiencies identified in the Veteran's thought processes or communication, nor has there been any indication of disorientation, delusions, hallucinations, or grossly inappropriate behavior, and she has never reported memory loss of the severity contemplated by a 100 percent rating.  While the Board acknowledges that the March 2019 private mental DBQ indicated that the Veteran had total occupational and social impairment as a result of her mental symptomatology, the Board finds this to be inconsistent with not only the numerous other examinations of record, but with the Veteran's only lay statements in which she consistently denied delusions, hallucinations, homicidal ideations, grossly inappropriate behavior, etc.  As such, a review of the evidence shows that the Veteran's psychiatric symptomatology does not more closely approximate the criteria for a 100 percent disability rating under the general rating schedule for psychiatric disorders. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

Accordingly, the Board concludes that the evidence warrants a rating of 70 percent, but no higher, for the Veteran's service-connected acquired psychiatric disability.

2. Entitlement to an effective date of May 1, 2021, but no earlier, for the award of a total disability rating based on individual unemployability due to service-connected disabilities (TDIU) 

The Veteran was granted TDIU by rating decision dated July 2023, in which the AOJ assigned an effective date of February 14, 2023.  The Veteran contends that her service-connected disabilities precluded her from obtaining and maintaining full-time, competitive gainful employment prior to her current effective date for TDIU of February 14, 2023.  See April 2023 VA Form 21-8940.

VA law provides that a total rating for compensation may be assigned where the schedular rating is less than total when it is found that the disabled person is unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation as a result of a single service-connected disability ratable at 60 percent or more or as a result of two or more disabilities, provided at least one disability is ratable at 40 percent or more, and there is sufficient additional service-connected disability to bring the combined rating to 70 percent or more.  38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a).  Nevertheless, even when the percentage requirements are not met, entitlement to a TDIU on an extraschedular basis may be granted in exceptional cases when the veteran is unable to secure and follow a substantially gainful occupation by reason of service-connected disabilities.  38 C.F.R. § 4.16(b).

Entitlement to a total rating must be based solely on the impact of service-connected disabilities on the ability to keep and maintain substantially gainful employment.  See 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.340, 3.341, 4.16.  The central inquiry is "whether the veteran's service-connected disabilities alone are of sufficient severity to produce unemployability."  Hatlestad v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 524, 529 (1993).  For VA purposes, the term "unemployability" is synonymous with inability to secure and follow a substantially gainful occupation.  VAOPGPREC 75-91, 57 Fed. Reg. 2317 (Jan. 21, 1992).

"Substantially gainful employment" is not currently defined in VA regulations; however, the term has been defined as having two components: one economic and one noneconomic. The economic component means an occupation earning more than marginal income (outside of a protected environment) as determined by the U.S. Department of Commerce as the poverty threshold for one person. The noneconomic component includes consideration of the veteran's history, education, skill, and training, whether the veteran has the physical ability to perform the type of activities required by the occupation at issue, and whether the veteran has the mental ability to perform the activities required by the occupation at issue. In other words, the noneconomic component requires consideration of a veteran's ability to secure or follow that type of employment. Ray v. Wilkie, 31 Vet. App. 58 (2019).

Marginal employment shall not be considered substantially gainful employment. 38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a). Factors to be considered in determining whether unemployability exists are the veteran's education and employment history, and loss of work-related functions due to pain. Ferraro v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 326, 330, 332 (1991). Consideration may not be given to the veteran's age or to any impairment caused by nonservice-connected disabilities. 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.341, 4.16, 4.19. For a veteran to prevail on a claim of entitlement to a TDIU, the record must reflect some factor which takes the case outside the norm. The fact that a veteran may be unemployed or has difficulty obtaining employment is not determinative. The ultimate question is whether the veteran, because of service-connected disabilities, is incapable of performing the physical and mental acts required by employment, not whether he or she can find employment. Van Hoose v. Brown, 4 Vet. App. 361, 363 (1993).

Turning to the issue of whether the Veteran has been rendered unemployable because of her service-connected disabilities prior to February 14, 2023, in the Veteran's April VA Form 21-8940, the Veteran averred that she became too disabled to work in June 2012 as a result of her service-connected psychiatric issues.  She reported, however, that she continued working 60 hours per week as a registered nurse until an unspecified date in April 2021.  See April 2023 VA Form 21-8940.

The Board notes that the Veteran's current effective date for TDIU of February 14, 2023, was assigned by the AOJ as this is the earliest date at which the Veteran met the schedular criteria for TDIU at the time of the July 2023 rating decision which granted TDIU.  Pursuant to the Board's decision, above, to increase the Veteran's rating for her service-connected acquired psychiatric disability to 70 percent effective November 4, 2016, however, the Veteran now meets the schedular criteria for TDIU effective November 4, 2016.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a).

The Board is bound by the AOJ's finding that the Veteran qualified for TDIU as of February 14, 2023.  38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).  

After carefully considering the foregoing evidence of record, the Board finds that for the period from May 1, 2021, to February 14, 2023, the probative evidence of record is at least approximately balanced that the Veteran was unable to obtain, or maintain, substantial, gainful employment.  The Veteran asserted by lay statement that she was unemployed and has difficulties obtaining employment as a result of her illness and anxiety related symptoms, including being terminated at least a dozen times.  See May 2023 VA Form 21-4138 Statement in Support of Claim.  Moreover, in the Veteran's March 2019 private mental DBQ, Dr. E.M.T. opined that the Veteran has total occupational and social impairment as a result of her psychiatric symptoms.

The Veteran's reported symptoms and work-related limitations are consistent with her VA and private treatment notes, the conclusions of the VA mental examiners, and the conclusions of the private mental examiner Dr. E.M.T.  Moreover, the foregoing evidence is not meaningfully contradicted by any medical or vocational evidence of record.  As such, the Board finds the Veteran's reported difficulties in work-related activities and claims that she could no longer perform substantial, gainful employment to be competent and credible.

The Board notes, however, that while the Veteran contends in her VA Form 21-8940 that she has been unable to work since June 2012, the employment history section of her 8940 contradicts that statement.  As noted above, TDIU is only available to those who have not, and cannot, engage in substantial, gainful employment.  The Veteran indicates in her 8940 that she was working 48 hours per week until an unspecified date in April 2021, where she earned wages easily qualifying as substantial, gainful employment.  The Board accepts that the Veteran believes that she is entitled to an earlier effective date for the grant of a TDIU.  However, the Board is bound by the applicable legal authority and finds no basis therein to assign an effective date earlier than May 1, 2021.  The Board further acknowledges that the Veteran reported periods of employment in October to November 2021, June 2022, and September 2022.  The Boards, however, that these periods were not sufficient in length to qualify as substantial, gainful employment.

Accordingly, entitlement to TDIU is granted from May 1, 2021, to present.

 

 

M. Mills

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	B. Hillman, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.