Citation Nr: A25034563
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 200501-83950
DATE: April 15, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 20 percent for degenerative arthritis of the cervical spine is remanded.

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent for right patellofemoral syndrome is remanded.

Entitlement to a separate rating in excess of 10 percent for right knee instability is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from December 1993 to December 2003, to include service in Southwest Asia.  For his meritorious service, the Veteran was awarded (among other decorations) the Army Commendation Medal, and the Army Achievement Medal.

This matter is before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal of a March 2020 rating decision (i.e., agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision) from a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).  

Given the date of the rating decision on appeal, the Veteran's appeal is governed by the modernized review system, known by the Board as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA).  38 C.F.R. §§ 3.2400, 19.2. 

In a May 2020 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement (NOD)), the Veteran elected the evidence submission docket.  In a January 2024 Board decision, the Board denied the Veteran's claims for entitlement to a rating in excess of 20 percent for degenerative arthritis of the cervical spine and a rating in excess of 10 percent for right patellofemoral syndrome.  The Board also granted the Veteran a separate rating of 10 percent, but no higher, for right knee instability.  

The Veteran appealed to the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court).  In October 2024, the Court granted an October 2024 Joint Motion for Partial Remand (JMPR), which vacated the January 2024 Board decision to the extent that it denied the Veteran entitlement to (1) a disability rating in excess of 20 percent for degenerative arthritis of the cervical spine, (2) a disability rating in excess of 10 percent for limitation of flexion due to right patellofemoral syndrome, and (3) a separate disability rating in excess of 10 percent for right knee instability.  The matters were remanded to the Board for readjudication in accordance with the JMPR. 

1. Entitlement to a rating in excess of 20 percent for degenerative arthritis of the cervical spine is remanded.

In the October 2024 JMPR, the parties agreed that a March 2020 VA examination for neck (cervical spine) conditions was inadequate because the examiner's findings were inconsistent with the Veteran's lay statements given during the examination.  See Ardison v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 405, 407 (1994) (an adequate medical examination is one that is based on a consideration of the veteran's prior medical history and describes the veteran's condition with a level of detail sufficient to allow the Board to make a fully informed decision); Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 301 (2008) (the opinion is required to "contain not only clear conclusions with supporting data, but also a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two").  

During the March 2020 VA examination, the Veteran endorsed having functional loss, including problems with neck rotation and heavy lifting.  However, the examiner concluded that pain, weakness, fatigability, or incoordination do not significantly limit his functional ability with repeated use over time.  The examiner also noted that although the examination was not being conducted immediately following repeated use over time, the examination was consistent with the Veteran's statements of functional loss during the examination.  Yet, the examiner did not reconcile her finding with the Veteran's reports of functional loss.  Therefore, the examination is inadequate.  

In the March 2020 rating decision, the AOJ denied the claim without obtaining an adequate medical examination.  This was a pre-decisional duty to assist error, and a remand is necessary to correct it.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

2. Entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent for right patellofemoral syndrome is remanded.

In the October 2024 JMPR, the parties also agreed that July 2019 and March 2020 VA examinations for knee and lower leg conditions were inadequate.  First, the examinations are inadequate because they failed to comply with Correia v. McDonald, 28 Vet. App. 158, 168 (2016).  Neither examiner provided the range of motion on both active and passive motion or in weight-bearing and non-weight-bearing.

In addition, the examinations are inadequate because they failed to comply with Walleman v. McDonough, 35 Vet. App. 294, 308 (2022), given that the examiners concluded there was pain upon range of motion but did not specify where the pain sets in during range of motion testing.  Specifically, the July 2019 VA examiner noted there was objective evidence of pain in passive motion, and the March 2020 VA examiner noted there was objective evidence of pain in passive motion and in non-weight-bearing.

In the March 2020 rating decision, the AOJ denied the claim without obtaining an adequate medical examination.  This was a pre-decisional duty to assist error, and a remand is necessary to correct it.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

?

3. Entitlement to a separate rating in excess of 10 percent for right knee instability is remanded.

In the January 2024 decision, the Board stated a higher rating was not warranted for the Veteran's right knee instability because of findings from a 2020 private examiner, but provided no reasoning as to why a higher rating was not warranted.  See December 2019 Private Examination Report (received by VA in February 2020).  In the October 2024 JMPR, the parties agreed that the Board provided an inadequate statement of reasons and bases when concluding a rating higher than 10 percent was not warranted for right knee instability.  See Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49, 57 (1990); Caluza v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 498, 506 (1995).  

However, as discussed, the Board is remanding for a new VA examination of the Veteran's knee and lower leg to address the issue of entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent for right patellofemoral syndrome.  Given that findings from that examination could impact the issue of entitlement to an increased rating for right knee instability, the Board finds the issues are inextricably intertwined.  See Henderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 11, 20 (1999) (matters are "inextricably intertwined" where action on one matter could have a "significant impact" on the other).  Therefore, a remand of the issue of entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent for right knee instability is also required. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Schedule the Veteran for VA examinations to determine the nature and severity of his service-connected degenerative arthritis of the cervical spine and service-connected right knee disabilities.  

The entire claim file, to include all electronic files, must be reviewed by the examiner.   

The Veteran's lay contentions (i.e., reports of functional loss) must be considered, and where necessary, the examiner must reconcile those contentions with findings from the examination.  

For each disability, the examiner must provide the range of motion on active and passive motion with weight-bearing and non-weight-bearing, or provide an explanation for why such measurements cannot be obtained.  In addition, where there is pain upon range of motion (including during flare-ups), the examiner must specify where the pain set in during range of motion testing. 

The examination reports must include a complete rationale for all opinions expressed and conclusions reached.  If the examiner feels that a requested opinion cannot be rendered without resorting to speculation, the examiner must state whether the need to speculate is caused by a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (i.e. no one could respond given medical science and the known facts) or by a deficiency in the record or the examiner (i.e. additional facts are required, or the examiner does not have the needed knowledge or training).

 

M. C. WILSON

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	C. Neal, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.