Citation Nr: A25034059
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 240509-439154
DATE: April 11, 2025

ORDER

Service connection for a deviated septum is denied.

FINDING OF FACT

A deviated septum is not shown to have begun during service, or to be causally or etiologically related to any disease, injury, or incident during service. 

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for service connection for a deviated septum have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303. 

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from January 2007 to January 2011. 

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a rating decision issued in June 2023 by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office.

Service Connection

The Veteran asserts that he first developed a deviated septum while in service, warranting service connection. Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (a). Service connection may also be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge, when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (d). Direct service connection may not be granted without evidence of a current disability; in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and a nexus between the claimed in-service disease or injury and the present disease or injury. Id.; see also Caluza v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 498, 506 (1995) aff'd, 78 F.3d 604 (Fed. Cir. 1996).

When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, the Secretary shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.R.F. § 3.102; see also Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49, 53 (1990); Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021)(only when the evidence persuasively favors one side or another is the benefit of the doubt doctrine not for application).

The Veteran's service treatment records are negative for complaints, findings, or diagnoses related to his septum. A July 2009 note shows the Veteran's nasal cavity was examined and his septum found to be normal. Later that month, the Veteran was seen for headache pain and examined. It was specifically found at that time that his septum was not deviated. The Veteran was examined in July 2010 in anticipation of separation, and his sinuses were found to be normal. In a concurrent report of medical history, he denied any ear, nose, or throat trouble. He listed several medical concerns he was experiencing at that time, without noting anything related to the sinuses or septum.  

Post-service VA treatment records reveal that the Veteran was diagnosed with a deviated septum in February 2023, over 12 years after his discharge from service. The Veteran has not indicated how he believes that the disability is related to his military service. There is no indication from the record, other than his assertions, that the disability is in any way related to that military service.

The Board acknowledges that the Veteran has not been afforded a VA examination or medical opinion in regard to this claim. VA's duty to assist includes scheduling a VA examination when necessary. VA will provide a medical examination when there is: (1) competent evidence of a current disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability; (2) evidence establishing that an event, injury, or disease occurred in service or establishing that certain diseases manifested during an applicable presumptive period for which the veteran qualifies; and (3) an indication that the disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability may be associated with the veteran's service or with another service-connected disability; but there is insufficient competent medical evidence on file for VA to make a decision on the claim. See 38 U.S.C. § 5103A (d)(2); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159 (c)(4)(i).

In this case, there is no indication of evidence establishing that an event, injury or disease occurred in service. Neither is there an indication that a deviated septum, or persistent or recurrent symptoms of such, are in any way associated with the Veteran's service, or another service-connected disability. Other than his generalized assertions, the Veteran has presented no medical evidence to support his claim, nor has a connection been reasonably raised by competent medical evidence. See Waters v. Shinseki, 601 F.3d 1274 (Fed. Cir. 2010) (holding that a veteran's assertion that a service-connected condition caused the claimed disability was insufficient alone to trigger the duty to provide an examination). As noted above, other than filing this claim, the Veteran has provided no opinion or assertion as to how a deviated septum, diagnosed over 12 years after his discharge from service, is related to that service. There is no other evidence that the Veteran's deviated septum was caused or aggravated by service. Thus, the Board finds that VA's duty to provide an examination has not been triggered.

Based on the subjective and clinical evidence of record, the Board finds that the evidence weighs persuasively against a finding that service connection is warranted. Although the Veteran has a current diagnosis of a deviated septum, the evidence of record does not indicate that the disability manifested during, or as a result of, his active-duty service.

By filing his claim, the Veteran is asserting that there is a link between his military service and the condition. Lay witnesses are competent to provide testimony or statements relating to symptoms or facts and events that he or she observed which are within the realm of their personal knowledge. However, a lay person is not competent to establish that which would require specialized knowledge or training, such as medical expertise. Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 469-70 (1994). In this regard, the question of causation of a deviated septum involves a medical subject concerning an internal physical process extending beyond an immediately observable cause-and-effect relationship. As such, the question of etiology may not be competently addressed by lay evidence, and the Board affords no probative value to the Veteran's general contentions.

The Veteran's deviated septum is not shown to be causally or etiologically related to any disease, injury, or incident during service. Therefore, service connection is not warranted. In reaching such decision, it has considered the applicability of the benefit of the doubt doctrine. However, as the weight of the probative evidence is persuasively against the claim, that doctrine is not applicable. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Gilbert, supra; Lynch, supra. The claim is denied.

 

 

R. FEINBERG

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Jeremy J. Olsen, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.