Citation Nr: A25034883
Decision Date: 04/16/25	Archive Date: 04/16/25

DOCKET NO. 240627-452954
DATE: April 16, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a muscle disability, to include costochondritis, is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a left groin disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a right ankle disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a respiratory disability, to include sinusitis, is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from August 2000 to September 2002. 

The Rating Decision on appeal was issued in March 2024 and constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.  

In her June 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket and indicated appeal of the March 2024 Rating Decision.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2024 Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301; Terry v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 1, 5, 11 (2023).  Any evidence submitted after the March 2024 AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  However, because the Board is remanding the claims on appeal, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

The Board acknowledges that the Veteran's June 2024 VA Form 10182 also attempted to appeal other issues to the Board which were previously denied in Rating Decisions dated in January 2022, October 2014, March 2011, January 2005, and August 2004.  However, as these Rating Decisions were not issued within the year prior to the Veteran's June 2024 VA Form 10182, the appeal with respect to those issues was untimely; as no good cause has been shown for the delayed appeal, these rating decisions and issues are not currently before the Board.  See 38 C.F.R. §§20.202, 20.203 (Notice of Disagreement must be submitted to the RO within one year of the Rating Decision being appealed).

The Veteran seeks entitlement to service connection for a muscle disability (to include costochondritis), a left groin disability, a right ankle disability, and a respiratory disability (to include sinusitis).  Unfortunately, the Board finds that these issues must be remanded to correct pre-decisional duty to assist errors.  See 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a) (authorizing the Board to remand for pre-decisional duty to assist errors).

With respect to the issue of entitlement to service connection for a muscle disability, the Veteran indicated on her January 2024 VA Form 21-526EZ that she suffered from a muscle disability which caused pain in her chest during periods of flare-up.  She further indicated that this disability first had its onset in October 2001 as a result of overuse during physical training.  An October 2001 service treatment record confirms that the Veteran sought treatment for chest pain with a duration of 7 days, which she described as "sharp pains in the chest area" occurring during physical training.  At that time, she was diagnosed as having "costochondritis / muscle strain." 

With respect to the issue of entitlement to service connection for a left groin disability, the Veteran indicated on her January 2024 VA Form 21-526EZ that she suffered from a left groin sprain which caused extreme pain while running.  She further indicated that this disability first had its onset in May 2002 as a result of physical training.  A May 2002 service treatment record confirms that the Veteran sought treatment for a "possible groin sprain" that had its onset after she heard something pop in the left groin area while running during physical training.  At that time, she was diagnosed as having "groin strain." 

With respect to the issue of entitlement to service connection for a right ankle disability, the Veteran indicated on her January 2024 VA Form 21-526EZ that she suffered from right ankle capsulitis which rendered her unable to exercise without pain.  She further indicated that this disability first had its onset in February 2001 as a result of physical training.  A November 2000 service treatment record reveals that she complained of pain at the top of her right foot lasting two days, which was diagnosed as metatarsalgia.  In February 2001, she sought treatment for right ankle pain lasting three days, which was diagnosed as right ankle capsulitis.  Again, in December 2001, she sought treatment after twisting her ankle while running during physical training, which was diagnosed as deltoid ligament strain.   In August 2002, the Veteran sought treatment for sharp right foot pain after jumping from a 7-ton truck during an operation, at which time she was diagnosed as having plantar fasciitis.  

With respect to the issue of entitlement to service connection for sinusitis, the Veteran indicated on her January 2024 VA Form 21-526EZ that she suffered from idiopathic sinusitis which caused nasal dripping and resulted in difficulty breathing.  She further indicated that this disability first had its onset in 2000.  A January 2001 service treatment record indicated that the Veteran sought treatment for congestion, at which time she was diagnosed as having viral bronchitis.  Significantly, on her September 2002 Report of Medical History at separation from service, the Veteran reported that she experienced difficulty breathing while running and was given an inhaler at bootcamp in 2000 due to "wheezing problems."  The Veteran indicated that she was being discharged from the Marine Corps at that time due to her failure to pass the physical fitness test as a result of her inability to run.  

Significantly, the AOJ did not afford the Veteran examinations or obtain medical opinions relevant to any of these claimed disabilities.  Rather, the March 2024 Rating Decision on appeal denied all of the claims, explaining the evidence did failed to show a diagnosis for the claims disabilities and that, "The evidence does not show an event, disease or injury in service. (38 CFR 3.303, 38 CFR3.304) Your service treatment records do not contain complaints, treatment, or diagnosis for this condition."  Crucially, none of the aforementioned in-service instances of treatment were discussed by the AOJ.  

Consistent with VA's duty to assist, VA must provide a medical examination when there is evidence of (1) a current disability; (2) an in-service injury; (3) some indication that the claimed disability may be associated with the established injury; and (4) insufficient competent evidence of record for VA to decide the claim.  See McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 84 (2006).  The third prong, which requires evidence that the claimed disability or symptoms "may be" associated with the established event, has a low evidentiary threshold.  Id. at 83.

Here, the Veteran competently described her claimed disabilities as having their onset in service, even giving specific dates of in-service onset.  These competent lay statements were corroborated by the Veteran's service treatment records, which showed in-service treatment for chest symptomatology, groin symptomatology, ankle symptomatology, and respiratory symptomatology.  The Board finds the Veteran's statements imply peristent symptom which may indicate a current disability.  As such, the Board finds the Veteran has satisfied low evidentiary threshold of McLendon, such that VA was required to examine the Veteran for these claims.  The AOJ's failure to afford the Veteran VA examinations relevant to these claims constituted a pre-decisional duty-to-assist error in violation of 38 U.S.C. § 5103A.  Therefore, remand is warranted for to obtain examinations and opinions to determine the likely nature and etiology of the claimed disabilities under 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).  

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Provide the Veteran with an examination to determine the likely nature and etiology of any current muscle disability, to include costochondritis.  The entire claims file and a copy of this Remand must be made available to the reviewing examiner and the examiner shall indicate in the report that the claims file was reviewed.  

The VA examiner should furnish an opinion with respect to the following questions:

(a.) Identify any current muscle disability, to include costochondritis (also claimed as muscle strain). 

(b.) Whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that any current muscle disability, to include costochondritis, had its initial onset in or is otherwise related to the Veteran's period of active-duty service.  

In providing these opinions, the examiner must explicitly discuss the October 2001 service treatment record in which the Veteran sought treatment for chest pain with a duration of 7 days, which she described as "sharp pains in the chest area" occurring during physical training (diagnosed as "costochondritis / muscle strain").

The examiner should provide a complete rationale for all opinions provided.  If an opinion cannot be provided without resorting to mere speculation, then the examiner should identify all medical and lay evidence considered in this conclusion, fully explain why this is the case and identify what additional evidence (if any) would allow for a more definitive opinion.

The examiner is advised that the Veteran is competent to report her symptoms and history, and such reports must be specifically acknowledged and considered in formulating any opinions.  If the examiner rejects the Veteran's reports, then he/she must provide an explanation for such rejection.  The examiner is not to improperly discount the Veteran's lay statements or mistakenly rely on an absence of medical evidence in the record to support his/her conclusions.

2. Provide the Veteran with an examination to determine the likely nature and etiology of any current left groin disability.  The entire claims file and a copy of this Remand must be made available to the reviewing examiner and the examiner shall indicate in the report that the claims file was reviewed.  

The VA examiner should furnish an opinion with respect to the following questions:

(a.) Identify any current left groin disability. 

(b.) Whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that any current left groin disability had its initial onset in or is otherwise related to the Veteran's period of active-duty service.  

In providing these opinions, the examiner must explicitly discuss the May 2002 service treatment record in which the Veteran sought treatment for a "possible groin sprain" (diagnosed as "groin strain"). 

The examiner should provide a complete rationale for all opinions provided.  If an opinion cannot be provided without resorting to mere speculation, then the examiner should identify all medical and lay evidence considered in this conclusion, fully explain why this is the case and identify what additional evidence (if any) would allow for a more definitive opinion.

The examiner is advised that the Veteran is competent to report her symptoms and history, and such reports must be specifically acknowledged and considered in formulating any opinions.  If the examiner rejects the Veteran's reports, then he/she must provide an explanation for such rejection.  The examiner is not to improperly discount the Veteran's lay statements or mistakenly rely on an absence of medical evidence in the record to support his/her conclusions.

3. Provide the Veteran with an examination to determine the likely nature and etiology of any current right ankle disability, to include capsulitis.  The entire claims file and a copy of this Remand must be made available to the reviewing examiner and the examiner shall indicate in the report that the claims file was reviewed.  

The VA examiner should furnish an opinion with respect to the following questions:

(a.) Identify any current right ankle disability, to include capsulitis. 

(b.) Whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that any current right ankle disability, to include capsulitis, had its initial onset in or is otherwise related to the Veteran's period of active-duty service.  

In providing these opinions, the examiner must explicitly discuss the November 2000 service treatment record in which the Veteran complained of pain at the top of her right foot (diagnosed as metatarsalgia); the February 2001 service treatment record in which the Veteran sought treatment for right ankle pain (diagnosed as right ankle capsulitis); the December 2001 service treatment record in which the Veteran sought treatment after twisting her ankle while running during physical training (diagnosed as deltoid ligament strain); as well as the August 2002 service treatment record in which the Veteran sought treatment for sharp right foot pain (diagnosed as plantar fasciitis).  

The examiner should provide a complete rationale for all opinions provided.  If an opinion cannot be provided without resorting to mere speculation, then the examiner should identify all medical and lay evidence considered in this conclusion, fully explain why this is the case and identify what additional evidence (if any) would allow for a more definitive opinion.

The examiner is advised that the Veteran is competent to report her symptoms and history, and such reports must be specifically acknowledged and considered in formulating any opinions.  If the examiner rejects the Veteran's reports, then he/she must provide an explanation for such rejection.  The examiner is not to improperly discount the Veteran's lay statements or mistakenly rely on an absence of medical evidence in the record to support his/her conclusions.

4. Provide the Veteran with an examination to determine the likely nature and etiology of any current respiratory disability, to include sinusitis.  The entire claims file and a copy of this Remand must be made available to the reviewing examiner and the examiner shall indicate in the report that the claims file was reviewed.  

The VA examiner should furnish an opinion with respect to the following questions:

(a.) Identify any current respiratory disability, to include sinusitis. 

(b.) Whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that any respiratory disability, to include sinusitis, had its initial onset in or is otherwise related to the Veteran's period of active-duty service.  

In providing these opinions, the examiner must explicitly discuss the January 2001 service treatment record in which the Veteran sought treatment for congestion (diagnosed as viral bronchitis); as well as the September 2002 Report of Medical History at separation from service in which the Veteran reported that she still experienced difficulty breathing while running and was given an inhaler at bootcamp in 2000 due to "wheezing problems."

The examiner should provide a complete rationale for all opinions provided.  If an opinion cannot be provided without resorting to mere speculation, then the examiner should identify all medical and lay evidence considered in this conclusion, fully explain why this is the case and identify what additional evidence (if any) would allow for a more definitive opinion.

The examiner is advised that the Veteran is competent to report her symptoms and history, and such reports must be specifically acknowledged and considered in formulating any opinions.  If the examiner rejects the Veteran's reports, then he/she must provide an explanation for such rejection.  The examiner is not to improperly discount the Veteran's lay statements or mistakenly rely on an absence of medical evidence in the record to support his/her conclusions.

 

 

Tiffany Dawson

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Flamini, Anthony

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.