Citation Nr: A25034970
Decision Date: 04/16/25	Archive Date: 04/16/25

DOCKET NO. 240710-453342
DATE: April 16, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to a rating higher than 10 percent for lumbar degenerative disc disease is denied.

Entitlement to a rating higher than 20 percent for left lumbar radiculopathy is denied.

Entitlement to a rating higher than 20 percent for right lumbar radiculopathy is denied.

Entitlement to a rating higher than 10 percent for left ankle lateral collateral ligament sprain is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1.  The Veteran's lumbosacral spine disability is not shown to have been manifested by forward flexion limited to 60 degrees or less, combined range of motion limited to 120 degrees or less, muscle spasm or guarding severe enough to result in an abnormal gait or abnormal spinal contour, or incapacitating episodes of intervertebral disc disease; additional separately ratable neurological manifestations are not shown.

2.  The Veteran's left lower extremity lumbar radiculopathy is not shown to result in more than moderate incomplete paralysis of the sciatic nerve.

3.  The Veteran's right lower extremity lumbar radiculopathy is not shown to result in more than moderate incomplete paralysis of the sciatic nerve.

4.  The Veteran's left ankle lateral collateral ligament sprain is not shown to have been manifested by more than moderate limitation of motion; there is no evidence of ankylosis of the ankle, ankylosis of the subastragalar or tarsal joint, malunion of the os calcis or astragalus, or astragalectomy.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1.  A rating higher than 10 percent for lumbar degenerative disc disease is not warranted.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.7, 4.21, 4.40, 4.45, 4.71a, Diagnostic Code (Code) 5243.

2.  A rating higher than 20 percent for left lumbar radiculopathy is not warranted.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.7, 4.124a, Code 8520.

3.  A rating higher than 20 percent for right lumbar radiculopathy is not warranted.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.7, 4.124a, Code 8520.

4.  A rating higher than 10 percent for left ankle lateral collateral ligament sprain is not warranted.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.7, 4.10, 4.40, 4.45, 4.71a, Code 5271.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from April 2009 to December 2010.

These matters are before the Board on appeal from a February 2024 Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) rating decision, which was a higher-level review of a July 2023 rating decision.  In the July 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review option.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the July 2023 rating decision, which was then subject to higher-level review.  Any evidence submitted after the July 2023 rating decision cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Increased Ratings

Disability evaluations are determined by the application of a schedule of ratings, which is based on average impairment of earning capacity.  38 U.S.C. § 1155.  Separate rating codes identify the various disabilities.  38 C.F.R. Part 4.  When there is a question as to which of two evaluations shall be applied, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating.  Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7.  All reasonable doubt regarding the degree of disability is resolved in favor of the veteran.  38 C.F.R. § 4.3.

In general, when an increase in the disability rating is at issue, it is the present level of disability that is of primary concern.  See Francisco v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 55, 58 (1994).  However, "staged" ratings may be assigned when the evidence shows distinct periods during the evaluation period when manifestations of the disability warranted varied ratings.  Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119 (1999); Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2009).

When evaluating a service-connected disability based on limitation of motion, the Board must take into consideration functional loss due to pain under 38 C.F.R. § 4.40 and functional loss due to weakness, fatigability, incoordination, or pain on movement of a joint under 38 C.F.R. § 4.45.  See DeLuca v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 202 (1995); see Johnson v. Brown, 9 Vet. App. 7 (1996).  In DeLuca, the Court held that a diagnostic code based on limitation of motion does not subsume 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.40 and 4.45 and that the rule against pyramiding set forth in 38 C.F.R. § 4.14 does not forbid consideration of a higher rating based on a greater limitation of motion due to pain on use, including use during flare-ups.  Id.  A finding of functional loss due to pain must be supported by adequate pathology and evidenced by the visible behavior of the veteran.  38 C.F.R. § 4.40; Johnston v. Brown, 10 Vet. App. 80, 85 (1997).  Nonetheless, a rating higher than the minimum compensable rating is not assignable under any diagnostic code relating to range of motion where pain does not cause a compensable functional loss.  Rather, the "pain must affect some aspect of 'the normal working movements of the body' such as 'excursion, strength, speed, coordination, and endurance,'" as defined in 38 C.F.R. § 4.40, before a higher rating may be assigned.  See Mitchell v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 32, 37 (2011).  

Under 38 C.F.R. § 4.59, painful motion is a factor to be considered with any form of arthritis; however, 38 C.F.R. § 4.59 is not limited to disabilities involving arthritis.  Burton v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 1 (2011).  The final sentence of 38 C.F.R. § 4.59 requires that the examiner record the results of range of motion testing "for pain on both active and passive motion [and] in weight-bearing and non-weight-bearing and, if possible, with range of motion measurements of the opposite undamaged joint."  Correia v. McDonald, 28 Vet. App. 158 (2016).  VA examiners must obtain information about the severity, frequency, duration, precipitating and alleviating factors, and extent of functional impairment of flares from the veterans themselves, when a flare-up is not observable at the time of examination.  Sharp v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 26 (2017).

Arthritis due to trauma is rated as degenerative arthritis, based on limitation of motion of the joint involved.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Codes, 5003, 5010.  Where there is X-ray evidence of arthritis in a specific major joint or group of minor joints, a (maximum) 10 percent rating may be assigned for limitation of motion of such joint(s) that does not meet the criteria for a compensable rating for limitation of motion of that joint under the specific diagnostic code for the joint.

Lumbar degenerative disc disease

The Veteran's low back disability is currently rated at 10 percent under Code 5242. He seeks a higher rating.  

During a May 2023 VA examination, the Veteran reported having daily constant sharp pain at the mid to lower back, aggravated by activity and exertion or prolonged sitting or standing positions, and alleviated by rest and pain medications.  He reported having severe monthly flare-ups of sharp pain precipitated by activity and exertion, and during which he reported being limited in bending, stooping, pushing, pulling, carrying, and lifting moderate objects.  He reported functional impairment due to being unable to lift anything, run, perform house maintenance, play with his kids in the backyard, or engage in sex because he might injure his back.  On physical exam, forward flexion was to 85 degrees, and extension, right and left lateral flexion, and right and left lateral rotation were each to 30 degrees.  The range of motion itself did not contribute to a functional loss.  Pain was noted on examination.  There was evidence of pain on weight bearing that caused functional loss.  There was no objective evidence of crepitus or localized tenderness or pain on palpation.  There was no additional loss of function or range of motion after repetitive use testing.  The examiner opined that pain, fatigability, and weakness would significantly limit functional ability with repeated use over time or with flare-ups, with estimated endpoints of 75 degrees of forward flexion, 20 degrees of extension, 20 degrees of right and left lateral flexion, 20 degrees of right lateral rotation, and 10 degrees of left lateral rotation.  There was no localized tenderness, guarding, or muscle spasm of the thoracolumbar spine.  Muscle strength testing was normal on the right side and 4/5 on the left side, with no muscle atrophy noted.  Reflexes were hypoactive (1+) at the knees and normal (2+) at the ankles.  Sensory testing was normal.  Straight leg raising was positive to both sides.  Signs or symptoms due to radiculopathy included bilateral moderate intermittent pain; the examiner opined that there was involvement of the sciatic nerve bilaterally.  There was no ankylosis of the spine.  There were no other neurologic abnormalities or findings related to the thoracolumbar spine condition.  The Veteran did not have IVDS of the thoracolumbar spine.  He did not use any assistive devices.  The examiner opined that the back disability impacts the Veteran's ability to perform occupational tasks due to limitation in bending, stooping, pushing, pulling, carrying, and lifting moderate objects.

Based on this evidence, the July 2023 rating decision on appeal continued the 10 percent rating assigned for the Veteran's lumbar degenerative disc disease.

VA and private treatment records throughout show symptoms similar to those found on the VA examination described above.

The VA Rating Schedule provides for the following ratings for spine disabilities, with or without symptoms such as pain (whether or not it radiates), stiffness, or aching in the area of the spine affected by residuals of injury or disease.  

According to the General Rating Formula for Diseases and Injuries of the Spine (General Formula), the following ratings are to be assigned: [The ratings listed below apply to Codes 5235 through 5243 (unless a disability rated under Code 5243 is alternatively rated under the "Formula for Rating Intervertebral Disc Syndrome (IVDS) Based on Incapacitating Episodes").]  

Under the General Formula, a 20 percent rating is warranted when forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine is to 60 degrees or less; or combined range of motion of the thoracolumbar spine is not greater than 120 degrees; or, with muscle spasm or guarding severe enough to result in an abnormal gait or abnormal spinal contour such as scoliosis, reversed lordosis, or abnormal kyphosis.  A 40 percent rating is warranted when forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine is limited to 30 degrees or less; or, for favorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine. A 50 percent rating is warranted for unfavorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine; and a 100 percent rating is warranted for unfavorable ankylosis of the entire spine.  38 C.F.R. § 4.71a.

Any associated objective neurologic abnormalities, including, but not limited to, bowel or bladder impairment, should be separately evaluated under an appropriate diagnostic code.  38 C.F.R. § 4.71a and note 1 following the General Formula.

At the outset, the Board notes that the Veteran is service connected for radiculopathy of the bilateral lower extremities involving the sciatic nerve, to be addressed below.  The Board notes that additional neurological manifestations (such as for bladder or bowel impairment) are not shown or alleged, and further discussion of additional separate ratings for neurological manifestations is not necessary.  Incapacitating episodes of IVDS are also not shown or alleged; therefore, consideration of a rating based on incapacitating episodes is also not warranted.

The reports of the treatment records, VA examination, lay statements, overall, provide evidence against this claim, as they do not show that symptoms of the Veteran's lumbosacral spine disability include forward flexion limited to 60 degrees or less; combined range of thoracolumbar motion limited to 120 degrees or less; or muscle spasm or guarding severe enough to result in an abnormal gait or abnormal spinal contour such as scoliosis, reversed lordosis, or abnormal kyphosis (the criteria for a 20 percent rating).  

The Board notes that the Veteran has reported pain as a result of his lumbar spine disability.  See 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.40, 4.45; see also DeLuca v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 202, 204-07 (1996).  These symptoms were considered by the assigned rating.  Critically, as detailed above, there was no evidence to support additional functional limitations such as would warrant an evaluation higher than 20 percent.  On examination, there was no additional loss of function or range of motion after repetitive use testing.  While the Board is required to consider the effect of the Veteran's pain when making a rating determination, and has done so in this case, the Rating Schedule does not provide for a separate rating for pain.  Rather, it provides guidance for determining ratings under other diagnostic codes assessing musculoskeletal function.  Spurgeon v. Brown, 10 Vet. App. 194 (1997).  In this case, the Veteran is already being adequately compensated for pain and the resulting functional loss.  Therefore, higher disability ratings are not warranted under the schedular criteria.

The evidence does not show that the Veteran's lumbosacral spine disability has met or approximated the criteria for a 20 percent rating at any time.  As the symptoms and associated impairment of function of the Veteran's lumbar spine disability fall squarely within the parameters of the criteria for the 10 percent rating assigned, and never meet (or approximate) the criteria for the next higher rating under the General Formula, an increased rating under the General Formula criteria is clearly not warranted, and the appeal in the matter must be denied.  

Left lumbar radiculopathy 

Right lumbar radiculopathy 

The Veteran has been awarded separate 20 percent ratings for left and right lumbar radiculopathy under Code 8520. He seeks higher ratings.  

On May 2023 VA examination, the Veteran reported constant sharp back pain occurring daily and lasting all day with intermittent radiculopathy pain.  He reported the pain radiates to his hips and down the bilateral extremities to the knees.  Symptoms due to radiculopathy included moderate intermittent pain and moderate paresthesias and/or dysesthesias of both lower extremities.  Muscle strength testing was 5/5 for right knee extension, right ankle plantar flexion, and right ankle dorsiflexion, and 4/5 for left knee extension, left ankle plantar flexion, and left ankle dorsiflexion.  There was no muscle atrophy.  Reflexes were hypoactive (1+) at the knees and normal at the ankles.  Sensation to light touch was normal.  There were no trophic changes, and the Veteran's gait was normal.  The examiner opined that there was mild incomplete paralysis of the sciatic nerve, bilaterally.  The Veteran did not report using any assistive devices for locomotion.  The examiner opined that the functional impact of the Veteran's left and right lumbar radiculopathy included difficulty with lifting, pushing, pulling, standing and walking long periods, driving long distances, and sitting at a desk for long periods, as he needs to frequently reposition and shift his weight.

Based on this evidence, the July 2023 rating decision on appeal continued the 20 percent ratings assigned for the Veteran's left and right lumbar radiculopathy.

VA and private treatment records throughout show symptoms similar to those found on the VA examination described above.

The Veteran's left and right lower extremity lumbar radiculopathies are rated under Diagnostic Code 8520, paralysis of the sciatic nerve.  Under that Diagnostic Code, a 20 percent rating is warranted for moderate incomplete paralysis of the nerve; a 40 percent rating is warranted for moderately severe incomplete paralysis of the nerve; a 60 percent rating is warranted for severe incomplete paralysis of the nerve with marked muscular atrophy; and an 80 percent rating is warranted for complete paralysis of the nerve, with the foot dangling and dropping, no active movement possible of the muscles below the knee, and flexion of the knee weakened or (very rarely) lost.  The rating criteria indicates that the term incomplete paralysis indicates a degree of lost or impaired function substantially less than the type pictured for complete paralysis given with each nerve, whether due to varied level of the nerve lesion or to partial regeneration; when the involvement is wholly sensory, the rating should be for the mild, or at most, the moderate degree.

The terms "mild", "moderate", and "severe" are not defined in the rating schedule; rather than applying a mechanical formula, VA must evaluate all the evidence to the end that its decisions are "equitable and just".  38 C.F.R. § 4.6.

In this case, the medical evidence of record reflects treatment for left and right lower extremity lumbar radiculopathies; however, they are negative for evidence of symptoms consistent with a higher disability rating for either lower extremity.

The Board finds that a rating higher than 20 percent for left or right lumbar radiculopathy is not warranted.  The findings on examination show that the Veteran reported moderate intermittent pain and moderate paresthesias and/or dysesthesias of both lower extremities, and the examiner determined that the disability involves mild incomplete paralysis of the left and right sciatic nerves.  As the medical evidence of record does not show that the Veteran's left or right lower extremity disability exhibited more than moderate symptoms at any time or any indication of atrophy, a 40 percent rating is not warranted for either lower extremity.  Therefore, a rating higher than 20 percent for left or right lower extremity lumbar radiculopathy is not warranted, and the appeal in the matters must be denied.

Left ankle lateral collateral ligament sprain 

The Veteran's left ankle disability is rated at 10 percent under Code 5271. He seeks a higher rating. 

On May 2023 VA examination, the Veteran reported symptoms of pulsating pain located at the lateral aspect of the left ankle, with symptoms occurring every few months, intermittently, and lasting for a day or two at a time.  He reported that his symptoms were aggravated by activity and exertion and alleviated by rest and pain medications.  He did not report flare-ups of the ankle.  He reported functional impairment in that he is less active than he used to be because he tries to avoid the pain or anything that requires him to stand for too long.  He did not report a history of instability of the ankle.  On physical exam, plantar flexion was to 45 degrees, and dorsiflexion was to 15 degrees.  Pain was exhibited on both ranges of motion.  The left ankle range of motion itself did not contribute to a functional loss.  Passive range of motion was the same as active range of motion, with pain exhibited on plantar flexion and dorsiflexion.  There was evidence of pain with weight-bearing, with active and passive motion, and causing functional loss; the Veteran reported being limited in running, jumping, prolonged ambulation, prolonged standing, and high impact activities.  There was no objective evidence of crepitus, localized tenderness, or pain on palpation of the ankle.  There was no additional loss of function or range of motion after repetitive use testing.  The procured evidence suggested pain significantly limits functional ability with repeated use over time and with flare-ups, with an estimated range of motion of plantar flexion to 40 degrees and dorsiflexion to 10 degrees.  There were no additional contributing factors of disability.  There was no muscle atrophy.  There was no ankylosis.  There was absence of a firm end point with asymmetric or excessive motion (anterior drawer test), but no asymmetric or excessive motion (talar tilt test).  There was no history of ankle surgery.  The Veteran did not use any assistive devices due to the ankle disability.  The examiner opined that the ankle disability impacts the Veteran's ability to perform occupational tasks in that he is limited in running, jumping, prolonged ambulation, prolonged standing, and high impact activities.

Based on this evidence, the July 2023 rating decision on appeal continued the 10 percent ratings assigned for the Veteran's left ankle lateral collateral ligament sprain.

VA and private treatment records throughout show symptoms similar to those found on the VA examination described above.

Ankle impairment is rated under Codes 5270 through 5274.  Under Code 5270, a 20 percent rating is awarded for ankylosis in plantar flexion, less than 30 degrees.  Higher ratings require ankylosis.  38 C.F.R. § 4.71a.

Under Code 5271, a 10 percent rating is awarded for moderate limited motion of the ankle, and a 20 percent rating is awarded for marked limited motion of the ankle.  Code 5271 defines "moderate" limited motion as less than 15 degrees dorsiflexion or less than 30 degrees plantar flexion (to warrant a 10 percent rating); and "marked" limited motion as less than 5 degrees dorsiflexion or less than 10 degrees plantar flexion (to warrant a 20 percent rating).  Code 5271 defines normal ankle movement as 20 degrees of dorsiflexion and 45 degrees of plantar flexion.

Under Code 5272, a 10 percent rating is awarded for ankylosis of the subastragalar or tarsal joint in a good weight-bearing position, and a 20 percent rating is awarded for ankylosis of the subastragalar or tarsal joint in poor weight-bearing position.  Under Code 5273, a 10 percent rating is awarded for malunion of the os calcis or astragalus with moderate deformity, and a 20 percent rating is awarded for malunion of the os calcis or astragalus with marked deformity.  Under Code 5274, a 20 percent disability rating is awarded for astragalectomy.

Codes 5270, 5272, 5273, and 5274 do not apply here, as there is no evidence of ankylosis of the ankle, ankylosis of the subastragalar or tarsal joint, malunion of the os calcis or astragalus, or astragalectomy.

(Continued on the next page)

?

The VA examination report, the treatment records, and lay statements, overall, provide evidence against this claim, as they do not show that symptoms of the Veteran's left ankle disability have at any time resulted in marked limited motion of the ankle so as to meet, or approximate, the criteria for a 20 percent rating.  The evidence cited above from range of motion testing on VA examination demonstrates moderate, but not marked, limitation of motion of the ankle.  The 10 percent rating now assigned accounts for all left ankle motion limitations shown.  Hence, even with consideration of sections 4.40 and 4.45 and DeLuca, the record presents no basis for the assignment of a higher rating for the left ankle under Code 5271.  The record does not show any distinct period of time when symptoms and related impairment of the Veteran's left ankle disability exceeded the schedular criteria for the 10 percent rating assigned.  Therefore, a rating higher than 10 percent for the left ankle disability is not warranted, and the appeal in the matter must be denied.

 

 

JOHN Z. JONES

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	D. Schechner, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.