Citation Nr: A25034788
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 221206-301792
DATE: April 15, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to accrued nonservice-connected (NSC) pension benefits with special monthly pension (SMP) for a substitute appellant is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from January 1966 to December 1967.  Sadly, he passed away in February 2022.  The appellant is the late-Veteran's surviving spouse.  She has been substituted as the appellant in this appeal, per a July 2022 decision by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ).  The current matter on appeal before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) arises from an October 2022 decision in which the AOJ denied entitlement to accrued benefits based on the apparent unavailability of accrued amounts.  The AOJ relied on a finding that an Application for Veterans Pension was received after the Veteran passed away.  

In her December 2022 Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement [NOD]), the appellant selected the hearing option to offer testimony at a Board hearing before a Veterans Law Judge (VLJ).  In December 2024, the appellant and her non-dependent son and daughter testified at a Board videoconference hearing before the undersigned VLJ.  A hearing transcript is of record.  In light of the appellant's election of a Board hearing, the Board may only consider evidence dated up to the date of the October 2022 AOJ decision, and within 90 days following the date of the December 2024 Board hearing.  38 C.F.R. § 20.302(a).  The Board may not consider evidence submitted between the time of issuance of the October 2022 AOJ decision and the date of the December 2024 Board hearing, or more than 90 days after the Board hearing.  The appellant submitted extensive evidence outside the appropriate evidentiary windows in this appeal, which evidence appears to be largely duplicative of evidence appropriately associated with the claims file, the AOJ will have the opportunity to review any such new evidence upon remand.  

As a final preliminary matter, the Board notes that while the issue of entitlement to an effective date earlier than February 25, 2019, for the grant of basic entitlement to NSC pension benefits was raised at the December 2024 Board hearing, the Veteran did not appeal the AOJ's determination as to the effective date following issuance of the May 2019 rating decision.  Thus, unlike the matter of entitlement to the payment of pension benefits, as discussed below, the matter of entitlement to an earlier effective date for the grant of basic entitlement to NSC pension benefits was not pending at the time of the Veteran's death and is, therefore, not now on appeal before the Board.

Entitlement to accrued NSC pension benefits

The Board's review of the claims file reveals that further AOJ action on the matter of entitlement to accrued pension benefits is warranted to correct duty to assist errors that occurred prior to the October 2022 decision on appeal and pursuant to the necessity to fulfill statutory and regulatory duties with respect to this claim.  See 38 C.F.R. § 20.802.  

Accrued benefits are periodic monetary benefits (other than insurance and servicemen's indemnity) to which an individual was entitled at death under existing ratings or decisions and under laws administered by the VA Secretary, or those based on evidence in the file at date of death and due and unpaid, that shall, upon the death of such individual, be paid to the surviving spouse or other appropriate party.  38 U.S.C. § 5121; 38 C.F.R. § 3.1000.

In the instant case, review of the record reveals that the Veteran submitted an Application for Veterans Pension, on VA Form 21P-527EZ, that was received by the AOJ in February 2019.  In a May 2019 rating decision, the AOJ granted entitlement to basic eligibility for pension benefits, with entitlement to SMP based on the Veteran's need for aid and attendance, effective February 25, 2019.  In the May 2019 decision letter, however, the AOJ denied entitlement to the payment of pension benefits, with SMP, based on the finding that the Veteran's income exceeded the applicable maximum annual pension rate (MAPR).  

Although the Veteran did not timely appeal the AOJ's May 2019 decision to deny entitlement to payment of pension benefits, in the May 2019 decision letter the AOJ specifically notified that the Veteran may still be entitled to the payment of pension benefits from the date of his claim if evidence of unreimbursed medical expenses (UMEs) was received that reduced his income below the applicable MAPR.  The letter further informed the Veteran that he could submit evidence of UMEs on an appropriate form no later than December 31, 2021.  

A new Application for Veterans Pension was filed on behalf of the Veteran in December 2021.  Notably, additional evidence was submitted with the new pension application, including extensive evidence of the Veteran's unreimbursed medical expenses.  Despite the AOJ's receipt of the Veteran's new pension application and evidence of unreimbursed medical expenses that was received prior to the stated December 31, 2021, deadline, it appears that the AOJ did not take any action to readjudicated the matter of the Veteran's entitlement to the payment of NSC pension benefits with SMP, to include entitlement as of the date his initial pension claim was received.  Accordingly, the matter remained pending at the time of the Veteran's death in February 2022.  

Based on the foregoing, the matter of entitlement to the payment of NSC pension benefits with SMP must be remanded to the AOJ for initial adjudication.  

Accordingly, this matter is hereby REMANDED for the following action:

Take necessary action to readjudicate the claim of entitlement to the payment of NSC pension benefits with SMP that remained pending at the time of the Veteran's death, for accrued benefits purposes, to include entitlement as of the date of receipt of the Veteran's initial pension claim based on the receipt of evidence of unreimbursed medical expenses received by December 31, 2021, pursuant to instructions provided in the May 2019 decision letter.  

Readjudication of the claim of entitlement to the payment of NSC pension benefits must include identification of the Veteran's appropriate MAPR at the aid and attendance rate, and calculation and itemization of the Veteran's household income and unreimbursed medical expenses during the pertinent appeal period. 

Ensure that the appellant is provided with appropriate notification of the calculation and itemization of household income and unreimbursed medical expenses. 

 

 

H.M. WALKER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Michael Wilson, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.