Citation Nr: A25034047
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 240920-475573
DATE: April 11, 2025

REMANDED

Service connection for depression is remanded.

Service connection for anxiety is remanded.

Service connection for broken a left wrist is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served honorably in the United States Army from September 1967 to September 1973.

These matters come to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a September 2024 rating decision of a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).  This appeal is being adjudicated under the modern appellate framework.  In the September 2024 notice of disagreement (NOD) which commenced this appeal, the Veteran opted into the Hearing Docket.  The Veteran testified at a personal hearing before the Board in January 2025, and a transcript of the hearing is of record.

1. Service connection for depression is remanded.

2. Service connection for anxiety is remanded.

At issue is whether the Veteran is entitled to service connection for depression and anxiety.  The Veteran underwent a VA examination in September 2024, and the examiner opined that the Veteran did not have a current diagnosis of a mental health disorder.  In making this decision, the examiner stated that the Veteran was not prescribed medication to treat a mental disorder.  Nevertheless, the Veteran's contemporaneous VA treatment records indicate that the Veteran was prescribed psychiatric medication.  Once VA undertakes the effort to provide the Veteran with a VA examination, VA must provide the Veteran with an adequate one.  Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007).  While the examiner need not have read every piece of paper in a Veteran's medical file, the examiner must be aware of all pertinent facts of the Veteran's medical history in forming an adequate examination, and, in this case, it is not clear that the examiner was.  D'Aries v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 97 (2008).  This constitutes a violation of VA's duty to assist, but, unfortunately, the Board cannot grant the Veteran's entire prayer of relief.  As such, these matters must be remanded for a new VA examination in order to address these concerns.  38 C.F.R. ยง 20.802.

3. Service connection for broken a left wrist is remanded.

At issue is whether the Veteran is entitled to service connection for a left wrist disability.  The RO previously conceded that the Veteran had a current diagnosis of a left wrist disability.  The Board is bound by this favorable determination.  38 C.F.R. ยง 3.104.  The Veteran reported of an in-service incurrence in the May 2024 claim for service connection.  The Veteran is competent to offer reports of an in-service incurrence of a left wrist injury.  Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372 (2007).  As such, the record contains evidence of an in-service incurrence potentially related to a current disability.  This is sufficient to trigger VA's duty to assist, and the Veteran should have been provided a VA examination.  McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006).  Unfortunately, the record is silent for an examination evaluating the nature and etiology of the Veteran's claimed left wrist disability.  This constitutes a violation of VA's duty to assist, but, unfortunately, the Board cannot grant the Veteran's entire prayer of relief.  As such, this matter must be remanded for a VA examination in order to address these concerns.  38 C.F.R. ยง 20.802.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Arrange to provide the Veteran with a VA examination in order to address the following:

(a.) Is it at least as likely as not that the Veteran has a current diagnosis of an acquired psychiatric disorder?  Why or why not?

(b.) What is the medical significance, if any, of the fact that VA has prescribed the Veteran psychiatric medication (trazodone)?  Why?

(c.) Is it at least as likely as not that a medical nexus exists between an in-service incurrence and a current diagnosis of a left wrist disability?  Why or why not?

2. Arrange to provide the Veteran with a VA examination in order to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's claimed left wrist disability.

 

 

Ann K. Minami

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	David R. Seaton, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.1303.