Citation Nr: A25034057
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 230615-361080
DATE: April 11, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to Veteran Readiness and Employment (VR&E) benefits, other than employment services, under the provisions of Chapter 31, Title 38, United States Code, is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. During the period here at issue, the Veteran had service-connected disabilities with a combined rating of 90 percent.

2. At the time of his application for VR&E benefits, the Veteran possessed a Bachelor of Arts degree in biology; he had marketable and transferable skills.

3. During the period under consideration, the evidence persuasively establishes that the Veteran had overcome any impairment to employability to which his service-connected disabilities had substantially contributed; he qualified for employment consistent with his abilities, aptitudes, and interests.

4. The evidence persuasively establishes that the Veteran did not have an employment handicap during the period here at issue.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to VR&E benefits were not met during the period on appeal.  38 U.S.C. §§ 3100, 3101, 3102; 38 C.F.R. §§ 21.1, 21.32, 21.33, 21.35, 21.40, 21.50, 21.51.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the U.S. Marine Corps from July 2014 to July 2018.  His decorations include the Global War on Terrorism Service Medal and the Sea Service Deployment Ribbon.

This matter comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an October 2022 decision issued by the VR&E Division of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office in Bay Pines, Florida.  The Veteran timely appealed to the Board by filing a VA Form 10182 (Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement)) in June 2023, requesting direct review of the evidence considered by the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ).  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.201, 20.202(b)(1).

Under the direct review option, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of issuance of the AOJ decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  The Board cannot consider evidence submitted after that decision was promulgated.

If evidence was associated with the claims file during a period of time when additional evidence was not allowed, the Board has not considered it in its decision on the Veteran's claim.  38 C.F.R. § 20.300.  If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was added to the claims file that the Board could not consider, he may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify that evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

Entitlement to VR&E benefits

The Veteran seeks to establish entitlement to VR&E services for the purpose of obtaining employment as a physician.  See October 2022 VA Form 28-1902w (Rehabilitation Needs Inventory (RNI)).

The provisions of Chapter 31, Title 38, United States Code, are intended to enable veterans with service-connected disabilities to achieve maximum independence in daily living and, to the maximum extent feasible, to become employable and to obtain and maintain suitable employment.  38 C.F.R. § 21.1.  For a veteran with 20 percent disability, basic entitlement to Chapter 31 benefits requires that the veteran be found by VA to be in need of rehabilitation because of an employment handicap.  38 C.F.R. § 21.40(b).  An employment handicap means an impairment, resulting in substantial part from a service-connected disability rated at 20 percent or more, of a veteran's ability to prepare for, obtain, or retain employment consistent with such veteran's abilities, aptitudes, and interests.  38 U.S.C. § 3101(7); 38 C.F.R. § 21.35(g).

The determination as to whether an employment handicap exists has been specifically delegated by regulation to the discretion of a VA counseling psychologist (CP) or vocational rehabilitation counselor (VRC).  38 C.F.R. §§ 21.50(b), 21.51.  An employment handicap will be found to exist when the individual has a vocational impairment; the individual has not overcome the effects of the impairment of employability through employment in, or qualifying for employment in, an occupation consistent with his abilities, aptitudes, and interests; and his service-connected disabilities have contributed in substantial part to the overall vocational impairment.  38 U.S.C. § 3102; 38 C.F.R. § 21.51.

In the present case, the Veteran's basic eligibility for VR&E benefits is not in dispute.  During the period here on appeal, he was service connected for multiple disabilities with a combined evaluation of 90 percent from March 3, 2021.  He therefore met the basic threshold requirements for entitlement to a program of vocational rehabilitation.  However, as noted, in order to meet the full requirements for entitlement to a program of vocational rehabilitation, he must also have been determined by VA to be in need of rehabilitation because of an employment handicap.  38 U.S.C. § 3102; 38 C.F.R. § 21.40.

According to the October 2022 RNI, the Veteran stated that he expected that the VR&E program would provide him financial aid towards medical school and guidance on how to perform the job after his graduate program, consistent with his current disabilities.  He reported that his highest level of education was completing a Bachelor's degree in biology.  He reported that he had been employed full-time from April 2022 to July 2022 as a quality analyst, earning approximately $3,464 per month.  He reported that his duties included reviewing disability compensation claims for accuracy and completion.  He stated he resigned the position because he was accepted to medical school.  In addition, he reported that he was a medical scribe from September 2020 to May 2021, and from July 2021 to April 2022.  He indicated that his disabilities limited standing time, sitting time, mobility, computer time, and certain interactions.  He stated that his service-connected disabilities had affected his job performance, job opportunities, and manager relations.

Of record is a PTSD disability benefits questionnaire, dated August 2022, which notes that the Veteran was in school.  The examiner indicated the Veteran's symptoms resulted in occupational and social impairment due to mild or transient symptoms which decreased work efficiency and ability to perform occupational tasks only during periods of significant stress, or symptoms controlled by medication.  

During an October 2022 VA vocational evaluation, a VRC considered the Veteran's education and work history, as well as his symptoms and impairment due to service-connected disabilities, which had a combined rating of 90 percent, and determined that the Veteran did not have an employment handicap.  As such, he was not entitled to receive VR&E services.

The VRC first noted that the Veteran recently left his quality analyst position reviewing disability claims for accuracy and completion because he was accepted to medical school.  The Veteran reported that the job was stressful but not physically demanding.  He reported to the VRC that his goal was to be a doctor and that he wanted assistance with tuition, books, and supplies.  

The VRC thoroughly reviewed the Veteran's history and noted the limitations that he would likely experience based on his service-connected disabilities. The VRC indicated that the Veteran's disabilities imposed restrictions in positions that were physically demanding and mentally stressful that might irritate or aggravate his service-connected disabilities.  The VRC noted that the Veteran's conditions would preclude him from work in physically demanding occupations and stressful environments that present significant stress, pressure, demanding timeframes, and dealing with difficult and demanding people.  As a result, his disabilities impaired him from preparing for, obtaining, and maintaining employment.

Ultimately, however, the VRC found that the Veteran had overcome the effects of any vocational impairment.  The VRC found that the Veteran had a degree in biology which facilitated his ability to find moderate to sedentary positions in the medical field, education, and environmental agencies, to include government agencies that deal with science and medicine.  In the final analysis, the VRC found that the Veteran did not meet the criteria for an employment handicap because he had overcome the vocational impairments to employability.  As for a serious employment handicap, because an employment handicap is a threshold requirement of having a serious employment handicap, the VRC assessed that the Veteran did not have a serious employment handicap. 

In the October 2022 decision on appeal, the VRC further remarked that the Veteran had enough credentials, a biology degree, work experience, and transferable work skills, such as the use of computer programs and office administrative skills, to find suitable employment.  The VRC reiterated that there were jobs within the medical field for someone with a biology degree, such as lab tech, education, and in government agencies.  Instead of education and employment benefits, the VRC referred the Veteran to non-VA resources that he could pursue.

Following review of the evidence properly available for consideration, the Board finds that entitlement to Chapter 31 benefits was not warranted during the period here on appeal.  The record shows that based on the Veteran's work experience and training, he had overcome any impairment of employment to which his service-connected disabilities substantially contributed, and he was employable with his then-current skills, training, and education.  While the evidence reflects that his service-connected disabilities, rated as 90 percent disabling, caused difficulties with aspects of employment, the VRC nevertheless determined that the Veteran's service-connected disabilities would not cause an impairment in his ability to obtain, maintain, or retain suitable employment.  The VRC reached that conclusion in the specific context of addressing the Veteran's vocational goals.  See October 2022 VA Form 28-1902b (Counseling Record-Narrative Report); October 2022 VR-58 (Decision Letter).

The Board has considered the Veteran's assertions.  See June 2023 VA Form 10182.  Specifically, he argued that his career goal was to be a medical doctor and a bachelor's degree in biology was only a pre-requisite.  He indicated he only held employment while pursuing the bachelor's degree to have a source of income and boost his medical school application.  

On review, the Board must find that the Veteran has not presented persuasive evidence to show that he had an employment handicap during the period on appeal and was entitled to VR&E services.  Although he was unemployed during the period at issue, the evidence indicates that he was voluntarily unemployed while pursuing additional education.  Moreover, prior to entry of the decision on appeal, the Veteran did not demonstrate that he had been unable to obtain suitable employment in line with his then-current educational background and experience, to include by reporting any efforts he had made to obtain positions with his current degree.  

While the Board is cognizant of the fact that the Veteran disagrees with the VRC's findings, the Board finds that his lay assertions are entitled to less weight than the findings rendered by the VRC, who has specialized training in this area.  The VRC in this case had sufficient facts and data before her to support a determination that the Veteran did not have an employment handicap and provided a sound rationale for that determination.  See Black v. Brown, 10 Vet. App. 297 (1997) (an opinion rendered by one with specialized training may be considered more probative than a non-specialist's finding).  As noted previously, VRCs are specifically delegated the authority, by regulation, to determine whether a veteran has an employment handicap.  On review, the Board finds that the October 2022 assessment by the VRC is entitled to significant probative weight. 

Considering all of the available evidence, the Board finds that the legal requirements for entitlement to Chapter 31 VR&E benefits have not been met because the Veteran did not have an employment handicap during the period here at issue and was therefore not in need of rehabilitation.  Because an employment handicap is a threshold requirement of having a serious employment handicap, the Veteran also did not have a serious employment handicap.  38 C.F.R. § 21.52(a).

The Board commends the Veteran for wanting to pursue further training and employment opportunities.  Although he has every right to seek career training at the level of his choosing, allowing a veteran to pursue whatever level of career training he chooses when he is capable of obtaining suitable employment frustrates the purpose of VR&E benefits.  In that regard, the Board emphasizes that the purpose of Chapter 31 VR&E services is not to provide a claimant with whatever level of career training he chooses should his interests or career objectives change.  Rather, the purpose of such services is to provide a level of training that facilitates suitable employment.  38 C.F.R. § 21.70.

The Board has considered the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine but finds that the evidence is persuasively against the Veteran's claim.  That is to say, the evidence on the issue is not in approximate balance.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b).  The appeal is denied.

 

 

DAVID A. BRENNINGMEYER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	R. Kettler, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.