Citation Nr: A25034620
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 230215-325289
DATE: April 15, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for sarcoidosis, including as due to in-service exposure to an herbicide agent or other in-service toxic exposure, is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a disability of the right fingers, to include sarcoidosis of the nails, and including as due to in-service exposure to an herbicide agent, other in-service toxic exposure, or as due to sarcoidosis, is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a disability of the left fingers, to include sarcoidosis of the nails, and including as due to in-service exposure to an herbicide agent, other in-service toxic exposure, or as due to sarcoidosis, is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a cardiac disability, including as due to in-service exposure to an herbicide agent, other in-service toxic exposure, or as due to sarcoidosis, is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from December 1967 to November 1969.

These matters come before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a rating decision issued in February 2023 by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office.

The Veteran testified at a hearing before the Board, held in June 2023. A transcript of that hearing has been associated with the record. 

This appeal was previously before the Board in October 2023, at which time the claims were denied. The Veteran appealed that decision to the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans' Claims (Court). In a Joint Motion for Remand (JMR), the parties agreed that the Board erred when it failed to address whether the Veterans Law Judge (VLJ) who conducted the June 2023 hearing adequately explained the elements of a service connection claim. In addition, the parties agreed that the Board failed to address whether the agency of original jurisdiction satisfied the duty to assist in obtaining evidence regarding the Veteran's treatment at a private hospital. In July 2024, the Court vacated the October 2023 decision and remanded it to the Board. 

As for the adequacy of the June 2023 hearing, it is the responsibility of the VLJ conducting a hearing to explain fully the issues and suggest the submission of evidence which the claimant may have overlooked, and which would be of advantage to the claimant's position. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(d)(2). The Court has held that a duty to assist under 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(d)(2) imposes two distinct duties on VLJs conducting hearings: (1) the duty to fully explain the issues still outstanding that are relevant and material to substantiating the claim, and (2) the duty to suggest that a claimant submit evidence on an issue material to substantiating the claim when the record is missing any evidence on that issue or when the testimony at the hearing raises an issue for which there is no evidence in the record. See Bryant v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 488 (2010).

Here, at the June 2023 hearing, the VLJ started off by confirming the issues on appeal: entitlement to service connection for sarcoidosis, a heart condition, and problems of the left and right hand. The Veteran's representative confirmed this was correct, and clarified that the hand claims included issues with the fingernails. The representative then began questioning the Veteran about his disabilities, and the onset of what she and the Veteran contended were sarcoidosis symptoms, while in service. The representative elicited, through questioning, the Veteran's assertions that his sarcoidosis had an in-service onset due to herbicide agent exposure, and that the remaining conditions developed secondary to sarcoidosis. The Veteran testified extensively as to a possible link between the conditions. The presiding VLJ clarified that the Veteran was, in fact, exposed to herbicide agents in service. At the end of the hearing, the VLJ stated that a nexus opinion addressing the Veteran's herbicide agent exposure and his sarcoidosis diagnosis would be helpful in deciding the claim. 

Thus, the VLJ verified that the issues on appeal were service connection for sarcoidosis and, as secondary to that condition, disabilities of the heart and hands. During the hearing the Veteran's testimony focused on the elements necessary to substantiate the claim, to include in-service incurrence, a nexus to service, and secondary service connection. The Veteran and his representative demonstrated actual knowledge of the elements necessary to substantiate the appeal via questioning and testimony. The Veteran discussed his asserted in-service injury-that is, herbicide exposure. He also stated that he was given a formal diagnosis of sarcoidosis. Furthermore, the Veteran and his representative explained that they would obtain and submit a nexus statement from the Veteran's treating VA physician, within 90 days following the hearing and, in fact, a nexus statement was subsequently submitted. This statement, as well as the Veteran's testimony, were addressed in the October 2023 Board decision. It is clear from a holistic review of the hearing transcript that although the presiding VLJ did not precisely explain the exact, specific elements of service connection to the Veteran at the time, such error was harmless, as the Veteran's testimony and the questioning and explanations of his representative show an obvious understanding of such elements. Further, the VLJ identified that a positive nexus opinion, a material issue, was missing from the record. Therefore, the Board finds that, consistent with Bryant, the June 2023 VLJ complied with the duties set forth in 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(d)(2).

Finally, as noted above, the parties to the JMR agreed that the Board did not provide an adequate statement of reasons or bases as to whether the duty to assist was satisfied with regard to obtaining the Veteran's records from Banner Desert Hospital. Multiple VA treatment records show that the Veteran was undergoing pulmonary therapy at the hospital just prior to, and possibly at the beginning of, the appeal period. A treatment note from August 2022, less than a month prior to the filing of the present claims, shows that the Veteran was at that time undergoing pulmonary therapy at Banner and was interested in pursuing the same type of treatment at VA. 

VA has the duty to assist veterans in obtaining evidence necessary to substantiate a claim for VA benefits. 38 U.S.C. §§ 5103, 5103A. VA's duty to assist the Veteran in developing his claim includes requesting and obtaining records that have a reasonable possibility of being related to his claim for benefits. See 38 U.S.C. § 5103A; see also 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c); Golz v. Shinseki, 590 F.3d 1317, 1320 (Fed. Cir. 2010).

The record does not contain treatment records from Banner Desert Hospital, and there is no indication that VA has attempted to obtain any such records. These records are arguably relevant to the Veteran's claim for entitlement to service connection for sarcoidosis. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(3). Accordingly, to comply with the JMR, the Board finds that a remand is required to attempt to obtain any available treatment records from Banner Desert Hospital. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Afford the Veteran an opportunity to submit, or authorize VA to obtain, all outstanding private treatment records pertaining to his diagnosis and treatment for pulmonary conditions from Banner Desert Hospital. 

(Continued on the next page)

?

After obtaining any necessary authorization from the Veteran, obtain all outstanding treatment records from the facility. Make at least two (2) attempts obtain records from any identified sources. If any such records are unavailable, inform the Veteran and afford him an opportunity to submit any copies in his possession.

 

 

R. FEINBERG

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Jeremy J. Olsen, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.