Citation Nr: A25034166
Decision Date: 04/14/25	Archive Date: 04/14/25

DOCKET NO. 240220-417658
DATE: April 14, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for migraine/tension headaches, including as secondary to service-connected obstructive sleep apnea is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for right foot/heel condition, including as secondary to service-connected right ankle lateral collateral and deltoid ligaments sprain is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for lumbosacral strain is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from July 1998 to November 2015. 

The rating decisions on appeal were issued in January 2024 and February 2024. In the February 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the January 2024 and February 2024 rating decisions. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decisions, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of entitlement to service connection for migraine/tension headaches, right foot/heel condition, and lumbosacral strain, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

1. Entitlement to service connection for migraine/tension headaches is remanded. 

The Veteran contends that his headaches are caused by his service-connected obstructive sleep apnea. See June 2023 VA 21-526EZ Form, Application for Disability Compensation and Related Compensation Benefits. He maintains that his migraines headaches last approximately two to three hours and impact his  ability to focus, relax and more importantly maintain a sleep/rest schedule.

A review of the Veteran's treatment records show that he has a current diagnosis of both migraine and tension headaches. 

The Veteran was afforded VA examinations. An August 2023 VA examiner opined that the Veteran's migraines were less likely than not incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness because the service treatment records and separation exam were silent for headache complaints. An October 2023 VA examiner opined that the Veteran's migraine/tension headaches were less likely than not caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activity after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran. A February 2024 VA examiner opined that the Veteran's migraine/tension headaches are less likely than not proximately due to or the result of the Veteran's service-connected obstructive sleep apnea. The examiner explained that a review of medical literature does not support that obstructive sleep apnea causes migraines or tension headaches and that the medical literature does not support a nexus. 

The February 2024 VA examiner, however, did not provide an opinion addressing aggravation. Thus, the Board finds this medical opinion is inadequate. See El-Amin v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 136, 140 (2013) (noting that the findings of "not due to," "not caused by," and "not related to" a service-connected disability are insufficient to address the question of aggravation under 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(b)). Therefore, to correct this pre-decisional duty to assist error, the Board finds that a remand is warranted so that an addendum opinion may be obtained.

2. Entitlement to service connection for right foot/heel condition is remanded. 

The Veteran contends that his right foot/heel condition is caused by his service-connected right ankle lateral collateral and deltoid ligaments sprain. See June 2023 VA 21-526EZ Form, Application for Disability Compensation and Related Compensation Benefits. Specifically, he reports that it is due to a previous injury on his right foot and he has compensated all of his weight to this side and has developed severe pain in his heel. The pain often travels to the metatarsals part of his foot.

A review of the Veteran's treatment records show that he has a current diagnosis of right calcaneus/heel with plantar spur limitation of motion. 

The Veteran was afforded VA examinations. An August 2023 VA examiner opined it is less likely than not that there is a current plantar spur condition that is due to the right ankle lateral collateral and deltoid ligaments sprain. The examiner explained that there is no evidence to suggest that an injury to one lower extremity would have any significant impact on the "opposite" uninjured limb unless the injury resulted in certain conditions which the examiner detailed. An October 2023 VA examiner opined that the Veteran's right foot/heel condition was less likely than not caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activity after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran. A February 2024 VA examiner opined that the Veteran's right heal condition is less likely than not proximately due to or the result of the Veteran's service-connected right ankle lateral collateral and deltoid ligaments sprain. The examiner explained that the conditions are not medically related. The right heel pain is a separate entity entirely from the right ankle lateral collateral and deltoid ligaments sprain and unrelated to it.  A thorough review of medical literature failed to demonstrate a causal relationship.

The Board notes that the service-connected disability and claimed nonservice connected disability affect the same lower extremity so the August 2023 VA examiner's opinion addressing the impact of one lower extremity on the "opposite" lower extremity is not relevant. The February 2024 VA examiner's opinion on causation is too conclusory and does not specifically address the Veteran's contention. Also, the examiner did not provide an opinion addressing aggravation. See El-Amin, 26 Vet. App. at 140. Thus, the Board finds the medical opinions are inadequate. Therefore, to correct this pre-decisional duty to assist error, the Board finds that a remand is warranted so that an addendum opinion may be obtained.

3. Entitlement to service connection for lumbosacral strain is remanded. 

The Veteran contends that his lumbosacral strain is caused by lifting heavy artillery rounds and pounding antenna stakes that were exactly 6 feet long. See June 2023 VA 21-526EZ Form, Application for Disability Compensation and Related Compensation Benefits.

A review of the Veteran's treatment records show that he has a current diagnosis of lumbosacral strain. 

The Veteran was afforded VA examinations. An August 2023 VA examiner opined that the Veteran's lumbosacral strain was less likely than not incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness because the service treatment records and separation exam were silent for back complaints. An October 2023 VA examiner opined that the Veteran's lumbosacral strain was less likely than not caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activity after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran.

The August 2023 VA examiner's opinion does not specifically address the Veteran's contention. Thus, the Board finds the medical opinion is inadequate. Therefore, to correct this pre-decisional duty to assist error, the Board finds that a remand is warranted so that an addendum opinion may be obtained.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action: 

1. Obtain an addendum opinion pertaining to the Veteran's migraine/tension headaches. A copy of the entire claims file should be given to the examiner and a note that such was reviewed should be included in his or her report. The examiner should answer the following question:

(a.) Are his migraine/tension headaches at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) AGGRAVATED by his service-connected obstructive sleep apnea?

In formulating an opinion, the examiner should specifically consider and address the Veteran's contention that his migraines headaches last approximately two to three hours and impact his ability to focus, relax and more importantly maintain a sleep/rest schedule.

A detailed rationale for all opinions rendered must be provided.

2. Obtain an addendum opinion pertaining to the Veteran's right foot/heel condition. A copy of the entire claims file should be given to the examiner and a note that such was reviewed should be included in his or her report. The examiner should answer the following questions:

(a.) Is his right foot/heel condition at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) caused OR aggravated by his service-connected right ankle lateral collateral and deltoid ligaments sprain?

In formulating an opinion, the examiner should specifically consider and address the Veteran's contention that he has compensated all of his weight to the right side and has developed severe pain in his heel and the pain often travels to the metatarsals part of his foot.

A detailed rationale for all opinions rendered must be provided.

3. Obtain an addendum opinion pertaining to the Veteran's lumbosacral strain. A copy of the entire claims file should be given to the examiner and a note that such was reviewed should be included in his or her report. The examiner should answer the following question:

(a.) Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's lumbosacral strain is etiologically related to his active military service?

In formulating an opinion, the examiner should specifically consider and address the Veteran's contention that his lumbosacral strain is caused by lifting heavy artillery rounds and pounding antenna stakes that were exactly 6 feet long. 

A detailed rationale for all opinions rendered must be provided.

					(continued on next page)

 

TANYA SMITH

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Fields, Ashley N.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.