Citation Nr: A25034006
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 211109-196364
DATE: April 11, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an initial disability rating in excess of 70 percent for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is denied.

Entitlement to a total disability rating based on individual unemployability (TDIU) is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. For the entire period on appeal, the severity, frequency, and duration of the Veteran's symptoms of PTSD did not more closely approximate total occupational and social impairment. 

2. The Veteran's service-connected disabilities did not preclude him from securing or following substantially gainful employment.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for entitlement to an initial disability rating greater than 70 percent for PTSD have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.126, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411.

2. The criteria for entitlement to a TDIU have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.340, 3.341, 4.3, 4.7, 4.15, 4.16, 4.18.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from January 1978 to January 1982. 

The Veteran was granted service connection for PTSD in a November 2019 rating decision. In June 2020, the Veteran filed a Supplemental Claim application seeking a higher initial evaluation for his service-connected PTSD and a VA 21-8940: Application for Increased Compensation Based on Unemployability. 

In a September 2020 rating decision, entitlement to a TDIU and a rating in excess of 70 percent for PTSD was denied. In December 2020, the Veteran filed a VA Form 20-0996: Request for Higher-Level Review seeking review of the September 2020 rating decision. 

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a March 2021 Higher-Level Review (HLR) rating decision by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO). Because the March 2021 HLR rating decision on appeal was issued after February 19, 2019, it is subject to the Appeals Modernization Act ("AMA"). 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.2400(a)(1); 19.2(a).

In the Veteran's November 2021 VA Form 10182 Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. 

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the September 2020 rating decision, which was subject to review in the March 2021 HLR rating decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the September 2020 rating decision cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

1. Entitlement to an initial disability rating in excess of 70 percent for PTSD

The Veteran contends that he is entitled to an initial disability rating in excess of 70 percent for his PTSD symptoms. See November 2021 Notice of Disagreement. 

Disability ratings are determined by applying a schedule of ratings that is based on average impairment of earning capacity. Separate diagnostic codes (DCs) identify the various disabilities. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R., Part 4. Each disability must be viewed in relation to its history and the limitation of activity imposed by the disabling condition should be emphasized. 38 C.F.R. § 4.1.

Where entitlement to compensation has already been established and an increase in the disability rating is at issue, the present level of disability is of primary concern. See Francisco v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 55, 58 (1994). The Board will also consider the appropriateness of "staged" ratings based on the facts found. Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505, 509-10 (2007). Further, the evaluation of the same disability under various diagnoses is to be avoided. 38 C.F.R. § 4.14.  

If a reasonable doubt arises regarding the degree of disability after careful consideration of all procurable and assembled data, such doubt will be resolved in favor of the claimant. 38 C.F.R. § 4.3. Where there is a question as to which of two ratings shall be applied, the higher rating will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating. Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7.

PTSD (Diagnostic Code 9411) is rated under the schedule of ratings for mental disorders, 38 C.F.R. § 4.130. In relevant part, the rating criteria are as follows:

A 70 percent rating is warranted when there is occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately, and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful situations (including work or a work-like setting); and inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.

The highest rating of 100 percent is warranted when there is total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name. 38 C.F.R. § 4.130.

The list of symptoms under the rating criteria above are meant to be examples of symptoms that would warrant the respective rating, but are not meant to be exhaustive, and the Board need not find all or even some of the symptoms to award a specific rating. Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436, 442-43 (2002). However, a veteran may only qualify for a given disability rating under § 4.130 by demonstrating symptoms associated with that percentage, or others of similar severity, frequency, and duration, and that those symptoms have resulted in the type of occupational and social impairment associated with that percentage. See Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 117-18 (Fed. Cir. 2013).

Further, when evaluating a mental disorder, the Board must consider the "frequency, severity, and duration of psychiatric symptoms, the length of remissions, and the Veteran's capacity for adjustment during periods of remission." 38 C.F.R. § 4.126(a). The Board must also "assign an evaluation based on all the evidence of record that bears on occupational and social impairment rather than solely on the examiner's assessment of the level of disability at the moment of examination." Id.

For the reasons explained below, the Board has determined that a rating in excess of 70 percent is not warranted for the Veteran's PTSD.

Before the period on appeal, the VA treatment records indicate that the Veteran attempted suicide in August 2018 and October 2018. See January 2019 VA treatment record. 

During the period on appeal, the VA treatment records show that the Veteran continued to endorse passive suicidal ideations through November 2019 and during a September 2020 VA examination. In December 2018, the Veteran reported PTSD symptoms and stated that his mood swings were impacting his marriage. He indicated that he had been doing better since starting Sertraline. Additionally, he reported difficulty sleeping, problems with concentration and memory, nightmares, hypervigilance, and avoiding being in public. 

In January 2019, he reported chronic long-term depression, frequent irritability, and snapping at his wife, which he described as angry verbal responses. He denied any physical aggression. He noted having some forgetfulness in the middle of tasks but endorsed being able to refocus when he tried. He stated that he slept well since being put on a CPAP machine. He noted that he was still interested in pleasant activities, such as fishing, but had less energy to participate in these activities than he used to. He indicated that he started walking to improve his energy level. He endorsed good relationships with his family stating that they were close knit. He stated that he saw his adult children almost every weekend and identified his grandchildren as protective factors.

The Veteran submitted a Statement in Support of Claim in January 2019, in which he indicated that he felt like he always had to be vigilant and defensive. He reported that little noises startled him, that he felt anxious, and that he could not be in large crowds or small rooms. Additionally, he reported that after the stressor incident in service, he started drinking to the point where he became an alcoholic, though he recently stopped. He stated that he could not stand to hear little kids crying because it reminded him of refugees, and he could not attend funerals due to all the grief. 

The VA treatment records show that in March 2019, the Veteran shared that he was pushing himself to go to public places and events despite being uncomfortable in those situations. In April 2019, he continued to report feeling uncomfortable in public places, which he avoided as much as possible. He noted that he increased his exercise by going for walks in secluded places and indicated that he was spending time helping an elderly veteran in his neighborhood. 

In June 2019, the Veteran reported that he attended a crowded graduation party and noted that he managed his anxiety by spending time with family and distracting himself with conversing with them until he became too anxious and had to leave. 

In July 2019, he continued to report avoiding crowds due to anxiety. He further indicated that socializing with friends and family and involving himself in productive activities helped improve his mood. 

In September 2019, the Veteran reported increased depression and avolition in the past week. In October 2019, he reported that he had been very forgetful. For instance, he stated that he forgot to turn on the coffee pot in the morning, forgot to add water to the coffee pot, and forgot what he went to the store for. He also reported going into rooms and forgetting the reason why. The provider noted that exploration of this disclosure indicated limited attention when engaging in activities due to the Veteran attempting to do multiple things at once. 

In November 2019, the Veteran reported improved mood and stated that he no longer saw roaches or spiders in his peripherals. He stated that he was trying to stay active. He endorsed flashbacks in response to watching the news regarding a captive situation.

On VA examination in November 2019, the examiner found that the Veteran had occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to PTSD symptoms. The Veteran reported that he did not sleep well and frequently got up in the middle of the night. He reported an awesome relationship with his children. He denied hobbies or social interests, stating that he stayed home by himself and worked on his house after it was damaged during a hurricane. He reported that he had been fully retired since 2017 and stated that he avoided people and places and became irritated easily, preferring to stay home. The examiner noted PTSD symptoms including depressed mood; anxiety; suspiciousness; panic attacks that occur weekly or less often; chronic sleep impairment; mild memory loss, such as forgetting names, directions or recent events; difficulty in understanding complex commands; disturbances of motivation and mood; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work like setting; and suicidal ideation. The examiner noted that the Veteran was capable of managing his financial affairs. Additionally, the examiner noted that the Veteran endorsed passive suicidal ideation approximately once per week. He also endorsed angry/irritable homicidal ideation thoughts at times but denied actual homicidal ideation victim. 

In December 2019, the Veteran reported difficulty sleeping after learning that his veteran neighbor had died. In January 2020, he reported a stressful experience where he lost his temper with a representative on the phone. He felt remorse for his behavior and apologized. 

In February 2020, the Veteran reported improvements in mood due to avoiding public places, which aggravated him because he often encountered people who he perceived as inconsiderate. He also reported staying productive at home with improvement projects. 

In April 2020, the Veteran reported depressive symptoms, including limited social interaction, low appetite, and negative thoughts causing sadness. In June 2020, the Veteran expressed concern over his weight but indicated that it was difficult for him to find motivation to lose weight. 

In July 2020, he reported that he had minimized community outings to reduce his exposure to the health pandemic, but that he enjoyed building a deck and spending time with his grandchildren. 

A VA examination was obtained in September 2020, where the examiner found that the Veteran had occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, and/or mood due to his PTSD. The Veteran reported that the news and reports of rioting had increased his PTSD symptoms. He indicated increased anger and that he did not want to be around others or go to the stores. He reported having an anger outburst due to someone not wearing a mask at a store. The examiner indicated PTSD symptoms including depressed mood; anxiety; near-continuous panic or depression affecting ability to function independently, appropriately, and effectively; chronic sleep impairment; mild memory loss, such as forgetting names, directions or recent events; flattened affect; disturbances of motivation and mood; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work like setting; and suicidal ideation. He reported passive suicidal ideation once a week with a loose plan to overdose on sleep medication. Other symptoms included loss of interest in activities, feelings of guilt, low energy, poor concentration, excessive worry, rapid mood swings, irritability, anger outbursts, racing thoughts, avoiding others, and anxiety in social situations. The examiner indicated that the Veteran was capable of managing his financial affairs. Additionally, the examiner indicated that the Veteran was administered the SDS, which assesses functional impairment in inter-related domains. The results showed that his social life was a ten, suggesting that current symptoms extremely impacted this domain. Additionally, his score in family life/home responsibilities was a nine, suggesting that his current symptoms markedly impacted this domain. The examiner concluded that the Veteran's scores suggested that his current symptoms of PTSD were impacting daily functioning across several domains. 

For the entire period on appeal, VA treatment providers regularly documented that the Veteran's speech was clear and fluid; that his thought process was logical, clear, and goal directed; and that his insight and judgment appeared to be intact. See December 2018 - September 2020 VA treatment records. Additionally, they repeatedly indicated that the Veteran was oriented to person, place, and time, and denied that the Veteran exhibited hallucinations or delusions. 

The Board concludes that the aforementioned symptomatology more closely approximates occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, rather than total occupational and social impairment, which is required for the higher 100 percent rating, for the following reasons.

The medical evidence consistently reflects that during the period on appeal the Veteran exhibited symptoms of depressed mood, anxiety, irritability, anger outbursts, avoidance of the public, difficulty with memory and concentration, panic attacks, nightmares, flashbacks, and suicidal ideation. However, the Board finds that these symptoms resulted in occupational impairment consistent with the assigned 70 percent rating. Specifically, the Veteran had difficulty establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships and difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work like setting. 

Additionally, the Board acknowledges the evidence of record demonstrates difficulty in social relationships; however, the Board finds that this impairment more nearly approximates the assigned 70 percent evaluation. While the evidence during the period on appeal shows that the Veteran experienced anxiety in public and crowded places, avoidance of public places, irritability when dealing with others, and some difficulty in his marriage, the Veteran also reported that he had good relationships with his wife, children, and grandchildren and regularly spent time with them. Furthermore, the evidence shows that although the Veteran generally avoided being out in public, he pushed himself to go out to public places and events. The Board has also considered the September 2020 VA examiner's finding that the Veteran's SDS assessment showed that his symptoms extremely impacted his social life and markedly impacted his family life/home responsibilities; however, the Board finds that this level of impairment is contemplated by the assigned 70 percent rating, which accounts for inability to establish and maintain effective relationships. Overall, while the Board acknowledges that the Veteran's social relationships were impaired by his PTSD symptoms during the period on appeal, the Board finds that the level of this impairment more nearly approximated a 70 percent evaluation of social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, as opposed to total social impairment.

Furthermore, in the September 2020 VA examination, the examiner found that the Veteran's PTSD resulted in occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, which is the level of severity described under the 70 percent rating. Additionally, the November 2019 VA examiner found that the Veteran's PTSD resulted in occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity. While the adjudicator makes the determination as to what evaluation is warranted for the Veteran's service-connected PTSD, the VA examiners' conclusions are evidence against a finding that the PTSD caused total occupational and social impairment to warrant a 100 percent rating. 

As for the other criteria required for a 100 percent rating, the Board finds the documented symptomatology does not rise to the requisite level of severity. The record does not suggest that the Veteran had symptoms such as gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living; disorientation to time or place; or memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name. By contrast, the Veteran's speech was regularly documented as clear and fluid; his thought process was logical, clear, and goal directed; and his insight and judgment were noted to be intact. Additionally, the Veteran's treatment providers indicated that he was oriented to person, place, and time, and denied that the Veteran exhibited hallucinations or delusions. While the Veteran endorsed suicidal ideations during the period on appeal, the Board finds that this is contemplated by the assigned 70 percent rating, which accounts for suicidal ideation. Furthermore, the Board acknowledges that the Veteran exhibited troubles with memory during the period on appeal; however, the Board finds that this symptom did not rise to the severity as to rise to the level of a 100 percent rating. Specifically, the Veteran reported difficulty remembering to turn the coffee pot on, items to buy at the store, and reasons for entering rooms, as opposed to more severe symptoms contemplated by a 100 percent rating such as memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name. Furthermore, the medical evidence was absent for notations of the inability to perform activities of daily living, including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene, or disorientation to time or place. 

Therefore, the Board concludes that the Veteran's PTSD symptoms are most closely approximated by the assigned 70 percent disability rating. As described above, the evidence persuasively weighs against the Veteran showing total occupational and social impairment; nor are his PTSD symptoms of similar severity, frequency, and duration to warrant assigning a 100 percent disability rating. 

Considering the total disability picture, the Board finds the evidence persuasively weighs against an initial rating in excess of 70 percent. Therefore, the benefit of the doubt doctrine is not for application and a rating in excess of 70 percent for PTSD is denied. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7.

2. Entitlement to a TDIU

The Veteran asserts that he is entitled to a TDIU based on his service-connected PTSD, left ear hearing loss, and tinnitus. See June 2020 VA 21-8940. 

A TDIU may be assigned where the schedular rating is less than total, but where a veteran is unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation as a result of service-connected disabilities. 38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a). To qualify for schedular consideration of a TDIU, if there is only one such disability, this disability shall be ratable at 60 percent or more, and, if there are two or more disabilities, there shall be at least one disability ratable at 40 percent or more and sufficient additional disability to bring the combined rating to 70 percent or more. Id. 

For the purposes of one 60 percent disability, or one 40 percent disability in combination, the following will be considered as one disability: (1) disabilities of one or both upper extremities, one or both lower extremities, including the bilateral factor, if applicable; (2) disabilities resulting from common etiology or a single accident; (3) disabilities affecting a single body system, e.g., orthopedic, digestive, respiratory, cardiovascular-renal, neuropsychiatric; (4) multiple injuries incurred in action; or (5) multiple disabilities incurred as a prisoner of war. 38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a); see also Moody v. Wilkie, 30 Vet. App. 329, 339 (2018) (combining disabilities as "one disability" to meet the rating threshold of § 4.16(a) requires the use of the combined rating table).

The phrase "unable to secure and follow a substantially gainful occupation" contains both economic and noneconomic components. See Ray v. Wilkie, 31 Vet. App. 58, 73 (2019). The economic component refers to an occupation earning more than marginal income (outside of a protected environment) as determined by the U.S. Department of Commerce as the poverty threshold for one person. Id. The noneconomic component requires a determination as to a veteran's ability to secure and follow such employment. Id. Attention should be given to the veteran's history, education, skills, and training; whether the veteran has the physical ability (both exertional and nonexertional) to perform the types of activities required by the occupation at issue (e.g., lifting, bending, sitting, standing, walking, climbing, as well as auditory and visual limitations); and whether the veteran has the mental ability to perform the activities required by the occupation at issue (e.g., memory, concentration, ability to adapt to change, handle work place stress, get along with coworkers, and demonstrate reliability and productivity). Id. 

An award of TDIU is an individualized determination, specific to a veteran's particular circumstances, e.g., their history, education, skills, and training. See Todd v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 79, 85 (2014). It does not require a showing of 100 percent unemployability. Roberson v. Principi, 251 F.3d 1378, 1385 (Fed. Cir. 2001). The ultimate question is whether they are capable of performing the physical and mental acts required by employment, not whether they can find employment. Van Hoose v. Brown, 4 Vet. App. 361, 363 (1993).

The Board notes that entitlement to a TDIU is a legal determination, not a medical one. Geib v. Shinseki, 733 F.3d 1350 (Fed. Cir. 2013). Medical examiners may provide evidence regarding functional and occupational impairment, but the Board must decide whether a veteran may "secure and follow a substantially gainful occupation" based on all evidence of record. See Delrio v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 232, 243 (2019).

Initially, the Board notes that the March 2021 rating decision made the following favorable findings: 1) the Veteran is not working, and 2) the Veteran's service-connected disabilities meet the schedular criteria for entitlement to individual unemployability with 70 percent for PTSD and 10 percent for tinnitus. 

Given that the Veteran meets the schedular criteria for TDIU, the question for the Board is whether the Veteran is unable to secure and follow a substantially gainful occupation by reason of his service-connected disabilities. 38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a).

Turning to the evidence of record, the Board notes that on the Veteran's formal application for TDIU, he reported that he last worked in January 2017 when he worked forty hours per week as a UPS driver. See June 2020 VA 21-8940. He indicated that he began his employment there in September 1985, that he left the job due to disability, and that he had not attempted to obtain employment since then. Id. 

As for the Veteran's education and training, the Veteran indicated that he completed one year of college and that he had no other education or training before he became too disabled to work. Id. At a November 2019 VA examination, he reported that he dropped out of high school before joining the military, where he later earned his high school diploma. During service, his military occupational specialty (MOS) was rifleman. See January 2019 DD 214. After service, he had about twelve jobs before he worked for UPS as a driver. After working for UPS, he went to paramedic school but did not finish, though he worked with fire department paramedics. See November 2019 VA examination. 

The Board notes that the RO twice attempted to obtain a completed VA Form 21-4192 from the Veteran's prior employer, UPS; however, a response was never received. See July 2020 Correspondence. Additionally, the RO requested that the Veteran ask UPS to complete and return the form. See July 2020 Subsequent Development Letter. The Veteran responded that he had no contacts with UPS and could not request assistance with the paperwork. See August 2020 Correspondence. Under these circumstances, the Board finds that the RO made sufficient efforts to obtain a completed VA Form 21-4192. 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(b)(1); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(1).

Additionally, the Board finds that there is adequate employment history of record for the Board to adjudicate the TDIU claim. 

Prior to the period on appeal, the Veteran reported that he retired from his job at UPS in 2017. See November 2019 VA examination. However, he stated that he struggled for many years before he stopped working and attempted to work through it. See June 2020 VA 21-8940. He stated that working in the public was hard and he felt like he had to hide his struggles and "put on a front." Id. He reported having conflicts with coworkers and that he would sometimes get anxiety that required him to pull over to the side of the road. Id. He stated that on one occasion he was sent to the doctor from work because his anxiety made his blood pressure so high. Id. 

During the period on appeal, the Veteran reported that he could not go to Walmart, be in traffic, or be around crowds anymore. Id. Additionally, he stated that if he went out somewhere, he sat with his back to a wall so that he could see the crowd and windows. Id. He reported that when he came home from being out, he had to sit and unwind. Id. Furthermore, he stated that his hearing loss made work difficult because it was hard to hear beeping or ringing on the phone and he yelled at others without meaning to. Id. 

After careful review of the record, the Board finds that the weight of the evidence is against finding that a TDIU is warranted based on the Veteran's PTSD, left ear hearing loss, and tinnitus. While the evidence shows that the Veteran's PTSD, left ear hearing loss, and tinnitus caused functional impairment during the period on appeal, the evidence simply does not show a level of impairment so severe that the Veteran's service-connected disabilities rendered him unable to follow a substantially gainful occupation. 

The evidence of record indicates that the Veteran voluntarily retired from his job as a UPS driver after working there for thirty-two years. The Board acknowledges that the Veteran asserts he struggled with work for many years before retiring, that it was difficult working with the public, that he had confrontations with coworkers, that he sometimes had to pull over to the side of the road due to anxiety, and that on one occasion he had to go home due to anxiety. However, the Board notes that the Veteran nevertheless remained employed with UPS for thirty-two years until his retirement. 

Additionally, as for the Veteran's PTSD, the Board acknowledges that the Veteran's PTSD symptoms, including depressed mood, anxiety, irritability, anger outbursts, avoidance of the public, difficulty with memory and concentration, panic attacks, nightmares, flashbacks, and suicidal ideation, caused impairment during the period on appeal. However, the Board finds that such symptoms did not render him unable to obtain or maintain substantially gainful employment. Furthermore, as discussed above, the Board acknowledges that the VA examinations are consistent with the VA treatment records in showing that the Veteran experienced symptoms of PTSD that impacted his ability to establish and maintain effective work and social relationships during the period on appeal. However, while the VA examinations noted occupational and social difficulties related to PTSD, none of the examinations indicated that the Veteran could not obtain or maintain gainful employment as a result of PTSD. The Board acknowledges that the November 2019 and September 2020 VA examiners indicated that the Veteran had difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, and difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work like setting. The Board also acknowledges that the September 2020 VA examiner indicated that the Veteran's PTSD symptoms extremely impacted his social life and markedly impacted his family life/home responsibilities. However, while the VA examiners indicated that the Veteran's PTSD symptoms resulted in occupational impairment, the examiners did not suggest that this impairment was so severe as to render the Veteran incapable of performing the mental acts required by employment. The Board finds that while there is evidence that the Veteran's PTSD symptoms resulted in some occupational impairment during the period on appeal, the level of impairment caused by these symptoms is adequately contemplated by the assigned 70 percent disability rating for PTSD. 

The Board further acknowledges the Veteran's reports of memory loss and difficulty concentrating during the period on appeal. However, the Board finds that the nature of the Veteran's memory loss was not so severe as to render him unemployable. Rather, VA providers repeatedly indicated that the Veteran's memory and intellect appeared intact, and the November 2019 and September 2020 VA examiners characterized the Veteran's memory loss as mild. 

Additionally, the Board notes that the Veteran exhibited suicidal ideation during the period on appeal. While this symptom resulted in some impairment, the level of impairment caused by this symptom is adequately contemplated by the assigned 70 percent rating for PTSD, which accounts for suicidal ideation, and did not render the Veteran unable to obtain or maintain substantially gainful employment during the period on appeal. 

As for the Veteran's left ear hearing loss and tinnitus, the Board finds that the evidence does not support a finding that these conditions rendered the Veteran unable to work during the period on appeal. The Board observes that VA examinations were obtained in November 2019 and September 2020 for the Veteran's hearing loss and tinnitus, wherein the examiners found that the Veteran's tinnitus impacted his ordinary conditions of daily life, including the ability to work. The November 2019 examiner noted that the Veteran's tinnitus affected his ability to hear clearly, and the September 2020 examiner explained that the Veteran reported he often had to modify his environment to manage his tinnitus, for example, moving away from a windy area. Additionally, while the November 2019 VA examiner found that the Veteran's left ear hearing loss impacted ordinary conditions of daily life, including the ability to work, because the Veteran needed to concentrate to hear conversations when in noisy areas and soft voices were difficult to hear, the September 2020 VA examiner found that the Veteran's left ear hearing loss did not impact ordinary conditions of daily life. While the Board finds the VA examiners' findings adequate and probative, it concludes that the Veteran's impairment from left ear hearing loss and tinnitus does not rise to the level so as to render him unemployable. Furthermore, the Board acknowledges the Veteran's statement that his hearing loss makes work difficult because he has difficulty hearing beeping and ringing on his phone and he yells when he does not mean to, and the Board finds him competent to report his subjective symptoms. Kahana v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 428 (2011); see also Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1376-77 (Fed. Cir. 2007). However, the Board concludes that such impairment is not so severe as to render him unable to obtain or maintain substantially gainful employment. 

In sum, the Board finds that the competent evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran's service-connected PTSD, left ear hearing loss, and tinnitus precluded him from the ability to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation consistent with his education, skills, training, and work history. Accordingly, a TDIU is not warranted. In this instance, the evidence is neither evenly nor approximately balanced in finding a TDIU is not warranted. Rather, the evidence persuasively weighs in favor of such a finding, and the benefit of the doubt doctrine is not for application. Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021). Accordingly, the claim for a TDIU must be denied.

 

 

L. CHU

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	E. Corcoran, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.