Citation Nr: A25034190
Decision Date: 04/14/25	Archive Date: 04/14/25

DOCKET NO. 240905-470341
DATE: April 14, 2025

ORDER

Service connection for bilateral hearing loss is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran's current bilateral hearing loss for VA purposes is related to in-service hazardous noise exposure. 

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for service connection for bilateral hearing loss are met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.385.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from April 1970 to January 1974.  

This matter is before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a rating decision issued on August 5, 2024 by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In the September 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal, the Veteran referenced the August 2024 decision elected the Board's Direct Review docket. Based upon the selection of the Direct Review option, the Board may only consider the evidence of record as of August 5, 2024-the date of the rating decision on appeal. See 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If the Veteran submitted evidence that was added to the record after August 5, 2024, the Board did not consider it. If the Veteran wishes to have VA consider any evidence that was not considered, a supplemental claim should be submitted identifying such evidence. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.

The August 2024 rating decision on appeal included favorable findings consisting of the Veteran having a current diagnosis of bilateral hearing loss under the VA criteria and found that he had in-service noise exposure as his Military Occupational Specialty (MOS) of a rifleman. The Board is bound by these favorable findings and see no reason to disturb them. See 38 U.S.C. § 5104A; 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).

The Board acknowledges the Veteran's accredited representative listed entitlement to service connection for tinnitus on the September 2024 appellate brief. In support, the brief stated that the private medical opinion, discussed below, brings in tinnitus and tinnitus does interfere with hearing. However, a September 2023 rating decision granted service connection for tinnitus and assigned an initial 10 percent rating, effective March 3, 2023. As such, the issue of service connection for tinnitus is not currently before the Board and it will not be address below. 

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral hearing loss

Service connection will be granted if the evidence demonstrates that a current disability resulted from an injury or disease incurred in or aggravated by active military service. 38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a). Establishing service connection generally requires competent evidence of: (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship, i.e., a nexus, between the current disability and an in-service precipitating disease, injury, or event. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a).

In determining whether service connection is warranted for a disability, VA is responsible for determining whether the evidence supports the claim or is in approximate balance, with the claimant prevailing in either event, or whether the weight of the evidence is persuasively against the claim, in which case the claim is denied. When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination, the benefit of the doubt is afforded to the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc).

The Veteran contends that he is entitled to service connection for bilateral hearing loss. Specifically, he alleges his bilateral hearing loss is related to his in-service exposure to hazardous noise.

As noted above, favorable findings from the August 2024 rating decision include the Veteran had a current disability of bilateral hearing loss that meets criteria for VA purposes. Therefore, the first element of service connection has been established.

Regarding the second element, as noted above, there is a favorable finding that the Veteran was exposed to hazardous noise during service. Thus, the second element of service connection is also established.

Regarding the third element, a causal relationship between the current disability and the in-service incurrence, the Board finds that the medical and lay evidence of record is in approximate balance as to whether the Veteran's bilateral hearing loss is related to his active service. 

An October 2023 private audiologist report shows that the Veteran's service in the Marines to include various noise exposures were reviewed. The private audiologist also considered the Veteran's post-service noise exposure as well as his self-reported symptoms of ongoing hearing loss. The private audiologist diagnosed the Veteran with bilateral sensorineural hearing loss which was more likely than not caused by or a result of and the hazardous noise exposure during military service. 

A May 2024 VA hearing loss and tinnitus disability benefits questionnaire (DBQ) shows that after a review of the evidence of record and examination of the Veteran, that it was less likely than not that the Veteran's bilateral hearing loss was onset in or was related to active service. The VA examiner reported that there was no significant permanent shift in hearing thresholds beyond test variability from entrance to separation, which was objective evidence of no permanent auditory damage on active duty from reported noise exposure. The VA examiner noted that hearing at separation did not meet VA criteria and there was no report of complaint/treatment for hearing decreases during active service or at separation from service. The VA examiner reported that although noise exposure was reported by the Veteran and the relationship of noise, auditory damage and hearing loss was well-established, auditory damage and hearing loss could not be conceded based on noise alone. 

In reviewing the evidence of record, the Board finds that the evidence is at least in approximate balance regarding the Veteran's claim of entitlement to service connection for bilateral hearing loss. When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, reasonable doubt shall be resolved in favor of the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b). When a reasonable doubt arises regarding service origin, that doubt will be resolved in the favor of the claimant. Reasonable doubt is doubt which exists because of an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence which does not satisfactorily prove or disprove the claim. Indeed, when the evidence is in approximate balance, the law dictates that the appellant prevails.

(Continued on the next page)

?

The Board is aware of the conflicting medical evidence as to whether the Veteran's current bilateral hearing loss was caused by his in-service noise exposure. However, the Board concludes that the competent and probative nexus evidence in this case is in approximate balance regarding direct service connection. The Board finds that none of the medical opinions are more probative than the other opinions of record. The Veteran's October 2023 private audiological report shows that the bilateral hearing loss disability was caused by his in-service hazardous noise exposure. In contrast, the May 2024 VA examiner determined that the Veteran's bilateral hearing loss was less likely than not related to active service. Each medical opinion is supported by a reasoned analysis of medical facts and citations to medical principles. Neives-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 301-04 (2008). As such, the competent medical evidence is approximately balanced and service connection for bilateral hearing loss is warranted. 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303(a). 

 

 

Paul Sorisio

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	J. Dworkin, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.