Citation Nr: A25034931
Decision Date: 04/16/25	Archive Date: 04/16/25

DOCKET NO. 240530-448254
DATE:  April 16, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a back disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a psychiatric disability, to include posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran had active air service from May 1988 to August 1991. 

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a May 2024 decision issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ). 

In May 2024, the Veteran appealed to the Board by filing a VA Form 10182 and selecting the Direct Review option. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence before the AOJ at the time of the May 2024 decision. 38 C.F.R. §?20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. However, because the Board is remanding the claims, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the readjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

The Board notes that the claims for service connection for a back disability and a psychiatric disability were previously denied. In the May 2024 rating decision, the AOJ found that new and relevant evidence had been submitted and readjudicated the claims on the merits. The Board is bound by the AOJ's favorable findings. 38 U.S.C. § 5104A; 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).

Service Connection - Back Disability

The Veteran's service treatment records are unremarkable for any complaints, treatment, or diagnoses related to his back.

In May 2022, a private chiropractor, A.N., indicated that the Veteran had been diagnosed with degenerative joint disease of the lumbar spine and it was at least as likely as not directly and causally related to his military service. The chiropractor, however, did not provide any rationale for her opinion. 

In October 2023, a private physician performed a medical evaluation of the Veteran. It was noted that the Veteran had wear and tear on his body due to training. The diagnosis was sprain of ligaments of the lumbar spine. The physician opined that "degenerative joint disease of the lumbar spine" was caused by military service. The physician stated that due to persistent carrying loads of heavy military ordinances, the Veteran had developed lumbar and joint inflammation with significant pain/discomfort throughout the entire day. 

The Board notes that the October 2023 private physician did not explain how carrying heavy loads over 22 years ago caused the Veteran's current back disability. Furthermore, although the physician diagnosed the Veteran with a sprain of the ligaments of the lumbar spine, he provided an opinion as to degenerative joint disease, which was not diagnosed by him. For these reasons, the Board finds the October 2023 opinion is not sufficient to grant the Veteran's claim. 

However, because there is medical evidence indicating that the Veteran's back disability might be related to active service, the Board finds that a VA examination and medical opinion are necessary. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(4); see also McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006). The Board finds that the AOJ's failure to afford the Veteran with a VA examination constituted a pre-decisional duty to assist error. Accordingly, the Board finds that a remand is necessary to correct that error. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

Service Connection - Psychiatric Disability

The Veteran's service treatment records are unremarkable for any complaints, treatment, or diagnosis related to a psychiatric disability. 

During a January 2021 private psychological evaluation, the Veteran reported that he had an anxiety-provoking situation the weekend he arrived at basic training. He stated that the drill instructors worked them over, slapped them, backhanded them in the face, spit in their face, and hurt them. He also stated that they used discriminatory terms against him. He indicated that the older recruits would attack them, and that he developed insomnia. He also reported an incident where a bomb shifted on the platform of a loader, and he had to grab it to prevent it from falling. He was afraid that the bomb would drop and explode. In addition, he reported an incident where he fell off a ladder and injured his nose. He stated that the crew laughed at him. The psychologist indicated that the Veteran endorsed symptoms consistent with chronic PTSD and dysthymia related to his military experiences. The Board notes, however, that the United States Armed Services Records Research Center was unable to verify the Veteran's reported stressors. Furthermore, it is unclear whether the private psychologist reviewed the claims file. Therefore, the Board finds that the opinion is insufficient to grant the Veteran's claim. 

However, because there is medical evidence indicating that the Veteran's psychiatric disability might be related to active service, the Board finds that a VA examination and medical opinion are necessary. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(4); see also McLendon, 20 Vet. App. at 79. The Board finds that the AOJ's failure to afford the Veteran with a VA examination constituted a pre-decisional duty to assist error. Accordingly, the Board finds that a remand is necessary to correct that error. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for an examination by an examiner with appropriate expertise to determine the nature and etiology of his claimed back disability. The claims file must be made available to and reviewed by the examiner. Any indicated studies should be performed.

Based on the examination results and a review of the record, the examiner should provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that any currently back disability manifested during active service or is etiologically related to the Veteran's active service, to include carrying heavy loads of military ordinances. 

A rationale for all opinions expressed must be provided.

2. Schedule the Veteran for an examination by an examiner with appropriate expertise to determine the nature and etiology of any psychiatric disorder that may be present. The claims file must be made available to and reviewed by the examiner. Any indicated studies should be performed. 

After examining the Veteran and considering the pertinent medical history and lay statements regarding reported symptoms, the examiner must identify all psychiatric disorders that have been present during or proximate to the pendency of the claim, i.e., since February 2024. In doing so, the examiner must address previous diagnoses of PTSD and persistent depressive disorder/dysthymia. 

For each diagnosis identified other than PTSD, the examiner must provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the disability manifested during active service or is otherwise causally or etiologically related to the Veteran's active service.

With respect to PTSD, the examiner must determine whether the diagnostic criteria to support a diagnosis of PTSD have been satisfied. If a PTSD diagnosis is deemed appropriate, the examiner must then provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that any current PTSD symptomatology is attributable to or otherwise etiologically related to an in-service stressor.

A rationale for all opinions expressed must be provided.

 

 

Kristin Haddock

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	S. Mishalanie, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.