Citation Nr: A25034265
Decision Date: 04/14/25	Archive Date: 04/14/25

DOCKET NO. 241024-484796
DATE: April 14, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for tonsillitis is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Navy Reserve from July 2008 to November 2008, from April 2010 to April 2011, and from March 2012 to April 2013.

Although the Veteran initially requested Higher-Level Review when submitting the May 2024 VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review, the Higher-Level Reviewer determined that there had been a duty to assist error and transferred the claim to the Supplemental Claim decision review option for additional development.

In the October 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the September 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) supplemental claim decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  If evidence was submitted after the AOJ issued the supplemental claim decision on appeal, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  However, because the Board is remanding the claim of entitlement to service connection for tonsillitis, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

As a final preliminary matter, the Board acknowledges the recent precedential decision in Williams regarding 38 C.F.R. § 20.202(c)(2) and deciding AMA appeals before the time to change dockets has ended.  See Williams v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 305 (2024).  Generally, the Board may not decide an appeal before the deadline for requesting an AMA docket switch has elapsed.  38 C.F.R. § 20.202(c)(2) allows claimants to switch AMA dockets by completing and submitting a new Notice of Disagreement within one year from the date the AOJ mails notice of the decision on appeal, or 60 days from when the Board receives the Notice of Disagreement, whichever is later, unless a claimant has already submitted evidence or testimony as described in 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.302 and 20.303.  In this case, less than one year has passed since the AOJ mailed notice of the decision on appeal; however, as the Board is remanding the issue for additional development, there is no prejudice to the Veteran in proceeding with the claim on appeal prior to the expiration of the deadline for requesting an AMA docket switch.

Entitlement to service connection for tonsillitis.

The Veteran contends that his tonsillitis (claimed as chronic tonsillitis/strep throat) is due to his exposure to gas, burn pits, and other toxins during service.  See March 2024 VA Form 21-526EZ, Application for Disability Compensation and Related Compensation Benefits; see also May 2024 VA Nurse Practitioner Letter.

Following a review of the claims file, a remand is warranted to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  Specifically, the Board finds the VA medical opinions inadequate for adjudicative purposes.  The Board notes that when VA undertakes to provide a VA examination or obtain a VA opinion, it must ensure that the examination or opinion is adequate.  Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007).

As an initial matter, the Board notes that the September 2024 rating decision on appeal made a favorable finding as to the Veteran having a current diagnosis of recurrent tonsillitis with strep throat (quiescent).  See also May 6, 2024 and May 20, 2024 VA Rating Decisions.  The Board adopts this favorable finding.  The Board further notes that the Veteran has also been diagnosed with chronic sinusitis and allergic rhinitis for which the Veteran has been awarded service connection.

Upon VA examination in March 2024, the Veteran was diagnosed with allergic rhinitis.  The Veteran reported that he was exposed to gas in February 2011 and then developed pharyngitis, a cough, and postnasal drip.

During a subsequent VA examination in April 2024, the Veteran was diagnosed with allergic rhinitis, recurrent tonsillitis, and strep throat (quiescent).  The examiner further remarked that there was no diagnosis of chronic tonsillitis as the Veteran was instead diagnosed with recurrent tonsillitis.  The Veteran reported that his condition started around 2010 to 2011 with chronic strep throat and tonsillitis.  In separate May 2024 medical opinions, the VA examiner opined that the Veteran's tonsillitis was less likely than not caused by his in-service toxic exposure risk activities.  The examiner noted that tonsillitis in most cases is caused by a viral infection and there is no medical literature that supports the Veteran's toxic exposure incurring tonsillitis.  The examiner further indicated that the Veteran had not been diagnosed with chronic tonsillitis; the Veteran was seen and treated for tonsillitis in February 2011 and pharyngitis in February 2013, with the next care and treatment documented approximately 10 years later.  The VA examiner additionally opined that the Veteran's strep throat was less likely than not caused by his in-service toxic exposure risk activities.  The examiner noted no present diagnosis of strep throat and indicated that strep throat is caused by a bacterial infection, with no medical literature that supports the Veteran's toxic exposure incurring strep throat.

During a VA examination in June 2024, the Veteran was diagnosed with chronic sinusitis and allergic rhinitis.  The examiner noted that, although the Veteran reported symptoms of chronic tonsillitis, there was no objective evidence and, thus, a separate diagnosis was not warranted at that time.  The Veteran reported that he was exposed to an unknown gas and burn pits and has since had allergy and sinus issues.  In a separate medical opinion, the VA examiner opined that the Veteran's tonsillitis is less likely than not due to his service.  The examiner again noted that there is no objective evidence to support a diagnosis and treatment of tonsillitis.

In support of his claim, the Veteran submitted a May 2024 letter from a VA nurse practitioner.  In the letter, the VA provider documented the Veteran's diagnosis of chronic tonsillitis, in addition to other conditions.  The provider further documented the Veteran's assertions that his conditions, including chronic tonsillitis, are due to his exposure to burn pit smoke and other environmental toxins during service.  Although the provider opined that some of the Veteran's conditions are related to service, the VA provider did not provide an opinion regarding the Veteran's tonsillitis.

Considering the aforementioned medical opinions addressing the Veteran's tonsillitis, the Board finds the May 2024 and June 2024 VA opinions conclusory and based on an inaccurate factual premise.  See Reonal v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 458, 461 (1993).  As noted above, the Veteran was diagnosed with recurrent tonsillitis and strep throat during the April 2024 VA examination.  Furthermore, the May 2024 letter from the VA nurse practitioner documented a diagnosis of chronic tonsillitis.  However, the May 2024 and June 2024 opinions rely, at least in part, on the absence of a diagnosis and do not otherwise address the Veteran's recent diagnosis of recurrent tonsillitis and/or strep throat or documentation of chronic tonsillitis.

Accordingly, a remand is necessary to obtain an addendum VA medical opinion to cure the pre-decisional duty to assist error.

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain an addendum medical opinion from an appropriate clinician to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's tonsillitis.  The need for an in-person examination is left to the discretion of the examiner.

The entire claims file, including a copy of this Remand, must be made available to the examiner.  After reviewing the entire claims file, the examiner should:

(a.) Opine whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's tonsillitis was incurred in, caused by, or is etiologically related to his active service, to include related to or otherwise caused by toxic exposure risk activities.

With respect to the TERA opinion, the examiner must discuss the Veteran's total potential exposure through all applicable military service and the synergistic and combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities.

The examiner is advised that the Veteran is competent to report his symptoms and history and that such reports must be acknowledged and considered in formulating any opinions.  The examiner must provide a complete rationale for any opinion offered, citing to the examiner's own expertise, medical principals, and/or evidence in the Veteran's claims file, when necessary, to support the conclusion reached.  If an opinion cannot be reached without resorting to speculation, the examiner must fully explain why. 

 

H.M. WALKER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Caitlin B.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.