Citation Nr: A25034944
Decision Date: 04/16/25	Archive Date: 04/16/25

DOCKET NO. 241015-482388
DATE: April 16, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served in the Army National Guard from December 2000 to April 2006 with periods of active duty from February 2001 to July 2001 and from January 2003 to December 2004.  The Veteran additionally served in the Army Reserve from April 2006 to December 2008.  

This matter comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an October 2023 rating decision issued by a VA Regional Office, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ).  In the October 2024 VA Form 10182, Notice of Disagreement, the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the October 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  However, because the Board is remanding the Veteran's claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

1. Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea is remanded.

This matter must be remanded to correct a duty to assist error that occurred prior to the October 2023 rating decision, namely, to obtain an adequate medical opinion.

The Veteran has requested service connection for sleep apnea as secondary to his service-connected knee conditions with associated weight gain.  October 2024 Third Party Correspondence.  In a June 2023 statement, the Veteran stated that he is seeking service connection for sleep apnea because he is currently service connected for right and left knee patellofemoral pain syndrome which keeps him from exercising.  The Veteran has been awarded service connection for left and right knee patellofemoral syndrome evaluated at 10 percent disabling, effective December 2004.  The Veteran stated his conditions also prevent him from being able to sleep on his side and make it difficult to fall or stay asleep.  June 2023 Lay Statement.      

The Veteran submitted a June 2023 medical opinion in support of his claim which concluded that the Veteran's obesity is due to his service-connected knee conditions and that the Veteran's obesity led to, caused, and/or aggravated the Veteran's current obstructive sleep apnea.  The private provider reasoned that the Veteran's service-connected disability conditions can lead to or cause pain, painful motion, sleep disturbances, diminished motivation, and/or "comfort" overeating which can lead to diminished activity with less caloric expenditure.  The private provider further cited medical literature that obesity is known to predispose patients to and directly cause obstructive sleep apnea.  June 2023 Private Medical Opinion.  The private provider relied on a STOP-Bang Questionnaire wherein the Veteran reported snoring loudly, daytime fatigue, observed apnea, a BMI of 35.2, a neck size greater than 16 inches, and that the Veteran is a male.  Id. 

The Veteran was also afforded a VA examination and sleep study in August 2023 wherein the Veteran was diagnosed with obstructive sleep apnea.  August 2023 VA Examination.  The Veteran weighed 180 pounds with a BMI of 35.15 at the time of the August 2023 sleep study, and the Veteran reported an onset of 2003 during service.  Id.  The August 2023 VA examiner opined that the Veteran's sleep apnea is less likely than not proximately due to or the result of the veteran's service-connected knee conditions reasoning that there are no anatomic or physiologic relationships between the two conditions and that the interruption of a sleep pattern secondary to pain is distinct from the pathophysiology of obstructive sleep apnea.  Id.  Regarding obesity, the VA examiner stated that while high impact exercises (running) may be discouraged secondary to patellofemoral pain, there are many non-impact activities available to assist with weight-management coupled with dietary habits.  Id.  

Secondary service connection requires sufficient evidence to establish "but for" causation or aggravation between the disability and the service-connected disability.  Spicer v. McDonough, 61 F.4th 1360 (Fed. Cir. 2023).  In Spicer, the Federal Circuit clarified that the statutory construct of 38 U.S.C. § 1110 allowed for a much broader connection for secondary service-connection, to include multi-causal links, to include action and inaction, and consideration must be given as to not only whether a service-connected disability caused or aggravated another claimed condition, but whether the service-connected disability prevented the Veteran's ability from getting treatment or whether the medications stemming from the service-connected disability caused or aggravated the claimed condition in such a way.  Id.; see also El-Amin v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 136, 140 (2013) (holding a VA examination is inadequate if it does not adequately rule-out the possibility of aggravation).  Moreover, while obesity itself is ineligible for service connection, it may be an "intermediate step" between a service-connected disability and a current disability that may be service connected on a secondary basis under 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a).  See Walsh v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 300 (200).  

The Board finds the medical opinions of record are inadequate.  Neither opinion adequately addresses whether the Veteran's service-connected disabilities at least as likely as not caused the Veteran to become obese or aggravated his obesity.  While the private June 2023 opinion noted the Veteran's current BMI, service-connected disabilities, and provided medical literature in support, it fails to provide an adequate rationale for whether the Veteran's service-connected disabilities caused or aggravated his obesity under the particular circumstances present here.  Indeed, the examiner's rationale in this regard merely suggests that the Veteran's service-connected disabilities "can" lead to pain, diminished motivation, and/or "comfort" overeating without any apparent consideration of the Veteran's individual history, to include weight fluctuations.  See Bloom v. West, 12 Vet. App. 185, 187 (1999) (noting that the use of the term could, without additional rationale or supporting data, is speculative).  Here, the Veteran was noted to weigh 135 pounds with a "heavy" build upon entry into service in December 2000.  December 2000 Report of Medical Examination.  In March 2004, the Veteran complained of knee pain that was present for a year or more, and the Veteran's weight was noted to have increased to 167.5 pounds with a BMI of 32.71.  An October 2004 treatment record notes the Veteran weighed 170 pounds with ongoing reports of bilateral knee pain.  A June 2005 VA examination diagnosed the Veteran with bilateral patellofemoral syndrome; however, the Veteran's weight had nonetheless decreased to 140 pounds.  June 2005 VA examination.  The record is thereafter silent until 2023 wherein the Veteran was diagnosed with obstructive sleep apnea and noted to weigh 180 pounds.

The August 2024 VA medical opinion similarly fails to provide an adequate rationale as to whether the Veteran's service-connected disabilities caused or aggravated his obesity under the circumstances present here.  While the VA examiner explained that that there are many non-impact activities available to assist with weight-management coupled with dietary habits, the VA examiner was otherwise non-responsive as to whether the Veteran's service-connected disabilities caused or aggravated his obesity here.  The Board finds such rationale conclusory and insufficient.  Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 124-25 (2007). 

Remand is appropriate to correct these pre-decisional duty-to-assist errors and obtain a corrective medical opinion.

While the Board is remanding this matter at this time for additional development, the Board is mindful of the holding in Smith v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 332 (2020) and the impact of implicit credibility determinations within remand orders.  The Board does not at this time make any determinations regarding the credibility of any evidence currently of record, to include those described in this remand.

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

1. Ask an appropriate examiner to review the Veteran's file.  The necessity of an in-person examination is left to the discretion of the examiner. 

The examiner should opine as to:

i.	whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's sleep apnea: (a) had an onset in service; or (b) is related to service, to include the Veteran's claimed 2003 in-service onset in his August 2023 VA examination.

ii.	whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's service-connected disabilities (to specifically include his service-connected knee conditions): caused the Veteran to become obese or aggravated the Veteran's obesity. 

-	if so, the examiner should opine whether it is at least as likely as not that the obesity or aggravation of obesity as a result of the service-connected disabilities was a substantial factor in causing the current sleep apnea disability.

-	if so, the examiner should opine whether it is at least as likely as not that the current sleep apnea disability would not have occurred but for the obesity caused or aggravated by the service-connected disabilities.

NOTE: If the clinician determines that the claimed condition was aggravated with an intermediate step of obesity, the clinician must provide the baseline level of severity of sleep apnea established by medical evidence created before the onset of aggravation or by the earliest medical evidence created at any time between the onset of aggravation and the receipt of medical evidence establishing the current level of severity of sleep apnea.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(b).

The examiner should consider all relevant medical and lay evidence of record, including the lay statements submitted in June 2023, the June 2023 private medical opinion, the August 2023 VA examination and opinion, and the impact of the Veteran's service-connected disabilities on his physical activity and sleep.

If the Veteran's reports are discounted, the examiner should provide a rationale for doing so (e.g., whether there is any medical reason to accept or reject his contentions). 

The examiner is asked to explain the reasons behind any opinions expressed.

2. After the above development, and any additionally indicated development, has been completed, readjudicate the issue on appeal.  

(Continued on the next page)

?

(continued on next page)

 

 

SHEREEN M. MARCUS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Knopp, Derek A.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.