Citation Nr: A25034046
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 250303-524009
DATE: April 11, 2025

ORDER

Service connection for chronic sinusitis is denied. 

Service connection for chronic (allergic) rhinitis is denied. 

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The evidence does not show that the Veteran has chronic sinusitis that is related to, or associated with his active service, to include his conceded TERA.

2. The evidence does not show that the Veteran has chronic (allergic) rhinitis that is related to, or associated with his active service, to include his conceded TERA.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for chronic sinusitis have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1131, 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

2. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for chronic (allergic) rhinitis have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1131, 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The rating decision on appeal was issued in March 2024 and constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies. 

In the March 2025 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

The Board recognizes that the Veteran underwent additional VA examinations in September 2024. However, this evidence was added to the claims file during a period of time when new evidence was not allowed. As the Board is deciding the claims of service connection for sinusitis and rhinitis, it may not consider this evidence in its decision. 38 C.F.R. § 20.300. If the Veteran would like VA to consider these or any other evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

1. Service connection for chronic sinusitis is denied.

2. Service connection for chronic (allergic) rhinitis is denied.

Service connection may be granted for disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303. The three-element test for service connection requires evidence of: (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166-67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

The Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxics Act of 2022 (PACT Act) was enacted. Pursuant to the PACT Act, VA is required to schedule an examination and request a medical opinion for certain non-presumptive diseases involving toxic exposure risk activity (TERA). See 38 U.S.C. § 1168.

At the outset, the Board notes that, as conceded in the March 2024 rating decision, the Veteran participated in a TERA due to his service in Vietnam.

VA is required to provide a disability examination and medical opinion when the Veteran submits a claim for compensation, has evidence of a disability, had evidence of participation in a TERA, and such evidence is not sufficient to establish service connection for the disability. A Veteran can claim participation in a TERA explicitly or implicitly through service in a location presumed associated with toxic exposure, or records showing participation in a TERA; or, if VA has conceded exposure in a prior claim, or the file has a claim attributable to toxic exposure. Other ways to claim or establish participation in a TERA include, when a Veteran's military occupational specialty (MOS) is associated with toxic exposure; when medical records suggest exposure to a toxic substance, chemical, or airborne hazard such as a VHA exposure screening; or, with any other relevant evidence of record to include garrison exposures.

The Veteran contends that he developed sinusitis and rhinitis as a result of his military service, specifically to his herbicide exposure Vietnam.

Service treatment records were silent for any complaints or diagnosis suggestive of a sinus condition or rhinitis. In a November 1972 dental medical history report, the Veteran denied ear, eye, nose, or throat trouble. A March 1973 separation examination report showed the nose and sinuses as normal.

At his November 2023 VA examination, the examiner reported diagnoses of chronic sinusitis and allergic rhinitis. The Veteran reported the onset of his symptoms as 1971 and indicated that he began sneezing and has postnasal drainage every so often that is random. A November 2023 sinus imaging test revealed mucoperiosteal thickening of the frontal, ethmoid, and maxillary sinuses. After physical examination, the examiner opined that based on review of the available evidence, it is less likely than not that the claimed condition is due to service as there is a lack of substantiating evidence supporting a nexus between the current diagnosis of chronic sinusitis and allergic rhinitis and military service. Without chronicity during service or after service, a post-service event, illness, or injury is considered to be a more likely etiology.

Given the Veteran's participation in a TERA during service, the AOJ obtained additional medical opinions in March 2024 to determine whether the Veteran's sinusitis and rhinitis is caused by the toxic exposure risk activities, after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran. Upon considering the Veteran's overall record, the examiner noted no diagnosis of chronic rhinitis in Veteran's medical record. The examiner also found the Veteran did not have a diagnosis of chronic sinusitis as the diagnosis does not exist anywhere in the file and for sinusitis to be chronic rather than acute, it should last at least three months. Therefore, the claimed sinusitis and rhinitis was less likely than not (likelihood is less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activity(ies), after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran. 

Upon review of the overall record, the Board finds that the evidence weighs against the finding of a current sinusitis disability and against a finding of nexus for allergic rhinitis. 

The Board is mindful of the November 2023 medical opinion finding that the Veteran has chronic sinusitis. However, this finding has not been supported by the medical evidence of record. For example, private treatment records dated March 2009 to January 2010 indicate the Veteran repeatedly denied sinus problems, nasal congestion, and runny nose. In April 2011, the VA physician found no evidence of rhinorrhea or sinus tenderness. A February 2018 private treatment note indicated no sinus tenderness. 

Furthermore, the March 2024 examiner clarified that the Veteran was not shown to have chronic sinusitis or rhinitis. He emphasized that the Veteran's service treatment records and post service treatment records were silent for any signs or symptoms of a sinus issue, until the November 2023 VA examination.

The Veteran does have a diagnosis of allergic rhinitis.  However, the evidence is persuasively against a finding of nexus between his service from 1971 to 1973 and his November 2023 diagnosis of allergic rhinitis.  The Veteran's service treatment records do not contain any notations of this condition.  There is no medical evidence showing on-going treatment between service and diagnosis.  The VA medical examiner determined there is no link between service and the allergic rhinitis.  The Board finds that the evidence is persuasively against a finding of nexus. The Board therefore denies this claim. 

The Board concludes that the Veteran does not have a current diagnosis of chronic sinusitis at any time during the appeal period. While the Veteran may have had an acute episode of sinusitis, such is not a chronic disability with lasting impacts which are subject to service connection. As there is no credible evidence to support any finding of a current diagnosis of chronic sinusitis, the claim must be denied. In the absence of proof of a current disability, there can be no valid claim. Brammer v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 223, 225 (1992).

(Continued on the next page)

?

Accordingly, service connection for chronic sinusitis and allergic rhinitis is denied.

 

 

Martin T. Mitchell

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Boushehri, Diane M. Donahue

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.