Citation Nr: A25034465
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 240428-435067
DATE: April 15, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), depression, and stress, is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a right knee disorder is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for hearing loss is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a thoracolumbar spine disorder is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral sciatica, as secondary to thoracolumbar spine disorder, is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for foot pain is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for high blood pressure is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a hip condition is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a thigh condition is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a chronic pain disorder is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Appellant served on active duty for training (ACDUTR) from March 1984 to July 1984, with subsequent service in the Army Reserves from July 1984 to July 1990.

In January 2024, the Appellant submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR), and requested review of a January 2023, May 2023, and January 2024 rating decisions.  In February 2024, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the HLR decision on appeal, which considered the evidence of record at the time of the prior January 2023, May 2023, and January 2024 rating decisions.  

In the April 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Appellant elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the January 2023, May 2023, and January 2024 rating decisions, which were subsequently subject to higher-level review. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  However, because the Board is remanding the appeal, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Unfortunately, as will be explained, a remand is necessary in order to correct duty-to-assist errors that occurred prior to the January 2023, May 2023, and January 2024 rating decisions on appeal. See 38 C.F.R. § 20.802.

With respect to all claims on appeal, the record indicates that the Appellant served in the Army Reserves from March 1984 to March 1990.  Unfortunately, his Reserve records have not been associated with the claims file. As these records may contain information relevant to the claims on appeal, a remand is warranted to obtain these records.  The Board notes that the AOJ attempted to obtain these records in November 2022, and it received a negative response in December 2022 from the National Personnel Records Center (NPRC) that all previous records were uploaded to the claims file.  However, there is no indication that those records (presumed to be in the custody of the federal government) do not exist or that seeking them would be futile; further, VA did not subsequently inform the Appellant that his Reserve records were not associated with the claims file. Accordingly, remand is warranted for further evidentiary development. 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(2).

The Board also notes that there appears to be outstanding records from the Social Security Administration (SSA) pertaining to the Appellant's application for disability benefits. In a November 2022 statement, the Appellant indicated he had been on SSA disability since 2011 as a result of his thoracolumbar spine disorder and all of its residuals.  Because the SSA records may be relevant to the claims on appeal, a remand is necessary to obtain any determination pertinent to the Appellant's claim for SSA benefits, as well as any medical records relied upon concerning that claim. Murincsak v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 363 (1992); Golz v. Shinseki, 590 F.3d 1317, 1321 (Fed. Cir. 2010).

The Appellant claims entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder as a direct result of his military service. Specifically, the Appellant attributes his acquired psychiatric problems to his experiences during basic training, including being transported in a cattle truck and fearing for his life.  See November 2022 VA Form 21-4138, Statement in Support of Claim.

Review of the Appellant's available service treatment records are silent for any psychiatric problems or complaints.

In January 2024, the Appellant underwent a VA examination, and he was diagnosed with somatic symptom disorder with predominant pain, moderate. Ultimately, the examiner opined that the Appellant's current acquired psychiatric disorder was less likely than not related to his military service. The examiner's sole rationale was that the service treatment records did not show injury or treatment.

Unfortunately, this opinion is insufficient as it fails to reflect consideration of the Appellant's lay statements concerning the onset and continuity of his acquired psychiatric symptoms, and instead relies exclusively on the lack of objective service and post-service treatment for psychiatric problems. See Dalton v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 23, 39-40 (2007); Miller v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 249, 257 (2020).

When VA undertakes to obtain an evaluation, it must ensure that the evaluation is adequate. Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 312 (2007). Given the deficiencies addressed above with respect to the opinion concerning the Appellant's claimed acquired psychiatric disorder, on remand, he should be afforded a new examination.

The Appellant also claims entitlement to service connection for a right knee disorder as a result of his military service.  The Board notes that April and May 1984 service treatment records reflect the Veteran's report of right knee pain.

In December 2022, the Appellant underwent a VA examination, and he was diagnosed with a right knee strain. Ultimately, the examiner opined that the Appellant's current right knee disability was less likely than not related to his military service because the in-service injury seemed to be a one-time incident.

Unfortunately, this opinion is insufficient as it fails to reflect consideration of the Appellant's lay statements concerning the onset and continuity of his right knee symptoms, and instead relies exclusively on the lack of objective service and post-service treatment for right knee problems following his initial in-service injury. See Dalton, supra; Miller, supra.

When VA undertakes to obtain an evaluation, it must ensure that the evaluation is adequate. Barr, supra. Given the deficiencies addressed above with respect to the opinion concerning the Appellant's claimed right knee disorder, on remand, he should be afforded a new examination.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain the Appellant's complete service treatment records, including any records from his service in the Reserves from July 1984 to July 1990.  In obtaining those records, the AOJ may have to contact the appropriate Reserve Unit. Document all requests for information, as well as all responses in the claims file.

If any portion of his records are deemed missing, inform the Appellant of this fact, and provide him an opportunity to submit any records that he may have in his possession.

2. With any assistance needed from the Appellant, associate with the claims file any SSA disability claim records, including any medical records relied upon in making any determination.

3. The Appellant should be afforded an examination with a qualified examiner to determine whether his current acquired psychiatric disorder had its onset during, or is otherwise related to, his military service. The entire record must be made available to and be reviewed by the medical professional. The examiner should take a history from the Appellant as to the progression of his claimed disability.

Upon review of the claims file, interview and examination of the Appellant, the examiner should respond to the following:

a) Please clarify all current acquired psychiatric disorders. In this regard, a January 2024 VA examination report diagnosed the Appellant with somatic symptom disorder with predominant pain.

b) For any acquired psychiatric disorder identified, is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that such disability had onset in, or is otherwise related to the Appellant's military service?

The examiner must consider and comment upon the Appellant's own report of having experienced acquired psychiatric symptoms during and following basic training as a result of his experiences. Please discuss whether the nature and progression of the Appellant's acquired psychiatric disorder is consistent with the circumstances surrounding his reported in-service experiences and his reported history of symptoms.

If the examiner rejects the lay statements of record, the examiner must provide reasons for doing so, and lay statements must not be rejected due solely to an absence of contemporaneous or corroborating medical evidence, although this may be considered together with the other evidence of record.

All opinions should be supported with a medical explanation or rationale.

4. The Appellant should be afforded an examination with a qualified examiner to determine whether his current right knee disorder had its onset during, or is otherwise related to, his military service. The entire record must be made available to and be reviewed by the medical professional. The examiner should take a history from the Appellant as to the progression of his claimed disability.

Upon review of the claims file, interview and examination of the Appellant, the examiner should respond to the following:

a) Please clarify all current right knee disorders.

b) For any right knee disorder identified, is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that such disability had onset in, or is otherwise related to the Appellant's military service, to include his Apri 1984 and May 1984 in-service complaints of right knee symptoms?

The examiner must consider and comment upon the Appellant's own report of having experienced right knee symptoms during and following basic training as a result of his injury. Please discuss whether the nature and progression of the Appellant's right knee disorder is consistent with the circumstances surrounding his reported in-service experiences and his reported history of symptoms.

If the examiner rejects the lay statements of record, the examiner must provide reasons for doing so, and lay statements must not be rejected due solely to an absence of contemporaneous or corroborating medical evidence, although this may be considered together with the other evidence of record.

All opinions should be supported with a medical explanation or rationale. 

 

Leetra J. Harris

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	James R. Springer, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.