Citation Nr: A25034649
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 240711-455982
DATE: April 15, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for right knee disability, to include arthritis, is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a right leg disability, to include arthritis, is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the U.S. Marine Corps from August 2013 to August 2017.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a December 2023 rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs' (VA) Veterans Benefits Administration, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ), that denied entitlement to service connection for arthritis, degenerative - right leg, right knee condition.  In July 2024, VA received the Veteran's VA Form 10182, Notice of Disagreement (NOD), whereon the Veteran selected the Board's Direct Review Docket and disagreed with the denial of the claim relating to his right leg/ knee.

Recharacterization of the Issues on Appeal

The rating decision on appeal characterized the Veteran's claims regarding his right leg and right knee as one disability.  For clarity and in order to afford the Veteran the greatest opportunity to establish his claims, the Board has split these two disabilities into two separate claims.

Applicable Evidentiary Window

As the Veteran has selected the Direct Review Docket, the Board may only consider the evidence of record before the AOJ at the time of its decision on the issue(s) on appeal.  See 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300(a), 301.  The Board will not consider evidence received after the AOJ decision unless the claimant files a timely request for a Board hearing or an opportunity to submit additional evidence on the NOD (VA Form 10182). 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. The Veteran has not filed such a request. If additional evidence was submitted after the AOJ decision, the Board will not consider it. If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was added to the claims file that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a supplemental claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim(s), considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  See also Cook v. McDonough, 36 Vet. App. 175 (2023).  However, because the Board is remanding the claims, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

1. Entitlement to service connection for a right knee disability, to include arthritis, is remanded.

2. Entitlement to service connection for a right leg disability, to include arthritis, is remanded.

Under the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), VA's duty to assist ends when VA issues the notice of decision on a claim or returned claim and does not recommence unless a supplemental claim is submitted, or a claim is returned to the AOJ for correction of an error. 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(e); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c).

Given the limitations of when the duty to assist applies, remand by the Board in the AMA is proper for correction of (1) duty to assist errors occurring prior to the date of the AOJ decision on appeal (i.e., pre-decisional duty to assist errors); and (2) AOJ errors in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty, if correction of such error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the appellant's claim. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

While additional delay is regrettable, remand is necessary in order to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error discussed below.

In June 2023, VA issued an "Exam Scheduling Request" that noted it needed an examination and opinions "for arthritis, degenerative of right leg and the other for a right knee condition" and for "knee condition, right." However, the Veteran did not report for his examination. See July 23, 2023 Exam Scheduling Request Contention Cancellations. In September 2023, VA then sent the Veteran a letter informing him that he had missed the examination and asking for information as to why. VA received no response to the letter and the December 2023 rating decision denied service connection for arthritis, degenerative - right leg, right knee condition and noted the Veteran failed to report for his VA examination. The Veteran then filed his VA Form 10182 disagreeing with the denials of his "arthritis, degenerative - right leg, right knee condition" and "Right Knee Injury" in the December 2023 rating decision.

Remand is necessary for the claims in order to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error. 38 U.S.C. § 5103A, 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a). Here, there is no evidence of record that the Veteran was notified of the VA examination scheduled for his claims. Notably, the record does contain an October 2023 VA letter notifying the Veteran of a scheduled November 21, 2023, VA examination and the Veteran appeared and was examined on November 21, 2023. See VA Ankle Examination, date November 21, 2023.

Under the circumstances, the Board finds that the Veteran should have been afforded an additional opportunity to attend his VA knee examination. The applicable scheduling procedures indicate that a veteran be contacted and that all attempts at communication must be documented. Veterans Health Administration (VHA) Office of Disability and Medical Assessment (DMA) Compensation and Pension Disability Examinations Procedure Manual, Chapter 3, Paragraph 1.b.iii (1). No documentation showing that the Veteran was contacted and told of his right knee/leg examination is of record. Furthermore, the record reflects that, when properly notified, the Veteran has attended his scheduled examination. Therefore, the Board finds that remand for new VA examination and opinions are warranted.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1.	Please schedule the Veteran for a VA examination with an appropriate clinician to assess the nature and etiology of his claimed right knee and right leg disabilities.  The VA clinician should thoroughly review the appropriate documents in the Veteran's claims file and indicate that such was accomplished in the examination report.  All diagnostic testing should be conducted, to include radiographs.  Thereafter, the VA clinician is requested to respond to the following:

a.	Please state any diagnoses associated with the Veteran's right leg and right knee.

b.	For each diagnosis rendered, please state whether it is likely (an approximate balance of the positive and negative evidence) that the disability is the result of the Veteran's active military service.

c.	Any opinion expressed by the clinician should be accompanied by a complete rationale. If medical literature is relied upon in rendering a determination, the clinician should identify and specifically cite each reference utilized. If the clinician is unable to offer an opinion without resort to speculation, a thorough explanation as to why an opinion cannot be rendered should be provided.

d.	The clinician is also reminded that any opinion rendered without consideration of the Veteran's lay statements will be returned as incomplete.

2.	Thereafter, readjudicate the claims.

 

 

K. A. KENNERLY

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Michael Imber, Attorney-Advisor

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.