Citation Nr: A25034736
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 240916-474882
DATE: April 15, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea as secondary to the service-connected disabilities is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran had active military service from October 1995 to August 1999.

The Appeals Modernization Act (AMA) automatically applies to all claims for which VA issues notice of an initial decision on or after February 19, 2019. See 38 C.F.R. ยง 3.2400(a)(1). Here, a September 2023 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) denied the Veteran's claim to service connection for sleep apnea as secondary to the service-connected disability of bilateral pes planus and plantar fasciitis. The September 2023 rating decision constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the AMA applies. The Veteran appealed that decision by submitting a September 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement (NOD)). The Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. As a result, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the September 2023 rating decision. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.301. However, because the Board is remanding the claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. ยง 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea as secondary to the service-connected disabilities is remanded.

The Veteran contends that his claimed sleep apnea was caused or aggravated by his service-connected disabilities, directly or by causing or aggravating obesity. See June 2023 VA 21-4138 Statement in Support of Claim; and September 2024 Third Party Correspondence.

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in July 2013. The July 2013 VA examiner provided a negative nexus opinion as to whether obstructive sleep apnea is secondary to the service-connected disability of bilateral pes planus and plantar fasciitis. See 2023 August C&P Exam. 

The Board finds the July 2013 medical opinion inadequate. The examiner failed to consider the Veteran's lay report that raised weight gain and/or obesity related issues that may be related to his secondary service-connected disabilities. Specifically, the July 2023 examiner did not give any consideration as to whether the Veteran's service-connected disabilities caused and/or aggravated his weight gain and/or obesity that resulted in his obstructive sleep apnea. Further, the VA examiner did not address whether the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea was aggravated by his bilateral pes planus and plantar fasciitis. The AOJ's reliance on the inadequate opinion constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error. Therefore, the Board finds further development of medical opinion evidence in this matter is required. Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007).    

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Forward the Veteran's claims file for addendum medical opinion(s), by a physician who has not previously examined the Veteran or provided an opinion in this appeal, to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's sleep apnea disability. The claims file must be made available to and reviewed by the examiner. Another VA examination for the Veteran's sleep apnea should only be conducted if deemed necessary by the examiner providing the requested medical opinion. 

The examiner must address and fully explain whether weight gain and/or obesity potentially related to the Veteran's service-connected disabilities served as an intermediate step to the development of the claimed obstructive sleep apnea.

Based on the record, provide an opinion as to whether the Veteran's service-connected disabilities to include adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood, bilateral pes planus/plantar fasciitis, right/left knee strain, low back pain, and gastroesophageal reflux disease caused the Veteran to become obese. Specifically addressing whether the obesity as a result of the service-connected disabilities was a substantial factor in causing the Veteran's sleep apnea and whether the Veteran's sleep apnea would not have occurred but for obesity caused by the service-connected disabilities. 

Based on the record, provide an opinion as to whether the Veteran's service-connected disabilities to include adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood, bilateral pes planus/plantar fasciitis, right/left knee strain, low back pain, and gastroesophageal reflux aggravated the Veteran's obesity. Specifically addressing whether the obesity as a result of the service-connected disabilities was a substantial factor in aggravating the Veteran's sleep apnea and whether the Veteran's sleep apnea would not have occurred but for obesity aggravated by the service-connected disabilities.

The examiner must address the Veteran's lay report that his musculoskeletal conditions kept him from getting sleep and exercising which may have impacted his weight gain and/or obesity related issues. 

In forming the opinions, the examiner is advised that to be adequate, a VA opinion must provide separate findings and rationales for both causation and aggravation. The medical literature presented is not a substitute for medical rationale based on medical principles and facts. The Veteran's specific medical conditions must be discussed in arriving at the conclusions.

All opinions must be supported by a sufficient rationale and not just conclusions. A negative opinion cannot be solely based on the absence of medical evidence. If the examiner determines that an opinion cannot be provided without resort to speculation, the examiner should explain his/her inability to provide an opinion, identifying precisely what facts could not be determined. 

Based on the record, provide an opinion as to whether the Veteran's reported obstructive sleep apnea is aggravated (chronically worsened) by his service-connected bilateral pes planus/plantar fasciitis.  

A detailed rationale must be provided for all opinions expressed.   

 

JIMMY L. BARDIN

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	C. Ivan Franklin.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.1303.