Citation Nr: A25034127
Decision Date: 04/14/25	Archive Date: 04/14/25

DOCKET NO. 240805-467762
DATE: April 14, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral pes planus is granted.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a foot condition, diagnosed as bilateral metatarsalgia, is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for tinnitus is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for pseudofolliculitis barbae is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran's bilateral pes planus began during active service.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for service connection for bilateral pes planus have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran had active service from August 2016 to August 2020.

These matters come to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a March 2024 rating decision from a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ).

The Veteran initially requested Higher-Level Review of a prior decision when he submitted a June 2023 VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review. The Higher-Level Reviewer determined that there had been a duty to assist error and transferred the claim to the Supplemental Claim decision review option for additional development. 

After the AOJ issued its March 2024 decision, the Veteran filed an August 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) and elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2024 decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim of entitlement to service connection for bilateral pes planus, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. However, because the Board is remanding the claims of entitlement to service connection for a (1) foot condition, to include metatarsalgia, (2) tinnitus, and (3) pseudofolliculitis barbae,  any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral pes planus

The Veteran contends he is entitled to service connection for bilateral pes planus (claimed as foot pain) due to "hiking for miles with a full kit on" and "jumping out of the back of high trucks onto hard ground while wearing full gear" in service. 

Service connection may be granted for disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service. 38 U.S.C. §§1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §3.303. The three-element test for service connection requires evidence of: (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166-67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

In November 2023, VA obtained an examination for the Veteran's claim. The examiner noted that the Veteran reported he began to experience pain at the soles of his feet "after the requirements of service" in 2017 and used insoles. The examiner indicated the Veteran had a diagnosis of bilateral pes planus and metatarsalgia, and indicated that the Veteran had decreased longitudinal arch height bilaterally on weight-bearing. The examiner then provided the following opinion as to the Veteran's claim

Veteran has claimed bilateral foot pain as being directly related to military service. Based on review of the available evidence, it is less likely than not that the claimed condition is due to service as there is a lack of substantiating evidence supporting a nexus between the current diagnosis of pes planus and military service. Without chronicity during service or after service, a post-service event, illness, or injury is considered to be a more likely etiology. Veteran's claims file is negative for reports of foot/feet pain. Unable to verify that this condition existed during service. 

However, upon review of the Veteran's service treatment records, the Board notes that the report of medical examination upon his enlistment reflects that the Veteran's feet were examined and it was noted that his feet had normal arches, whereas the report of medical examination upon his separation reflects that the Veteran's feet were examined and it was noted that the Veteran had bilateral pes planus characterized as asymptomatic. Thus, the above opinion has no probative value as it was based on an inaccurate factual premise, that the Veteran's condition did not exist during service. See Reonal v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 458, 461 (1993). As the Veteran was sound upon entry into service with regard to bilateral pes planus, the Board finds that the Veteran's bilateral pes planus was onset in service. 38 U.S.C. § 1111; 38 C.F.R. § 3.304(b). Moreover, the Veteran's reports that he began to experience pain in the soles of his feet and used insoles to treat his symptoms after his separation from service is consistent with the notation in the Veteran's service treatment records. As such, the Board finds that the Veteran's reports as to his bilateral pes planus are credible and support the Board's finding that the Veteran's bilateral pes planus was incurred in service and did not resolve. See Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 469 (1994). Accordingly, service connection for bilateral pes planus is granted. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(b).

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to service connection for a foot condition, diagnosed as bilateral metatarsalgia, is remanded.

Although the Veteran's claim of entitlement to service connection for bilateral pes planus has been granted in the instant decision, the scope of the Veteran's claim included the bilateral metatarsalgia diagnosed in the development of his initial claim. See Grimes v. McDonough, 34 Vet. App. 84, 89 (2021). As above, the Board has found that the VA November 2023 warrants no probative value to determine the etiology of the Veteran's claimed condition. However, as the examiner failed to discuss the metatarsalgia that she diagnosed, VA erred in failing to obtain an opinion for the Veteran's diagnosed metatarsalgia prior to its adjudication. 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(f)(2)(A); 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a). As such, the Board must remand the matter for an opinion as to the nature and etiology of the Veteran's claimed foot condition, diagnosed as bilateral metatarsalgia. 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(d); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(4). 

2. Entitlement to service connection for tinnitus is remanded.

The Veteran contends his tinnitus is due to in-service noise exposure from his duties as a "Motor T operator," which "involved being around loud trucks for hours on end," as well as noise exposure from the firing range. See March 2023 VA 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim. 

Although VA obtained an examination for the Veteran's claimed tinnitus in April 2023, the opinion rendered by the examiner incorrectly noted that there were no complaints of tinnitus in the Veteran's service treatment records and did not address the Veteran's report during his examination that his tinnitus progressed over the prior three years. Specifically, an August 2018 service treatment record reflects a notation of tinnitus. Hence, the examiner's reasoning that there was "no complaint of tinnitus in service treatment records" appears to be incorrect. Moreover, as tinnitus is an organic disease of the nervous system, the opinion should have addressed the Veteran's report. See Miller v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 249, 258-60 (2020) (unless the Board finds the lay statements not competent or not credible, an examiner's opinion must address the Veteran's relevant lay statements in order to include enough detail to inform the Board's decision). The Board refrains from finding that the Veteran's tinnitus is subject to presumptive service connection as the Veteran reported he was a truck driver following his separation from service during an examination for another claim, which he did not report during the April 2023 examination for his claimed tinnitus. See November 2023 VA examination. As such, there is some question as to whether the Veteran's tinnitus was due to intercurrent injury or disease. 

In addition, the Board notes that VA obtained a subsequent October 2023 opinion to address the Veteran's toxic exposure risk activities (TERA) in service, the examiner discussed noise exposure rather than toxic exposure in her rationale. Moreover, the rationale for both opinions rendered were identical. As such, the Board finds the October 2023 opinion was not supported by a rationale. Accordingly, upon remand, VA should obtain a new opinion as to the etiology of the Veteran's claimed tinnitus that addresses the relevant evidence and the raised theories of entitlement. 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(d); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(4). 

3. Entitlement to service connection for pseudofolliculitis barbae is remanded.

The Veteran contends he is entitled to service connection for pseudofolliculitis barbae, which he asserts began in service. The Veteran reported that he tried various methods to treat his condition. While he did not undergo treatment for his condition in service, he was given an "unwritten profile." See August 2023 HLR - Informal Conference. Although the Veteran reported he had an "unwritten profile," documentation that the Veteran obtained an exception to standard policy on appearance may be documented in his service personnel records. As the Veteran's service personnel records have not been obtained, upon remand, VA should obtain them to assist the Veteran to substantiate his claim. 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(c); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(3)

The matters are REMANDED for the following actions:

1. Obtain the Veteran's service personnel records and associate them with the Veteran's claims file. Efforts to obtain these records must continue until it is determined that they do not exist or that further attempts to obtain them would be futile. Any non-existence or unavailability of the Veteran's service treatment records must be verified, and the Veteran must be duly notified. All actions must be documented and associated with the Veteran's claims file.

2. Obtain a new medical opinion as to the etiology of the Veteran's foot condition, diagnosed as metatarsalgia. If the examiner deems it necessary, schedule the Veteran for an examination and/or additional testing. A copy of the Veteran's claims file, to include this REMAND, should be made available to and reviewed by the examiner.

The examiner should opine as to whether the Veteran's foot condition, diagnosed as bilateral metatarsalgia, was at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) caused by or otherwise the result of his service.

In providing an opinion, the examiner should address the Veteran's lay statements, including his report that he "hik[ed] for miles with a full kit on" and "jump[ed] out of the back of high trucks onto hard ground while wearing full gear" in service.  

Each opinion expressed by the examiner should be accompanied by a complete rationale. If the examiner is unable to offer an opinion without resorting to speculation, a thorough explanation as to why an opinion cannot be rendered should be provided, including whether it is due to a limitation of general medical knowledge, the examiner's knowledge, or information about the Veteran's medical history.

3. Obtain a new medical opinion as to the etiology of the Veteran's tinnitus. If the examiner deems it necessary, schedule the Veteran for an examination and/or additional testing. A copy of the Veteran's claims file, to include this REMAND, should be made available to and reviewed by the examiner.

The examiner should opine as to whether the Veteran's tinnitus was at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher): 

(a) a chronic organic disease of the nervous system that manifested within one year of the Veteran's separation from service, and not otherwise due to an intercurrent disease or injury, or 

(b) caused by or otherwise the result of his service, to include in-service noise exposure, and/or the combined synergistic effect of the Veteran's total potential toxic exposure in service.  

In so doing, the examiner should address:

-	the August 2018 service treatment record that includes a notation of tinnitus;

-	the Veteran's lay statements, including his reports during the April 2023 examination that his tinnitus had onset over the three prior years, and that his in-service noise exposure included noise from the firing range (veteran had an incident where his earplug fell out), loud exhausts, large trucks running; and

-	the Veteran's in-service exposures as a result of the toxic exposure risk activity as a motor vehicle operator. See January 2023 VA TERA memorandum.

Each opinion expressed by the examiner should be accompanied by a complete rationale. If the examiner is unable to offer an opinion without resorting to speculation, a thorough explanation as to why an opinion cannot be rendered should be provided, including whether it is due to a limitation of general medical knowledge, the examiner's knowledge, or information about the Veteran's medical history.

 

 

L. CHU

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	D. Shorafa

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.