Citation Nr: A25034125
Decision Date: 04/14/25	Archive Date: 04/14/25

DOCKET NO. 240912-472753
DATE: April 14, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a right knee disorder is remanded. 

Entitlement to an evaluation in excess of 20 percent for lumbar spine degenerative arthritis with spinal stenosis is remanded.

Entitlement to an evaluation in excess of 10 percent for right lower extremity radiculopathy is remanded. 

Entitlement to an evaluation in excess of 10 percent for left lower extremity radiculopathy is remanded. 

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Air Force from August 1996 to November 2003.  He also served in the Florida Army National Guard, which included a period of active duty for training (ACDUTRA) from October 2007 to December 2007 and a period of active duty from May 2011 to June 2012.

In June 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, and requested higher level review (HLR) of a June 2022 rating decision.  In September 2023, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the HLR decision on appeal, which considered the evidence of record at the time of the June 2022 rating decision. 

The Veteran submitted a VA Form 10182 in September 2024 and elected the direct review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the June 2022 rating decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the June 2022 rating decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review, the Board could not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  However, because the Board is remanding the case, any evidence that the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Upon review, the Board finds that a remand is needed to correct pre-decisional duty to assist errors.

A May 2022 VA examiner found that the Veteran does not have a diagnosis of a right knee disorder and provided a negative nexus opinion based on the finding that there was only subjective right knee pain by history without objective evidence of a current disability.  However, the Board notes that pain alone, without a specific diagnosis or identifiable disease, may cause a functional impairment and therefore qualify as a disability for VA purposes. See Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356, 1362 (Fed. Cir. 2018).  Therefore, the Board finds that an additional VA examination and medical opinion are needed.  

The Veteran was also afforded VA spine examinations in January 2021, March 2021, and June 2021.  However, the examiners did not provide all of the necessary range of motion findings. Correia v. McDonald, 28 Vet. App. 158 (2016) (holding that the final sentence of 38 C.F.R. § 4.59 creates a requirement that the examination should record the results of range of motion testing "for pain on both active and passive motion [and] in weight-bearing and nonweight-bearing.").  In particular, the examiners did not provide range of motion for weight-bearing after noting that there was pain on weight-bearing.  Therefore, the Board finds that an additional VA examination was needed to ascertain the severity and manifestations of the Veteran's service-connected lumbar spine disability.

Moreover, the Board notes that the June 2021 VA examiner diagnosed the Veteran with bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy.  However, the examination report does not contain all of the necessary findings needed to evaluate the disability under the rating criteria.  Therefore, the Board finds that a VA examination was needed to ascertain the severity and manifestations of the Veteran's service-connected radiculopathy of the lower extremities.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1.  The Veteran should be afforded a VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of any right knee disorder that may be present.  Any and all studies, tests, and evaluations deemed necessary by the examiner should be performed.

The examiner is requested to review all pertinent records associated with the claims file, including the Veteran's service treatment records, post-service medical records, and assertions.

The examiner should note that the Veteran is competent to attest to matters of which he has first-hand knowledge, including observable symptomatology.  If there is a medical basis to support or doubt the history provided by the Veteran, the examiner should provide a fully reasoned explanation.

It should be noted that evidence of pain alone that causes functional impairment, even without a specific diagnosis or identifiable disease, may constitute a disability for VA purposes.

For any diagnosis identified or any functional impairment resulting from pain, the examiner should opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not that the disorder manifested in or is otherwise causally or etiologically related to the Veteran's military service, to include any symptomatology or injury therein.

A clear rationale for all opinions should be provided.

2.  The AOJ should afford the Veteran a VA examination to ascertain the current severity and manifestations of his service-connected lumbar spine disability.  Any studies, tests, and evaluations deemed necessary by the examiner should be performed.

The examiner is requested to review all pertinent records associated with the claims file, including the Veteran's service treatment records, post-service medical records, and assertions.

The examiner should note that the Veteran is competent to attest to matters of which he has first-hand knowledge, including observable symptomatology.  If there is a medical basis to support or doubt the history provided by the Veteran, the examiner should provide a fully reasoned explanation.

The examiner should report all signs and symptoms necessary for evaluating the Veteran's disability under the rating criteria.  In particular, the examiner should provide the range of motion of the lumbar spine in degrees on active motion, passive motion, weight-bearing, and nonweight-bearing.  If the examiner is unable to conduct the required testing or concludes that the required testing is not necessary in this case, he or she should provide an explanation for this determination in the report based on the specific facts and circumstances of this Veteran's case.

The presence of objective evidence of pain, excess fatigability, incoordination, and weakness should also be noted, as should any additional disability, including any additional loss of motion due to these factors.

The examiner should state whether there is any form of ankylosis.  He or she should also state the total duration of any incapacitating episodes over the past 12 months and identify any neurological manifestations of the disability other than the already service-connected bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy.

The examiner should also discuss any additional functional impairment that occurs during flare-ups, including any additional limitation of motion, and after any repeated use over time.  To the extent possible, he or she should address the frequency, duration, characteristics, and severity of flare-ups (through the examination findings, review of the medical records, and/or history provided by the Veteran).  The examiner is specifically requested to estimate as to degrees of range of motion lost during flare-ups and with repeated use. If the examiner is unable to provide an opinion as to functional loss, he or she must provide an explanation in the report.

A clear rationale for all opinions should be provided.

3.  The AOJ should afford the Veteran a VA examination to ascertain the current severity and manifestations of his service-connected radiculopathy of the right and left lower extremities.  Any studies, tests, and evaluations deemed necessary by the examiner should be performed.

The examiner is requested to review all pertinent records associated with the claims file, including the Veteran's service treatment records, post-service medical records, and assertions.

The examiner should note that the Veteran is competent to attest to matters of which he has first-hand knowledge, including observable symptomatology.  If there is a medical basis to support or doubt the history provided by the Veteran, the examiner should provide a fully reasoned explanation.

The examiner should report all signs and symptoms necessary for evaluating the Veteran's disability under the rating criteria.  In particular, he or she should indicate whether there is incomplete paralysis that is mild, moderate, or severe with marked muscular atrophy.  He or she should also state whether there is complete paralysis where the foot dangles and drops with no active movement possible of the muscles below the knee and flexion of the knee is weakened or lost.  

The examiner should identify and describe any additional manifestations associated with the service-connected disability.

 A clear rationale for all opinions should be provided.

 

J.W. ZISSIMOS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	G.W. Neiman

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.