Citation Nr: A25034852
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 240411-431652
DATE: April 15, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for hypertension to include as due to herbicide exposure is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for hepatitis C to include as due to herbicide exposure is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran was not exposed to an herbicide agent, such as Agent Orange, during his active service. 

2. Hypertension did not have onset during active service, did not manifest within one year of separation from active service, and was not caused by active service. 

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for service connection for hypertension to include as due to herbicide exposure are not met.  38?U.S.C. §§?1101, 1110, 1112, 1113; 38?C.F.R. §§?3.303, 3.307, 3.309. 

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from February 1970 to June 1971.? 

These matters come before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an April 2024 rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).? 

In the April 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal, the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.? As the Veteran has selected the Direct Review Docket, the Board may only consider the evidence of record before the AOJ at the time of its decision on the issue on appeal.? See 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300(a), 301.? The Board will not consider evidence received after the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision unless the claimant files a timely request for a Board hearing or an opportunity to submit additional evidence on the NOD (VA Form 10182).? 38 C.F.R. § 20.301.? The Veteran has not filed such a request.

The Board acknowledges that in its April 2024 rating decision, the AOJ recognized that the Veteran's hypertension and hepatitis C claims had been previously denied, but then considered the claims on its merits, thereby indicating that "new and relevant" evidence had been received sufficient for readjudication of the claims on its merits.  The Board is bound by this favorable finding.???

Service connection for hypertension

Veterans are entitled to compensation from VA if they develop a disability "resulting from personal injury suffered or disease contracted in line of duty, or for aggravation of a preexisting injury suffered or disease contracted in line of duty."  38?U.S.C. §?1110 (wartime service), 1131 (peacetime service).  To establish a right to compensation for a present disability, a veteran must show: "(1) the existence of a present disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service"-the so-called "nexus" requirement.  Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004). 

For certain chronic disease, including hypertension, service connection may be granted if the disease becomes manifest to a compensable degree within one year following separation from service.  38?U.S.C. §§?1101, 1112, 1113, 1137 (2012); 38?C.F.R. §§?3.307, 3.309. 

With chronic disease shown as such in service (or within the presumptive period under §?3.307) so as to permit a finding of service connection, subsequent manifestations of the same chronic disease at any later date, however remote, are service connected unless clearly attributable to intercurrent causes.  When the disease identity is established (leprosy, tuberculosis, multiple sclerosis, etc.), there is no requirement of evidentiary showing of continuity.  Continuity of symptomatology is required only where the condition noted during service (or in the presumptive period) is not, in fact, shown to be chronic or where the diagnosis of chronicity may be legitimately questioned.  When the fact of chronicity in service is not adequately supported, then a showing of continuity after discharge is required to support the claim.  38?C.F.R. §?3.303(b). 

Certain diseases, to include hypertension, shall be?service-connected?if the Veteran was exposed to an herbicide agent during active?service?even though there is no record of such disease during?service, provided that the requirements of?38?C.F.R. §?3.307(d) are satisfied.? 38?C.F.R. §?3.309.  

When a Veteran is found not to be entitled to a regulatory presumption of service connection for a given disability, the claim must nevertheless be reviewed to determine whether service connection can be established on another basis.  See Combee v. Brown, 34 F.3d 1039, 1043-1044 (Fed. Cir. 1994).  In other words, notwithstanding the presumption provisions, the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit has determined that a claimant is not precluded from establishing service connection for disability due to herbicide exposure with proof of direct causation.  Combee v. Brown, 34 F.3d 1039, 1042 (Fed. Cir. 1994). 

The Veteran contends that he has hypertension that is related to service, to include as due to herbicide exposure.  In particular, he claims that while serving as a supply clerk, he handled weapons, military material and catalogs for storage and replacement that came from Vietnam and other areas in which Agent Orange was used.  See, e.g., December 2023 private treatment record from Dr. M.D.L.R.   

The Veteran currently is diagnosed with hypertension.  See, e.g., October 2023 VA examination report. 

With regard to the Veteran's contention that he was exposed to Agent Orange during service, the Veteran does not assert that he served within the borders of the Republic of Vietnam, Thailand, or any location wherein exposure to herbicides is presumed under the PACT Act, and his service personnel records do not reflect such service.  As such, the Board finds he is not entitled to the benefit of the presumption of herbicide exposure. 

On the contrary, the Veteran contends that he was exposed to Agent Orange from handling materials and equipment that came from an area in which Agent Orange was used.  However, there are crucially no official records of exposure that verify the Veteran's statements.  Moreover, although he is competent to testify as to events that occurred in military service, he is not competent to conclude that he handled materials or equipment that was sprayed with an herbicide such as Agent Orange or otherwise had exposure to such.  The exposure alleged by the Veteran is too speculative to support a finding of actual exposure, and the underlying premise the chemical was herbicides has not been established by competent evidence.  Importantly, the Veteran has merely contended generally that he handled "weapons, military materials, and catalogs for storage and replacement that came from overseas after war" which he assumes was exposed to Agent Orange. Therefore, the Board finds that the Veteran's statements of record are insufficient to support a finding of actual herbicide agent exposure.  Additionally, VA has provided the Veteran the opportunity to provide evidence in support of his claim, to include evidence that he was exposed to herbicides during service; as such, the Board finds that VA has made a sufficient attempt in order to verify the Veteran's claimed exposure to herbicides during service.  Therefore, the probative evidence does not demonstrate that the Veteran was exposed to herbicides, including Agent Orange during active service. 

The Board further notes that the Veteran's service treatment records are entirely negative for any complaints, treatment, or diagnosis of hypertension.  In fact, his May 1971 separation examination revealed normal findings as to this disability.  He does not allege he experienced any symptoms of these conditions during service.  Under these circumstances, the Board concludes that hypertension was not present during active duty.  The post-service medical evidence is similarly negative for any complaints or findings of hypertension or symptoms associated therewith for many years thereafter.  The Veteran has not contended otherwise. Therefore, he did not have characteristic manifestations sufficient to identify the chronic disease entity during service or within one year of separation.  38?C.F.R. §?3.303(b).  The Veteran has not contended otherwise. 

The Board acknowledges that Dr. M.D.L.R. opined in a private report dated December 2023 following examination of the Veteran that it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's hypertension was caused by service to include exposure to herbicides such as Agent Orange.  However, this positive opinion is not probative because, as discussed above, the probative evidence shows that the Veteran was not exposed to herbicides during service.  In this regard, a medical opinion based on an inaccurate factual premise is not probative.  See Reonal v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 458, 461 (1993).   

For the reasons and bases expressed above, the Board finds that the evidence is against the Veteran's claim of entitlement to service connection for hypertension to include as due to exposure to herbicides.? The benefit sought on appeal is accordingly denied.? 

REASONS FOR REMAND

Service connection for hepatitis C

The Veteran contends that he has hepatitis C that is related to service, to include as due to herbicide exposure.  The Board notes that the Veteran's service treatment records dated July 1970 documents a past history of hepatitis and that he was hospitalized several months prior with hepatitis and was discharged in April 1970.  Moreover, a May 1970 service hospital record documents a finding of hepatitis C.  Also, his May 1971 report of medical history in conjunction with the separation examination documents a history of hepatitis.  The remainder of the Veteran's service treatment records, to include the January 1970 enlistment examination are absent complaints of or treatment for hepatitis.  As such, the Veteran is presumed sound upon entrance to service.

The Veteran was provided a VA examination in October 2023 to determine the etiology of his hepatitis C.  He was diagnosed with hepatitis C at that time.  After examination of the Veteran, the VA examiner concluded that it is less likely than not that the Veteran's hepatitis C was incurred in or caused by service.  However, in rendering their rationale, the VA examiner appeared to reference a history of the Veteran using shared needles or other drug-related material prior to service as the examiner noted the Veteran's report that he was motivated to join the military to avoid drugs.  Therefore, the examiner indicated that the Veteran's hepatitis C may have pre-existed service.  However, the examiner did not use the correct legal standard in providing their opinion i.e. clear and unmistakable evidence that the Veteran's hepatitis C pre-existed service and was not aggravated during service.  38 C.F.R. §§ 3.304, 3.306.  Moreover, the examiner did not otherwise provide an adequate rationale as to why the Veteran's current hepatitis C is not related to or aggravated by the in-service findings of hepatitis discussed above.  Accordingly, this opinion is of no probative value.

While the Board acknowledges that the Veteran provided a December 2023 private opinion from Dr. M.D.L.R. who opined that it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's hepatitis C is related to service, such opinion was provided on the inaccurate basis that the Veteran was exposed to herbicides during service.  

There is no other medical opinion as to the etiology of the Veteran's hepatitis C.  In light of the foregoing, the Board finds that another opinion should be obtained on remand and the AOJ not obtaining such opinion was a predecisional duty to assist error.   

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Forward the Veteran's claims folder to an appropriately qualified medical professional to obtain an opinion as to the etiology of the Veteran's hepatitis C.  The examiner is requested to review all pertinent records associated with the claims file.

If the examiner determines that an opinion cannot be rendered without examination of the Veteran, then provide the Veteran with the examination.

The examiner must provide an opinion as to the following:

a. Whether there is clear and unmistakable evidence that the Veteran had hepatitis C prior to his active service.  In rendering this opinion, the examiner should cite to supporting evidence in the claims folder and address the treatment records for hepatitis C in May 1970 and July 1970.  Clear and unmistakable means obvious and undebatable.  

b. If it is determined that the Veteran's current hepatitis C pre-existed his active service, provide an opinion as to whether there is clear and unmistakable evidence that it was NOT aggravated to a permanent degree in service beyond that which would be due to the natural progression of the disability.  In rendering this opinion, the examiner should cite to supporting evidence in the claims folder.  Clear and unmistakable means obvious and undebatable.

c. If it is determined that the Veteran's current hepatitis C did not pre-exist his active service, provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) the Veteran has hepatitis C that is etiologically related to active service, to include the in-service treatment for hepatitis C in May 1970 and July 1970.   

The examiner must provide a rationale for their opinion.

 

 

Ann K. Minami

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Arif Syed, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.