Citation Nr: A25034683
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 210804-176776
DATE: April 15, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea is granted, on a direct basis.

Entitlement to service connection for a right knee collateral ligament sprain, is granted, on a direct basis.

Entitlement to service connection for a right ankle disability, manifesting in right ankle pain ("right ankle disability"), on a secondary causation basis, is granted.

Entitlement to service connection for a right knee disability, manifesting in right knee pain ("right knee disability"), on a secondary causation basis, is granted.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The evidence is at least evenly balanced as to whether the Veteran's sleep apnea had onset in service.

2. The evidence is at least evenly balanced as to whether the Veteran's right collateral ligament sprain had onset in service.

3. The evidence is at least evenly balanced as to whether the Veteran's right ankle disability was caused by the Veteran's service-connected right collateral ligament sprain.

4. The evidence is at least evenly balanced as to whether the Veteran's right knee disability was caused by the Veteran's service-connected right collateral ligament sprain.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. With reasonable doubt resolved in favor of the Veteran, the criteria for entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

2. With reasonable doubt resolved in favor of the Veteran, the criteria for entitlement to service connection for a right collateral ligament sprain have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

3. With reasonable doubt resolved in favor of the Veteran, the criteria for service connection for a right ankle disability, secondary to right collateral ligament sprain, on a causation basis, have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.310.

4. With reasonable doubt resolved in favor of the Veteran, the criteria for service connection for a right knee disability, secondary to right collateral ligament sprain, on a causation basis, have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.310.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran had active duty service in the United States Army from October 1990 to October 1994.

These matters come before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from an appeal of a May 11, 2021, rating decision of the Department of Veterans' Affairs.  As applicable to the instant decision, the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) denied service connection for sleep apnea and a right collateral ligament sprain in the May 2021 rating decision.  Although the AOJ did not adjudicate claims for a right ankle disability or a right knee disability in the May 2021 rating decision, the Board finds that these claims for service connection, for the Veteran's right ankle disability and right knee disability, secondary to right collateral ligament sprain, on a causation basis, have been reasonable raised by the evidence of record and are encompassed by the Veteran's description of his discernable right ankle and right knee on-going symptoms.  Grimes v. McDonough, 34 Vet. App. 84, 89 (2021) (holding that a claim for service connection includes any disability that is reasonably encompassed by factors such as the claimant's description of his or her claim, the symptoms described, and information submitted by the claimant or obtained by the Secretary).

In his August 2021 Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) (NOD), the Veteran elected the Hearing docket.  

Under the AMA hearing docket, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the respective AOJ decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or representative at the hearing or within 90 days following the hearing.  38 U.S.C. § 7113(b); 38 C.F.R. § 20.302(a).  

The Veteran testified at a Board hearing before the undersigned Veterans Law Judge on April 11, 2025.  A transcript has not yet been associated with the claims file, but one is not necessary because the benefits sought are being granted in full.  The Board notes that the case has been advanced on the docket.

If the Veteran wishes to have VA consider any evidence that was not considered, she may at any time, file a supplemental claim with the AOJ after receiving this decision and the additional evidence will be considered in connection with the supplemental claim.  38 U.S.C. §§ 5104C(a)(1)(B), (b); 5108; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.2501, 20.1105(a).  If filed within one year, this supplemental claim will preserve the date of the claim denied herein as the effective date of the grant of the benefit or benefits sought.  38 U.S.C. § 5104C(a)(2)(B); 38 C.F.R. § 3.2500(h)(1).

As the Board is granting the benefit sought in full, it need not consider the outstanding request for "a complete copy of the C-file", which VA had received on July 9, 2020, as acknowledged by the Veteran's representative.

Service Connection-Applicable Law

Service connection will be granted if the evidence demonstrates that current disability resulted from an injury suffered or disease contracted in active military, naval, air, or space service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (a). Establishing service connection generally requires competent evidence of three things: (1) current disability; (2) in-service injury or disease; and (3) a relationship between the two.  Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F. 3d 1356, 1361 (Fed. Cir. 2018). Consistent with this framework, service connection is warranted for a disease first diagnosed after service when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).

Service connection is also warranted for disability that is proximately due to or the result of service-connected disease or injury.  38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a).  Secondary service connection under 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a) is warranted where a non-service-connected disability would have been less severe but for a service-connected disability, either because there is an etiological link (to include worsening of functionality) between the two, or because the service-connected disability resulted in the inability to treat the non-service-connected disability.  Spicer v. McDonough, 61 F. 4th 1360, 1366 (Fed. Cir. 2023) ("but for" causation "applies to the natural progression of a condition not caused by a service-connected injury or disease, but that nonetheless would have been less severe were it not for the service-connected disability. Stated another way... compensation [is warranted] for a worsening of functionality-whether through an inability to treat or a more direct, etiological cause").  The Court has also held that the "'causation requirement in the phrase 'the result of' is 'broad,' in that it permits entitlement to VA benefits 'based on a multi-link causal chain.'"  Payne v. Wilkie, 31 Vet. App. 373, 384 (2019).  See also Spicer, 61 F. 4th at 1364 ("The but-for causation standard is not limited to a single cause and effect, but rather contemplates multi-causal links, including action and inaction"). 

Sleep Apnea and Right Collateral Ligament Sprain

As to sleep apnea, the Veteran has raised entitlement based upon secondary causation (due to service-connected PTSD).  Considering the instant favorable decision to grant service connection on a direct basis for this service claim for sleep apnea, as explained below, a discussion of any other theory of entitlement is not necessary, as such would not result in an earlier effective date.  Johnson v. Collins, __ Vet. App. __, No. 23-7589, 2025 U.S. App. Vet. Claims LEXIS 383 (Mar. 26, 2025) (indicating that effective date consequences can be considered by the Board in cases in which the issue before it is entitlement to service connection); Cf. Stender v. Wilkie, No. 19-0068, 2020 U.S. App. Vet. Claims LEXIS 520, *5-*7 (Mar. 27, 2020) (mem dec) (Falvey, J.) (the Board erred in granting service connection based on the Camp Lejeune Contaminated Water (CLCW) presumption without considering other theories of entitlement that could warrant an earlier effective date because of the effective date of the CLCW presumption); Bethea v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 252, 254 (1992) (single judge decisions may be relied upon for any persuasiveness or reasoning they contain).

For the following reasons, entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea and a right collateral ligament sprain is warranted.

In a May 10, 2021, VA examination report, a VA clinician provided a diagnosis of obstructive sleep apnea.  In a February 2021 VA examination report, a clinician indicated a current diagnosis of a right collateral ligament sprain.  Consequently, the current disability requirements have been met.

The Veteran is competent that he began having the discernable symptoms of difficulty with nighttime breathing, snoring, restless sleep, and excessive daytime sleepiness, daytime exhaustion in service.  These symptoms have been on-going through a home sleep study and through the present day.  Moreover, the evidence of record includes a lay account from the Veteran's in-service bunkmate who noticed that Veteran gasped for air during sleep and did not sleep normally when they roomed together.  As to his right collateral ligament strain, the Veteran reported and testified that he fell into a hole during a routine exercise in service. Since this in-service injury, he has experienced ongoing, radiating right collateral ligament pain, which, in turn, have caused discernable right ankle and right knee pain.  Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F. 3d 1372, 1377 (Fed. Cir. 2007) (a veteran is competent to testify regarding observations); Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F. 3d 1331, 1337 (holding lay evidence concerning continuity of symptoms after service, if credible, is ultimately competent, regardless of the lack of contemporaneous medical evidence).  The Board finds that the Veteran's (and his bunkmate's) accounts and the Veteran's hearing testimony which reflects the lay evidence of record to be consistent with the places, types, and circumstances of service, and there is nothing of equal or greater probative weight in the evidence of record to contradict these credible lay accounts discernable and ongoing symptoms culminating in the above noted diagnosis.  See 38 U.S.C. § 1154(a); 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a) (each disabling condition for which a veteran seeks service connection must be considered based on factors including the basis of places, types, and circumstances of service as shown by service records).   As to sleep apnea specifically, the Court reasoned in Maples v. Wilkie, No. 18-2016, 2019 U.S. App. Vet. Claims LEXIS 199 (Feb. 11, 2019) (mem dec) (Falvey, J.), given the observable nature of its symptoms, sleep apnea is the type of disability for which lay evidence can be sufficient to support a claim for service connection.  The Board finds this reasoning persuasive.  Bethea, 2 Vet. App. 252.  Therefore, the in-service disease or injury requirements for these two disabilities have been met and this competent and credible lay evidence reflects continuous symptoms since the Veteran's active duty service.

The VA clinicians who conducted the May 10, 2021, and February 2021 examinations rendered negative etiological opinions.  In the case of the former, the clinician only focused on the multifactorial nature of sleep apnea and secondary causation.  The clinician did not consider of the credible lay evidence as to in-service onset and ongoing symptoms or whether service was one of the factors in the multi-factorial analysis.  The clinician found absences in the Veteran's service treatment records to be more probative than the Veteran's competent and credible lay contentions and testimony.  Due to the lack of consideration of the consistent and credible lay evidence, the Board finds that these two negative etiological opinions are inadequate.

While the Board could remand for addenda (to consider the credible lay evidence adequately), such a remand might well be interpreted as an attempt to develop evidence with the intent of denying the Veteran's service connection claims, especially in light of the Veteran's competent, plausible, internally consistent, and credible accounts of his discernable symptoms from service through the present day.  38 C.F.R. § 3.304(c) ("The development of evidence in connection with claims for service connection will be accomplished when deemed necessary but it should not be undertaken when evidence present is sufficient for this determination"); Andrews v. McDonough, 34 Vet. App. 216, 225 (2021) ("Remand is inappropriate where the predominant purpose is not to allow the Board to make a fully informed decision unencumbered by error but to allow VA to obtain more evidence so that it can properly deny the claim").  Moreover, to the extent that these grants of service connection are based upon credible lay evidence rather than positive medical opinions as to direct causation, "nothing in the regulatory or statutory provisions [relating to evidence to be considered] requires both medical and competent lay evidence; rather, they make clear that competent lay evidence can be sufficient in and of itself."  Buchanan, 451 F. 3d at 1335.

In light of the above, the evidence is sufficient to decide this service connection claims, as it is at least evenly balanced as to whether the Veteran's sleep apnea and right collateral ligament sprain had onset in service.  As the reasonable doubt created by this relative equipoise in the evidence must be resolved in favor of the Veteran, entitlement to service connection for these two disabilities is warranted.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F. 4th 776, 781-82 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc) (only when the evidence persuasively favors one side, or the other is the benefit of the doubt doctrine not for application).

Right Ankle Disability and Right Knee Disability

As discussed above, the Board has granted service for the Veteran's right collateral ligament strain.  The diagnosis of lateral collateral ligament strain in the February 2021 ankle conditions disability benefits questionnaire did not indicate whether the lateral collateral ligament referred to was the ankle, the knee, or both.

In the February 2021 VA examination report, the clinician indicated that the Veteran endorsed on-going right ankle pain since his in-service injury.  Upon a March 2018 examination report, a clinician reported that the Veteran has experienced on-going right knee pain since the date of the same in-service injury.  While there is some ambiguity concerning a right ankle diagnosis, there is no diagnostic assessment assigned to the right knee.  To the extent that there is any ambiguity in the diagnosis, pain alone in some circumstances is sufficient to show a current disability.  See Saunders, 886 F. 3d at 1364-65 (a diagnosis is not required to meet the current disability requirement, and pain alone can constitute disability if it causes impairment in earning capacity).  The Veteran's credible lay statements and hearing testimony reflect that he has been experiencing on-going right ankle pain and right knee pain that causes impairment in earning capacity.  Therefore, the current disability requirement for the Veteran's these disabilities has been met in this regard as well and the disabilities characterized accordingly on the title page.

At the Board hearing, the Veteran conveyed that his in-service injury (right collateral ligament sprain) was followed by the onset of both discernable (and functionally limiting) ongoing right ankle pain and ongoing right knee pain.  Indeed, the Veteran is competent to report discernable symptoms, as to the date of inception and the ongoing nature ever since.  Jandreau, 492 F. 3d 1372, 1377; Buchanan, 451 F. 3d 1331, 1337.  The Veteran's testimony is facially plausible, consistent with other accounts, consistent with other evidence submitted on behalf of the Veteran and therefore warrants substantial probative weight.

The VA clinicians who conducted examinations focused on the Veteran's knees as well as the collateral ligament strain did not consider the role that the Veteran's right collateral ligament sprain played in the multi-link causation/acquisition of both the Veteran's right ankle disability and right knee disability.  Again, these clinicians focused upon absences in the Veteran's service treatment records and a lack of evidence reflecting "chronicity of care".  While the Board finds these clinicians' findings informative as to the anatomy of the ankle and the knee, the Board finds the examinations warrant diminished probative weight because the clinicians did not factor the Veteran's credible account of the genesis of these disabilities after his right collateral ligament strain nor the Veteran's accounts of the on-going and functionally inhibiting nature of both right ankle and right knee pain.  Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008) (most of the probative value of a medical opinion comes from its reasoning).

Considering the above, the evidence is at least evenly balanced as to whether the Veteran's service-connected right collateral ligament sprain caused his right ankle disability and his right knee disability in a multi-link chain.  As the reasonable doubt created by this relative equipoise in the evidence of record must be resolved in the Veteran's favor, entitlement to service connection for these two disabilities is warranted.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.  To the extent that there are overlapping symptoms between the collateral ligament strain and the knee and ankle disabilities, the AOJ may take this into considerations when assigning ratings for these disabilities when implementing the Board's decision.  See Hicks v. Wilkie, No. 17-1893, 2018 U.S. App. Vet. Claims LEXIS 1031, *7 (Aug. 6, 2018) (mem dec) (Falvey, J.) (citing Collaro v. West, 136 F.3d 1304, 1308 (Fed. Cir. 1998)) (when the Board denies service connection for a disability based on the anti-pyramiding regulation, 38 C.F.R. § 4.14, it errs because "the issue whether to service connect a disability is separate from the determination of how to rate a service-connected disability"). See also Bethea v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 252, 254 (1992) (single judge decisions may be relied upon for any persuasiveness or reasoning they contain).

 

 

Jonathan Hager

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	B. J. Komins, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability.  38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.