Citation Nr: A25034414
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 240625-449965
DATE: April 15, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for dizziness, to include as secondary to the service-connected headaches, tinnitus, and technically limited airway, is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from August 1989 to June 1996. 

The rating decision on appeal was issued in August 2023, and constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.  

In the June 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the August 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of for service connection for dizziness to include as secondary to service-connected headaches, tinnitus, or technically limited airway, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination for dizziness in August 2023. The August 2023 VA examiner provided a negative toxic exposure risk activity (TERA) opinion. In the rationale the examiner provided that the "Veteran has multiple comorbidities that could lead to dizziness symptoms such as frequent headaches, tinnitus, and shortness of breath. Also, in medical records there are multiple complaints of dizziness accompanying headaches. Therefore, it is more likely that veteran's symptoms of dizziness are related to current comorbidities."  The Board finds that the VA examiner's medical opinion raises the issue of dizziness as secondary to the service-connected headaches, tinnitus, and technically limited airway. The Board finds that further development of the Veteran's claim is warranted as the evidence of record is insufficient to make a fully informed decision; therefore, has not satisfied VA's duty to assist him in the development of the claim. As the AOJ erred in failing to further develop the claim, the Board finds that the AOJ made a pre-decisional duty to assist error. 

The matter is accordingly REMANDED for the following action:

Provide the Veteran's claims file to an appropriate clinician. The examiner must review the entire claims file (including this?remand). 

The examiner is asked to provide a response to the following:

Whether the Veteran has a present diagnosis that encompasses dizziness? Why or why not?

If so, is such diagnosis at least as likely as not (at least an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence) caused or aggravated by the service-connected headaches, tinnitus, and technically limited airway?

A complete rationale should be given for all opinions and conclusions expressed.  

 

A. C. MACKENZIE

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	R. Osborne, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.