Citation Nr: A25034585
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 220228-225876
DATE: April 15, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 50 percent disabling for service-connected unspecified depressive disorder is denied.

Entitlement to special monthly compensation (SMC) under 38 U.S.C. § 1114(s) is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1.  During the appeal period, the Veteran's service-connected unspecified depressive disorder has not resulted, or more nearly approximated, occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas.

2.  For the time period prior to June 17, 2019, the Veteran did not meet the criteria for SMC under 38 U.S.C. § 1114(s).

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1.  The criteria for entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 50 percent disabling for service-connected unspecified depressive disorder have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § §§ 3.102, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9435.

2.  The criteria for entitlement to SMC under 38 U.S.C. § 1114(s) for the time period prior to June 17, 2019, have not been met.  38 U.S.C. § 1114(s).

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from April 1982 to June 1985.

Procedurally, the Veteran sought service connection for depression and PTSD in 2012 (adjudicated as anxiety and PTSD), which was denied in an August 2013 rating decision.  Additional evidence was received by the AOJ and the issues were readjudicated and denied in a June 2015 rating decision on the basis of no nexus to service.  By letter dated June 23, 2015, the Veteran was notified of this decision and his appellate rights.  The Veteran did not appeal this decision, and new and material evidence was not received, within one year of the notice of decision.  This decision, therefore, is final.  38 C.F.R. §§ 3.156, 20.200-20.204 (2014).

On May 15, 2019, the Veteran filed a supplemental claim seeking service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder.  A November 2019 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) rating decision granted service connection for unspecified depressive disorder rated as 50 percent disabling from May 15, 2019.  Thereafter in October 2020, the Veteran timely elected the administrative review option of a Higher Level Review (HLR) (VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review) identifying the issues as an increased rating for service-connected unspecified depressive disorder and entitlement to SMC under 38 U.S.C. § 1114(s).

In March 2021, an HLR decision denied the claim, which considered the evidence of record at the time of the prior November 2019 decision.  

In the February 2022 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket, identifying the issues as an increased rating for service-connected unspecified depressive disorder and SMC.

The Board finds that the AMA continuous pursuit rules apply and that the Veteran has continuously pursued the initial rating claim per AMA rules since the filing of the May 2019 supplemental claim.  See 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.2500(c)(3), 3.2500(f), 3.2500(h).  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the November 2019 AOJ rating decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Under the Legacy system, the Board decided the appropriate rating to be assigned up to the date of the Board decision.  The AMA statutes and regulations are silent as to when the rating period on appeal ends.  However, the intent of the AMA was to streamline VA's adjudicatory process to make the Board more of an appellate body.  See 83 Fed. Reg. 39,818 (Aug. 10, 2018).  Although not precedential in nature, a Memorandum Decision by the Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (the Court) addressed whether the rating period on appeal could end at the date of the AOJ decision on appeal rather than at the time of the Board decision.  In Meuzelaar v. McDonough, 2024 U.S. App. Vet. Claims LEXIS 446 (March 28, 2024), the Court specifically noted "we cannot find any statute or regulation that supports such an interpretation of the AMA."  See Bethea v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 252, 254 (1992) (single judge memorandum decisions may be relied upon for any persuasiveness or reasoning they contain).  The Board finds this reasoning to be persuasive.  

1.	Initial rating in excess of 50 percent disabling for service-connected unspecified depressive disorder

The Veteran appeals the initial rating of 50 percent disabling for service-connected unspecified depressive disorder under Diagnostic Code 9435, effective as of May 15, 2019.  

Disability evaluations are determined by evaluating the extent to which a Veteran's service-connected disability adversely affects her ability to function under the ordinary conditions of daily life, including employment, by comparing her symptomatology with the criteria set forth in the Schedule for Rating Disabilities (Rating Schedule).  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.10.

If two evaluations are potentially applicable, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that evaluation; otherwise, the lower evaluation will be assigned.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7.

Staged ratings are appropriate for any rating claim when the factual findings show distinct time periods during the appeal period where the service-connected disability exhibits symptoms that would warrant different ratings.  Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007).

All psychiatric disorders are evaluated under a general rating formula for mental disorders.  38 C.F.R. § 4.130.  Under the general rating formula, a 30 percent rating is assigned when there is occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks (although generally functioning satisfactorily, with routine behavior, self-care, and conversation normal), due to such symptoms as: depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks (weekly or less often), chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss (such as forgetting names, directions, recent events).

A 50 percent rating is warranted for occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to such symptoms as: flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty understanding complex commands; impairment of short- and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment, impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships. 

A 70 percent evaluation is warranted for occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately, and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful situations (including work or a work-like setting); and inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.

Finally, a total schedular rating of 100 percent is warranted when the disorder results in total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of mental and personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name.

The symptoms listed in the rating schedule are not intended to constitute an exhaustive list, but rather serve as examples of the type and degree of the symptoms, or their effects, that would justify a particular rating.  See Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436 (2002).  Nevertheless, all ratings in the general rating formula are associated with objectively observable symptomatology, and "a veteran may only qualify for a given disability rating under § 4.130 by demonstrating the particular symptoms associated with that percentage, or others of similar severity, frequency, and duration."  Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 117 (Fed. Cir. 2013). 

Further, "§ 4.130 requires not only the presence of certain symptoms but also that those symptoms have caused occupational and social impairment in most of the referenced areas." Thus, "[a]lthough the veteran's symptomatology is the primary consideration, the regulation also requires an ultimate factual conclusion as to the veteran's level of impairment in 'most areas.'"  Id. at 118.

As such, the Board will consider both the Veteran's specific symptomatology as well as the occupational and social impairment associated with the rating code to determine whether an increased evaluation is warranted.

Turning to the evidence, the record reflects that the Veteran provided a statement in June 2019 describing his mental health symptoms.  He described depression and anxiety resulting from his service-connected Behcet's Syndrome.  He specifically described constantly depressed as he could not work due to Behcet's and that his family did not understand why he could not be normal.  He was constantly sick due to Behcet's flares, and unable to do things he loved to do, physically, personally, and vocationally.  The Veteran described ruining family vacations when he became sick.  He described being in constant internal pain with his pain medication making him drowsy, dizzy, and having poor concentration, and that he is unable to drive.

The Veteran participated in mental health treating in the VA clinic setting in May 2019.  He stated that his mood was stable at that time with mildly irritability and anxiety, sleep impairment and feeling hungry.  During the appointment, screening protocols were administered to the Veteran.  On a suicide risk assessment, the Veteran was judged as low risk after denying suicidal thoughts and behavior.  On a mental status exam, the Veteran was assessed as being alert, oriented, and casual in grooming.  His speech was normal in rate, rhythm, and clarity.  His psychomotor behavior was normal to chronically mildly fast, with no abnormal movements.  The Veteran's thought flow was coherent and linear, although fast, and thought content was negative for hallucinations or delusions.  His affect was mostly fairly bright with a little irritation.  On a depression screening, the Veteran was assessed with moderate depression.  Cognitively, the Veteran's memory was intact and he was attentive.  Insight and judgment were assessed as moderate.

In August 2019, the Veteran returned to the clinic for mental health treatment.  He presented with similar complaints of being mildly irritable and anxious, having some sleep issues, and feeling hungry a lot.  The Veteran reported reexperiencing symptoms related to witnessing a sexual assault.  He was also upset about erectile dysfunction which may have caused his bad mood.  Screening protocols were again administered to the Veteran.  On the suicide risk assessment, the Veteran was judged as low risk after denying suicidal thoughts and behavior.  On the mental status exam, the Veteran's grooming was normal and he was cooperative, although the examiner had difficulty getting the Veteran to focus on important questions.  The Veteran was oriented, with speech normal in rate, rhythm, and clarity.  His psychomotor behavior was normal, with no abnormal movements.  The Veteran's though flow was coherent and linear, and thought content was negative for hallucinations or delusions.  He did express concern about erectile dysfunction and his affect was low as a result.  Cognitively, the Veteran had no complaints about memory or attention.  He had little insight and judgment.  

The Veteran was afforded a VA mental disorders examination in October 2019.  He was diagnosed with PTSD due to childhood trauma and unspecified depressive disorder with anxious distress due to a medical condition (Behcet's Syndrome).  The examiner summarized the Veteran's mental health disorder as causing occupational and social impairment due to mild or transient symptoms which decrease work efficiency and ability to perform occupational tasks only during periods of significant stress; or, symptoms controlled by medication.

At the time of the examination, the Veteran reported living with his wife and one of her children.  He had three children from prior marriages but did not have contact with them.  The Veteran completed high school and then served in the Army as a mechanic and construction operator.  Following service, he worked until 2011 when he became disabled as a result of Behcet's Syndrome.

At the examination, the Veteran also discussed the following symptoms.  He stated that he always had anxiety, but denied panic attacks.  The Veteran reported that depression has always been a part of his life.  He noted suffering from sleep apnea and poor sleep.  He reported that his appetite was fine and that he loved to eat.  He has difficulty with concentration and his mind wanders.  Regarding his mood, the Veteran reported that he "snaps a lot."  He stated that his energy level was weak.  He socialized on a limited basis, mostly with family, but had no contact with his children.  The Veteran enjoyed music and computer work.  Current stressors involved finances, issues with an ex-wife, and medical/physical problems.  The Veteran denied homicidal ideation.  He admitted to suicidal thoughts on and off for many years, but denied being currently suicidal.  

The clinician found that the Veteran exhibited the following symptoms: depressed mood, anxiety, chronic sleep impairment, disturbances of motivation and mood, and inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.

The examiner made the following behavioral observations about the Veteran: he was casually dressed and mildly disheveled.  His affect was initially calm and engaging, but became more intense as they talked.  The Veteran was oriented to person, place, time, and situation.  His thought processes were rambling and tangential.  He had no perceptual disturbances.  His voice and speech were mildly pressured at times.  He displayed likely average intelligence.  The clinician did not observe any psychomotor agitation nor retardation.  The Veteran's memory was generally intact.

Here, the AOJ awarded a 50 percent rating for service-connected unspecified depressive disorder effective to the date of the May 15, 2019, claim.  The Veteran's attorney has argued for entitlement to at least a 70 percent rating for the entire appeal period and that the Veteran has demonstrated examples commensurate with a 70 percent rating: suicidal ideation, impaired impulse control, and inability to maintain relationships.

In carefully reviewing the evidentiary record, the Board finds that during the appeal period the Veteran had varying symptoms of depressed mood, anxiety, irritability, chronic sleep impairment, concentration difficulties, decreased energy level, disturbances of motivation and mood, and an inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.  The Board observes that the Veteran holds more than one acquired psychiatric disorder diagnosis, and attributes all psychiatric signs, symptoms and functional impairment due to the service-connected acquired psychiatric disorder.  See Mittleider v. West, 11 Vet. App. 181 (1998).

Regarding the contention that the Veteran has demonstrated the example for a 70 percent rating for suicidal ideation, the Board recognizes the Veteran's history of intermittent suicidal ideation.  He admitted to suicidal thoughts on and off for many years at the October 2019 VA examination, although he denied being currently suicidal.  Thus, one example for a 70 percent rating is met.  

As to the argument that the Veteran has demonstrated the example for a 70 percent rating for impaired impulse control, the Board finds that the Veteran does not approximate this behavior.  The specific example in the 70 percent rating criteria includes additional descriptive language: "impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence)."  The Board notes that the word "violence" is not specifically defined in the regulation.  As such, it is presumed that VA regulations employ words according to their ordinary dictionary readings at the time the regulations were promulgated.  Moody v. Wilkie, 30 Vet. App. 329, 336 (2018).  In the context of medical definitions, the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims has found it appropriate to refer to definitions in the Merriam-Webster dictionary.  See, e.g., Holmes v. Wilkie, 33 Vet. App. 67, 71 (2020).  Accordingly, the Board will employ the Merriam-Webster dictionary meaning for violence, which is defined as the use of physical force so as to injure, abuse, damage or destroy.  www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/violence.  

The evidence reflects the Veteran is often irritable.  In May 2019, the Veteran's insight and judgment were assessed as moderate. In August 2019, he had little insight and judgement.  At the October 2019 VA examination, the Veteran reported that he "snaps a lot."  Behaviorally, his thought processes, communication, and orientation to time and place were not impaired.  The Board finds that the Veteran's reports of irritability do not rise to the frequency and severity that more nearly approximates impaired impulse control or unprovoked irritability with periods of violence.  The record is silent for any violence committed or threatened by the Veteran during the appeal period.

Finally, the Board will address the argument that the Veteran has demonstrated the example for a 70 percent rating for an inability to maintain effective relationships.  The Board acknowledges that the Veteran is unemployed and has been awarded TDIU during the appeal period.  The Veteran specifically identified his Behcet's disease and the effects of medications as causing his unemployability.  See generally VA Form 8940 received June 2019.  However, in his personal capacity, the Veteran was married and resided with his wife and one of her children.  While he reported that he had no contact with his own children, he does socialize on a limited basis, mostly with family.  Overall, the Veteran had some capability of establishing and maintaining effective relationships.

Within these examples, the Board must analyze the frequency, severity and duration of these symptoms and how they impact the Veteran's occupational and social functioning.  Here, the Board has an expert medication opinion for review.  The probative value of a medical opinion is based, in part, on whether the examiner relied upon an accurate factual predicate.  Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 301 (2008); Reonal v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 458 (1993).  The Board is the ultimate fact finder on matters which do not require medical training.  See generally Kahana v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 428 (2011).

The Board places significant probative weight on the opinion of the 2019 VA examiner who, after reviewing the claims folder, the Veteran's description of symptoms (including their frequency, severity and duration), and mental status examination, relied upon his own psychiatric expertise and experience in evaluating the Veteran's overall occupational and social impairment.  This expert considered all symptoms, including those which meet or demonstrate some examples listed as supporting a 70 percent rating.  The Board finds that this opinion is consistent with behavioral observations by VA psychologists in the clinical setting.  The 2019 examiner opinion is persuasive evidence against a rating in excess of 50 percent for any time during the appeal period.

To the extent that the evidence of record documents symptoms included in the individual rating criteria for a 70 percent rating during the appeal period, the Board finds that such symptoms have not been of sufficient frequency, severity, and duration to have resulted in overall impairment to the required level of severity so as to warrant a rating in excess of 70 percent during the appeal period.  The expert medical opinion is persuasive evidence against this claim.

Finally, the Board also finds the frequency, severity, and duration of the Veteran's mental health disorder symptoms do not more closely approximate a 100 percent rating for total occupational and social impairment at any point during the appeal period.  A 100 percent rating requires "total" occupational and social impairment.  The Board notes that the words "total" and "persistent" are not specifically defined in the regulation.  The word "total" is defined as "absolute, utter."  https://merriam-webster.com/dictionary/total.  The word "persistent" is defined as "continuing to exist despite interference or treatment."  www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/persistent.  Here, while the lay and medical evidence shows some occupational and social impairment, the evidence does not demonstrate symptoms that have caused absolute - or total - occupational and social impairment in most of the referenced areas for the 100 percent disability rating.  

Therefore, the Board finds that a rating in excess of 50 percent during the appeal period is not warranted.  There is no further doubt of material fact to be resolved in the Veteran's favor.

1.	SMC under 38 U.S.C. § 1114(s)

The Veteran's attorney has specifically raised the issue of entitlement to SMC under 38 U.S.C. § 1114(s), which is currently in effect since June 17, 2019.  This is due to Bechet's Syndrome being recognized as the sole cause for unemployability, and additional service-connected disability since June 17, 2019, independently ratable as 60 percent disabling.  The claim for SMC under 38 U.S.C. § 1114(s), prior to June 17, 2019, is predicated on the argument that the Veteran is entitled to a 70 percent rating for his acquired psychiatric disorder.  That claim is denied above, and the Board finds that the criteria for entitlement to SMC under 38 U.S.C. § 1114(s), prior to June 17, 2019, have not been met.

 

T. MAINELLI

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	A. Estes

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.