Citation Nr: A25034562
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 231207-398807
DATE: April 15, 2025

ORDER

For the increase rating period from June 21, 2023, a disability rating in excess of 50 percent for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is denied.

FINDING OF FACT

For the increase rating period from June 21, 2023, the severity, frequency, and duration of the symptoms of the service-connected PTSD have not approximated occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

For the increase rating period from June 21, 2023, the criteria for a disability rating in excess of 50 percent for PTSD have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5103(a), 5103A, 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.321, 4.3, 4.7, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran, who is the Appellant, served on active duty September 2017 to February 2021.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a November 2023 rating decision from the Regional Office (RO).  In the December 2023 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement (NOD)), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket; therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the November 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

The Veteran appealed the proposed reduction of the disability rating for PTSD from 50 to 0 percent in the November 2023 rating decision.  A review of the record shows that a March 2024 rating decision reduced the disability rating for PTSD to 0 percent effective June 1, 2024; however, an August 2024 rating decision subsequently restored a 50 percent rating for PTSD, rendering moot the question of the appropriateness of the reduction to 0 percent and the question of restoration of 50 percent rating.  The questions of restoration of a reduced issue and increased rating are separate rating questions; an appeal for restoration of a reduced rating is not a claim for increase.  In this case, however, the Veteran filed a claim for increased rating for PTSD in June 2023.  The Veteran has not expressed satisfaction with the assigned 50 percent rating; therefore, the question of an increased rating in excess of 50 percent remains on appeal before the Board.     

The Board finds that the duties to notify and assist in this case have been fulfilled.  Neither the Veteran nor the evidence has raised any specific contentions regarding the duties to notify or assist.

Disability Rating Criteria

Disability ratings are determined by applying the criteria set forth in the VA Schedule for Rating Disabilities (Rating Schedule) found in 38 C.F.R. Part 4. 38 U.S.C. § 1155.  It is not expected that all cases will show all the findings specified; however, findings sufficiently characteristic to identify the disease and the disability therefrom and coordination of rating with impairment of function will be expected in all instances.  38 C.F.R. § 4.21.

Where there is a question as to which of two disability ratings shall be applied, the higher rating will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating. Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7.  It is the defined and consistently applied policy of VA to administer the law under a broad interpretation, consistent, however, with the facts shown in every case.  When after careful consideration of all procurable and assembled data, a reasonable doubt arises regarding the degree of disability such doubt will be resolved in favor of the claimant.  38 C.F.R. § 4.3.

Where an increase in an existing disability rating based on established entitlement to compensation is at issue, the present level of disability is of primary concern. Francisco v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 55, 58 (1994).  The relevant temporal focus for adjudicating an increased rating claim is on the evidence concerning the state of the disability from the time period one year before the claim was filed until VA makes a final decision on the claim.  Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007).

In general, all disabilities, including those arising from a single disease entity, are rated separately, and all disability ratings are then combined in accordance with 38 C.F.R. § 4.25.  Pyramiding, the rating of the same disability, or the same manifestation of a disability, under different diagnostic codes, is to be avoided when rating a veteran's service-connected disabilities.  38 C.F.R. § 4.14.  It is possible for a veteran to have separate and distinct manifestations from the same injury which would permit rating under several diagnostic codes; however, the critical element in permitting the assignment of several ratings under various diagnostic codes is that none of the symptomatology for any one of the conditions is duplicative or overlapping with the symptomatology of the other condition.  Esteban v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 259, 261-62 (1994); Lyles v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 107 (2017) (holding that 38 C.F.R. § 4.14 prohibits compensating a veteran twice for the same symptoms or functional impairment).

When an unlisted condition is encountered, it will be permissible to rate under a closely related disease or injury in which not only the functions affected, but the anatomical localization and symptomatology are closely analogous.  Conjectural analogies will be avoided, as will the use of analogous ratings for conditions of doubtful diagnosis, or for those not fully supported by clinical and laboratory findings.  Nor will ratings assigned to organic diseases and injuries be assigned by analogy to conditions of functional origin.  38 C.F.R. § 4.20.

General Rating for Mental Disorders

Pertinent to this case, the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders provides that a 50 percent rating will be assigned for a mental disability which is productive of occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to symptoms such as flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks occurring more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short- and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material or forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships.  38 C.F.R. § 4.130.

A 70 percent rating will be assigned for occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood due to symptoms such as suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant speech; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a work-like setting); and an inability to establish and maintain effective relationships. Id.

A 100 percent rating will be assigned for total occupational and social impairment due to symptoms such as gross impairment in thought processes or communication, persistent delusions or hallucinations, grossly inappropriate behavior, a persistent danger of hurting herself or others, an intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene), disorientation to time or place, and memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name.  Id.

In this decision, the Board considered the rating criteria in the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders not as an exhaustive list of symptoms, but as examples of the type and degree of the symptoms, or effects, that would justify a particular rating. The Board has considered the symptoms indicated in the rating criteria as examples of symptoms "like or similar to" the Veteran's PTSD symptoms in determining the appropriate schedular rating assignment and has not required the presence of a specified quantity of symptoms in the Rating Schedule to warrant the assigned rating for major depressive disorder.  See Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436 (2002).

Considerations in evaluating a mental disorder include the frequency, severity, and duration of psychiatric symptoms, the length of remissions, and a veteran's capacity for adjustment during periods of remission.  The evaluation must be based on all evidence of record that bears on occupational and social impairment rather than solely on an examiner's assessment of the level of disability at the moment of the examination.  38 C.F.R. § 4.126 (a).  Although the extent of social impairment is a consideration in determining the level of disability, the rating may not be assigned solely on the basis of social impairment.  38 C.F.R. § 4.126 (b).

The Secretary of VA, acting within his authority to adopt and apply a schedule of ratings, chose to create one general rating formula for mental disorders.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; see 38 U.S.C. § 501; 38 C.F.R. § 4.130.  By establishing one general formula to be used in rating more than 30 psychiatric disorders, there can be no doubt that the Secretary of VA anticipated that any list of symptoms justifying a particular rating would in many situations be either under- or over-inclusive.  The Secretary's use of the phrase "such symptoms as," followed by a list of examples, provides guidance as to the severity of symptoms contemplated for each rating, in addition to permitting consideration of other symptoms, particular to each veteran and disorder, and the effect of those symptoms on the claimant's social and work situation.  This construction is not inconsistent with Cohen v. Brown, 10 Vet. App. 128 (1997).  See Mauerhan, 16 Vet. App. at 442.  

The evidence considered in determining the level of impairment under 38 C.F.R. § 4.130 is not restricted to the symptoms provided in the diagnostic code.  Instead, the rating specialist is to consider all symptoms of a claimant's condition that affect the level of occupational and social impairment, including, if applicable, those identified in the American Psychiatric Association's Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM-V).  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.126.  If the evidence demonstrates that a claimant suffers symptoms or effects that cause occupational or social impairment equivalent to what would be caused by the symptoms listed in the diagnostic code, the appropriate, equivalent rating will be assigned.  The schedular rating criteria rate by analogy psychiatric symptoms that are "like or similar to" those explicitly listed in the schedular rating criteria.  Mauerhan at 443.  The Federal Circuit has embraced the Mauerhan interpretation of the criteria for rating psychiatric disabilities. Sellers v. Principi, 372 F.3d 1318, 1326 (Fed. Cir. 2004).  

In Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 117 (2013), the Federal Circuit held that VA "intended the General Rating Formula to provide a regulatory framework for placing veterans on a disability spectrum based upon their objectively observable symptoms." The Federal Circuit stated that "a veteran may only qualify for a given disability rating under § 4.130 by demonstrating the particular symptoms associated with that percentage, or others of similar severity, frequency, and duration." It was further noted that "§ 4.130 requires not only the presence of certain symptoms but also that those symptoms have caused occupational and social impairment in most of the referenced areas.

Rating PTSD from June 21, 2023

The service-connected PTSD is rated 50 percent under Diagnostic Code 9411 for the entire increased rating period on appeal from June 21, 2023.  38 CFR § 4.130.  The Veteran has claimed an increased rating in excess of 50 percent.

After a review of all the evidence, both lay and medical, the Board finds that for the rating period from June 21, 2023 to present the severity, frequency, and duration of the symptoms of the service-connected PTSD have not approximated occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, as required for a higher 70 percent rating.

VA treatment records show some reported symptoms but no treatment the service-connected PTSD during the rating period.  The evidence shows that, when the Veteran presented for a new patient appointment in July 2022, he endorsed some mild PTSD symptoms, such as insomnia, and feeling on edge, but he denied any suicidal or homicidal ideation.  The depression screening in July 2022 was also negative for little interest or pleasure in doing things and feeling down, depressed, or hopeless, and the Veteran declined a mental health consultation at that time.  In November 2022, the Veteran requested a consultation to mental health due to increased anxiety, PTSD, and nightmares.  During a subsequent May 2023 encounter with the primary care clinic, the Veteran continued to endorse some anxiety and insomnia, but he again declined any mental health intervention, including counseling, a mental health consultation, or psychotropic medications.  See July 2022, November 2022, May 2023 VA Treatment Records.   

At a VA examination in November 2023, the Veteran reported that he gets annoyed with people and has a short fuse, reporting that he argues with his wife a lot and describing his attitude as a "ticking timebomb."  He denied any emotional or verbal abuse or physically aggressive behavior towards his spouse or others.  The Veteran generally described his familial relationships as "pretty good" and reported having a few friends that he talks to every other month.  The Veteran denied any social or physical activities since he left service and reported that his primary interest outside work is spending time with his family.  The Veteran endorsed persistent insomnia due to worsening nightmares, and denied any suicidal or homicidal ideation, legal or behavioral issues, or mental health treatment, noting that his priority was to go to work and take care of his family.  The Veteran reported that a typical day for him includes preparing bottles for his baby in the morning, assisting his school age child in getting ready before dropping the child off at school, going to work as a fiberoptic installer for AT&T, and eating dinner and helping with the baby upon returning home from work.  See November 2023 VA Examination Report.

The VA examiner in November 2023 observed the Veteran to be fully oriented, appropriately groomed, and polite and respectful with no overt signs of psychosis.  Attention and speech were within normal limits.  In describing his mood, the Veteran reported "like a robot, I am here to take care of my family and that is it."  Affect was limited in range and intensity congruent with reported mood.  Memory, impulse control, judgment, and overall cognition were intact and within normal limits.  The Veteran exhibited linear and goal directed thought processes, and no evidence of abnormal thought content, such as obsessional rituals, delusions, hallucinations, or other perceptual disturbances. 

The evidence as a whole as it bears on the relevant increased rating period indicates that the Veteran has endorsed symptoms of PTSD such as anxiety and nightmares with insomnia and feeling on edge at times, noting that he gets annoyed and has a short fuse, so he gets into arguments with his wife frequently.  However, the Veteran denied problems with verbal abuse or physical aggression towards others, and he denied any history of domestic violence or being the subject of any disciplinary actions.  The Veteran described his familial and social relationships as good overall, and while he denies may social interests outside of spending time with his family, he reported maintaining employment to take care of his family and did not indicate any significant job performance issues due to his psychiatric symptoms.  

Overall, the lay and medical evidence reflects that during the relevant rating period the service-connected PTSD has manifested as symptoms that are like or similar to anxiety, chronic sleep impairment, disturbance of mood or motivation, flattened affect, and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective social or work relationships, which are all contemplated by the currently assigned 50 disability rating.  Despite the psychiatric symptoms, the Veteran has consistently declined mental health counseling or treatment, and the evidence does not reflect that the Veteran has mentally decompensated or required psychiatric hospitalization despite the ongoing anxiety, insomnia, and irritability, and in the absence of treatment.  The record does not suggest that the Veteran's mental health has increased in severity during the relevant rating period.  For these reasons, the persuasive weight of the evidence is against a rating in excess of 50 percent for the service-connected PTSD for the rating period from June 21, 2023.  See 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411.   

 

 

J. PARKER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Moore, S.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.