Citation Nr: A25034846
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 210809-209528
DATE: April 15, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to Veteran Readiness and Employment (VR&E) benefits pursuant to 38 U.S.C. Chapter 31 is denied.

FINDING OF FACT

The severity of the Veteran's service-connected disabilities, especially his service-connected posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), render achievement of a vocational goal infeasible.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

During the period on appeal, the Veteran's achievement of a vocational goal is not reasonably feasible for the purpose of VR&E benefits; the criteria for entitlement to VR&E benefits are not met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 3100, 3101, 3102, 3106; 38 C.F.R. §§ 21.35, 21.40, 21.50, 21.53, 21.70.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Coast Guard from June 1967 to June 1971.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a June 23, 2021, decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Vocational Rehabilitation Counselor (VRC).

In an August 2021 VA Form 10182 Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Board hearing docket under the modernized appeal review system ("AMA").

The Veteran testified at a Board hearing before the undersigned Veterans Law Judge (VLJ) in June 2024.  A transcript of that hearing has been associated with the record and reviewed prior to issuing this decision.

Beyond the above, the Board notes that the Veteran is currently service-connected for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), rated 70 percent disabling from April 14, 2017, and 100 percent disabling from January 5, 2021; and for tinnitus, rated 10 percent disabling from May 11, 2015.  He has a 10 percent combined disability rating from May 11, 2015, a 70 percent combined disability rating from April 14, 2017, and a 100 percent combined disability rating from January 5, 2021.

Entitlement to VR&E benefits pursuant to 38 U.S.C. Chapter 31.

The Veteran is seeking entitlement to VR&E benefits pursuant to 38 U.S.C. Chapter 31.

When the Veteran initially applied for VR&E benefits in May 2021, he had already been accepted into the graduate degree program at Concordia University Irvine (CUI) and was planning to pursue a Master's degree in Coaching and Athletics Administration (MCAA).  In his May 2021 VA Form 28-1902w, Rehabilitation Needs Inventory (RNI), the Veteran indicated that he was applying for VR&E benefits to pay for that education.

The Veteran was evaluated by a VRC in June 2021.  The VRC performed a comprehensive assessment of the Veteran's service-connected and nonservice-connected disabilities and reviewed the Veteran's prior education, work history, and transferrable skills.  The VRC opined that the Veteran had a serious employment handicap for VR&E purposes on the basis that the Veteran's service-connected disabilities resulted in a significant impairment of the ability to prepare for, obtain, or maintain employment in an occupation consistent with his abilities, aptitudes, and interests.  See June 21, 2021, VA Form 28-1902b, Counseling Record - Narrative Report.  Nevertheless, the VRC also found that the Veteran's achievement of a vocational goal was not currently reasonably feasible.  See June 21, 2021, VA Form 28-1902f, Feasibility Determination - Narrative Report.

On June 23, 2021, the VRC issued a decision letter informing the Veteran that he did not meet the criteria for VR&E benefits because it was not reasonably feasible for the Veteran to achieve his vocational goal.  See 38 C.F.R. § 21.53.

On August 9, 2021, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 10182 and appealed the VRC's June 2021 decision.

The Veteran's case is now before the Board for appellate review.

The purpose of VA's rehabilitation program is to provide for services and assistance necessary to enable veterans with service-connected disabilities to achieve independence in daily living and, to the extent possible, become employable and obtain and maintain suitable employment.  38 U.S.C. § 3101; 38 C.F.R. §§ 21.1, 21.70.

In the instant case, the Veteran's basic entitlement to VR&E services is not at issue.  When the Veteran applied for VR&E benefits, he had two service-connected disabilities: (1) posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) rated 70 percent disabling from April 14, 2017, and 100 percent disabling from January 5, 2021; and (2) tinnitus rated 10 percent disabling from May 11, 2015.  He had a 10 percent combined disability rating from May 11, 2015, a 70 percent combined disability rating from April 14, 2017, and a 100 percent combined disability rating from January 5, 2021.  His nonservice-connected disabilities consisted of bilateral hearing loss associated with tinnitus.  As noted above, the VRC appropriately found that the Veteran had a serious employment handicap for VR&E purposes.  See June 21, 2021, VA Form 28-1902b, Counseling Record - Narrative Report. 

In each case in which a veteran has either an employment handicap or a serious employment handicap, VA will also determine the reasonable feasibility of achieving a vocational goal.  38 C.F.R. § 21.53.

Given that the Veteran clearly had a serious employment handicap when he applied for VR&E benefits, the central inquiry in this appeal is whether achievement of the Veteran's desired vocational goal was "reasonably feasible" during the period on appeal.  See 38 C.F.R. §§ 21.35 (h), 21.50(b)(3), 21.53(d).  

A "vocational goal" is defined as gainful employment consistent with a veteran's abilities, aptitudes, and interests. 38 U.S.C. §§ 3101(8), 3106(a); 38 C.F.R. §§ 21.50, 21.53.

A vocational goal is "reasonably feasible" when the following criteria are met: (1) the vocational goal must be identified; (2) the veteran's physical and mental conditions must permit training to begin within a reasonable period; and (3) the veteran must possess the necessary educational skills and background to pursue the goal or will be provided services by VA to develop such necessary educational skills as part of the program.  38 C.F.R. § 21.53(d).

The phrase "achievement of a vocational goal is reasonably feasible" means that the effects of the Veteran's disabilities (service and nonservice-connected), when considered in relation to the veteran's circumstances, do not prevent him from successfully pursuing a vocational rehabilitation program and successfully becoming gainfully employed in an occupation consistent with the Veteran's abilities, aptitudes, and interests.  38 C.F.R. § 21.35(h).

By contrast, the phrase "achievement of a vocational goal is not currently reasonably feasible" means that the effects of the Veteran's disabilities (service and nonservice-connected), when considered in relation to the veteran's circumstances at the time of the determination: (i) prevent the Veteran from successfully achieving a vocational goal at that time; or, (ii) are expected to worsen within the period needed to achieve a vocational goal and which would, therefore, make achievement not reasonably feasible.  Id.

Any reasonable doubt as to feasibility will be resolved in the veteran's favor. 38 C.F.R. § 21.57(c)(1).

The Board has considered all relevant evidence of record and finds that the evidence generally demonstrates that, at the time of the VRC's feasibility determination, the Veteran's service-connected PTSD was of such severity that it prevented him from being able to achieve his vocational goal of becoming gainfully employed as a fly-fishing instructor.  38 C.F.R. § 21.35(h).

In the June 2021 Feasibility Determination - Narrative Report, the VRC found that the Veteran's worsening conditions rendered any vocational goal unfeasible.  Specifically, the VRC opined that the Veteran was not medically stable and that he had not maintained steady employment since 1995.  The VRC opined that the Veteran's efficiency and productivity would likely be hampered by concentration and memory impairments and fatigue caused by sleep disturbance and poor stress management.  The VRC also indicated that the Veteran's ability to establish and maintain interpersonal relationships would be impacted negatively by concentration impairments, social isolation, estrangement from others, and easy irritability.  In support, the VRC noted that the Veteran had been afforded a VA psychiatric examination in January 2021 and that the VA examiner had made the following observations in the corresponding examination report:

"[The] Veteran noted continued memory and concentration impairments; he noted difficulties 'organizing thoughts' and 'trying to express [his] ideas.'  [The Veteran], because of significant concentration impairments, likely would have moderate to severe impairments in attaining employment.  Were he to gain employment, he likely would have moderate to severe impairments in sustaining that employment.  [The Veteran's] efficiency and productivity likely would be hampered by concentration and memory impairments, fatigue caused by sleep disturbances, and poor stress management.  His ability to establish and maintain interpersonal relationships would be impacted negatively by concentration impairments, social isolation and estrangement from others, and easy irritability."

The VRC also noted that the Veteran had received psychotherapy from Dr. D.P.F. and that Dr. D.P.F. had opined that the Veteran's "PTSD, social phobia, and generalized anxiety disorder...[resulted in] permanent and total unemployability."  The VRC also noted Dr. D.P.F.'s opinion that "[a]t present, and for the next many years, [the Veteran] with his service-connected disabilities would not be able to work in a sedentary or physical capacity and satisfy the expectations of an employer."

The VRC opined that having a Master's degree was not required for an occupation as a fly-fishing instructor.  After conducting labor market research and consulting Fly Fishers International.org, MasterFlyCasting.com, Onetonline.org, and fly-fishing instructors and coaches, the VRC indicated that a fly-fishing instructor would need to be able to provide direct customer service to customers, to include demonstrating strong social and technical skills, the ability to communicate effectively, the ability to express ideas clearly, the ability to work one-on-one or in groups, and the ability to resolve problems, answer questions, and cater to students needs to ensure customer satisfaction.  The VRC also noted that a fly-fishing instructor would need to be able to select and use instructional methods and procedure appropriate for the situation; the ability to communicate information and ideas so that others will understand; the ability to establish and maintain interpersonal relationships; and the ability to work with others through constant contact.  Based on her review of the claims file and interview with the Veteran, the VRC opined, "It is clearly documented in the Veteran's medical information that he has impairments in concentration, memory, impaired abstract thinking...[and his symptoms include] anxiety, [being] easily irritated, [having] angry outbursts, [] difficulty understanding complex commands, difficulty communicating, disturbance in motivation and mood, panic attacks, and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships."  The VRC concluded that   achievement of [a] vocational goal is not currently reasonably feasible" for this particular Veteran.  As a final matter, the VRC noted that the Veteran did not have any independent living needs.

The Board finds that the VRC conducted a thorough evaluation of the Veteran's service-connected disabilities within the context of his ability to obtain and maintain suitable employment consistent with his aptitudes, interests, and abilities. The VRC found that the Veteran's achievement of the vocational goal of becoming a fly-fishing instructor was not reasonably feasible due to the severity of his service-connected PTSD.  As noted above, the VRC opined that the Veteran's efficiency and productivity would likely be hampered by concentration and memory impairments and fatigue caused by sleep disturbance and poor stress management and that his ability to establish and maintain interpersonal relationships would be impacted negatively by concentration impairments, social isolation, estrangement from others, and easy irritability.  Citing relevant medical evidence, the VRC asserted that the Veteran's service-connected PTSD, when considered in relation to his circumstances, would likely prevent him from being able to maintain gainful employment as a fly-fishing instructor.

The Board notes that the VRC is an expert in the field, competent to attest to the Veteran's employment prospects in the current environment and there is no indication in the record that the VRC is not credible or that the VRC provided the Veteran with an inadequate vocational assessment.  As a general matter, a competent, informed, and responsive expert opinion is probative.  See generally Guerrieri v. Brown, 4 Vet. App. 467, 473 (1993) ("the probative value of medical opinion evidence is based on the medical expert's personal examination of the patient, the expert's knowledge and skill in analyzing the data, and the medical conclusion the expert reaches....[and] [a]s is true with any piece of evidence, the credibility and weight to be attached to these opinions [are] within the province of the [Board as] adjudicators...."); Wray v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 488, 493 (1995) (holding that the adoption of an expert medical opinion may satisfy the Board's statutory requirement of an adequate statement of reasons and bases if the expert fairly considered the material evidence seemingly supporting the veteran's position).  The Board considers it significant that the VRC has extensive specialized training in vocational rehabilitation.  As such, the Board affords the VRC's opinion significant probative weight.  Ultimately, the evidence of record in this case suggests that any employment, and specifically employment in the field of fly-fishing instruction, is neither feasible nor suitable for the Veteran.

Additionally, the Board finds that the VRC's assessment is consistent with the evidence of record, especially as it pertains to the significant impact and functional impairment caused by the Veteran's service-connected PTSD.  In that regard, the Veteran's private doctor, Dr. D.P.F., provided a statement in December 2020 indicating that the Veteran's psychiatric disorder resulted in permanent and total unemployability and that "[a]t present, and for the next many years, [the Veteran] with his service-connected disabilities would not be able to work in a sedentary or physical capacity and satisfy the expectations of an employer."

Similarly, the Veteran was afforded a VA psychiatric examination in January 2021, approximately four months before he applied for VR&E benefits.  The VA examiner who conducted that examination found that the Veteran's service-connected PTSD was manifested by anxiety, suspiciousness, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss, impaired abstract thinking, difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work-like environment, and the inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.  The VA examiner also observed the following:

[The Veteran] earned a college degree; he reported memory and concentration impairments and noted, "I was labeled all the way there, and that label you don't get rid of."  [The Veteran], because of failing classes, took "a lot of extra courses."  He added, "College was tough for me because none of this was recognized.  I didn't get any cooperation."  [The Veteran] has not worked steadily since the 1990s.  He worked in advertising.  He was "very trusted" by superiors and "penalized" for doing well; co-workers would be told, "Give it to that guy.  He'll get it done."  Because of memory and concentration impairments, [the Veteran] worked overtime regularly to complete assignments by deadlines.  Co-workers did not work well with [the Veteran], who explained, "There were a lot of people, they would not want          to cooperate with me...I couldn't sit there with dumb-dumbs."  [The Veteran] quit after several years; he explained, "It was a tough situation for me, and it was getting harder...I just couldn't keep up with the stress, the writings."   

...

He noted continued memory and concentration impairments; he noted difficulties "organizing thoughts" and "trying to express [his] ideas."  [The Veteran], because of significant concentration impairments, likely would have moderate to severe impairments in attaining employment.  Were he to gain employment, he likely would have moderate to severe impairments in sustaining that employment.  [The Veteran's] efficiency and productivity likely would be hampered by concentration and memory impairments, fatigue caused by sleep disturbances, and poor stress management.  His ability to establish and maintain interpersonal relationships would be impacted negatively by concentration impairments, social isolation and estrangement from others, and easy irritability.

The examiner ultimately concluded that the Veteran's symptoms resulted in "total occupational and social impairment."

The January 2021 VA examiner's findings are highly probative because they are supported by rationale and provided by a trained medical professional.  Accordingly, the VA examiner's findings carry significant weight and probative value insofar as they provide context for the severity of the Veteran's PTSD symptomatology and disability picture during the period on appeal.  Among the factors for assessing the probative value of a medical opinion are the VA examiner's access to the claims file and the thoroughness and detail of the opinion. Hayes v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 60 (1993) (it is the responsibility of the Board to assess the credibility of and weight to be given to the evidence); Wood v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 190 (1992).  The probative value of medical evidence is also based on the examiner's knowledge and skill in analyzing the data and the medical conclusion reached; as is true of any evidence, the credibility and weight to be attached to medical opinions are within the province of the Board.  Guerrieri, 4 Vet. App. at 473.

The Board has considered the Veteran's statements and Board hearing testimony.  Notably, the Veteran's own statements and testimony reflect the Veteran's understanding that his PTSD symptoms significantly impair his ability to obtain and maintain suitable employment.  During the June 2024 Board hearing, the undersigned noted that the Veteran's PTSD was rated 100 percent disabling due to  his symptoms causing total occupational impairment.  The undersigned also noted that the finding of "total occupational impairment" generally contradicted any evidence demonstrating that achievement of a vocational goal was reasonably feasible.  In response, the Veteran stated, "I understand what you're saying, but it seems odd that, that they'd want to restrict you having the opportunity to at least address some of those issues and improve them.  It doesn't mean that you're going to, you know, come out of it and not be any better, but, I mean, it adds to the quality of what you're dealing with."  The Board acknowledges that having a 100 percent disability rating for a psychiatric disorder does not prevent the Veteran from being able to pursue additional training through the VR&E program.  Nevertheless, the Board finds that the severity of the Veteran's service-connected PTSD does provide probative evidence on the issue of feasibility.  Namely, a 100 percent disability rating calls into question whether the Veteran is truly capable of obtaining and maintaining suitable employment (regardless of whether that employment is substantially gainful, meaningful, or not).  Moreover, a 100 percent disability evaluation indicates a severe problem, including (for example only) the inability to dress.  It indicates problems that would make work unlikely, in the extreme, including possible delusional behavior.  The VRC who evaluated the Veteran specifically found that the Veteran's PTSD, rated 100 percent disabling, impaired his concentration, memory, and abstract thinking and that his associated symptoms included anxiety, being easily irritated, having angry outbursts, difficulty understanding complex commands, difficulty communicating, disturbance in motivation and mood, panic attacks, and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships.  It is unclear how the Veteran could work with such rating. 

The Board commends him for having a goal that he believes he can achieve.  However, the Board finds that the totality of the evidence of record demonstrates that the Veteran's achievement of his desired vocational goal is not reasonably feasible due to the severity of his service-connected PTSD.  See 38 C.F.R. §§ 21.35 (h), 21.50(b)(3), 21.53(d).  During his June 2024 Board hearing, the Veteran testified that he believed that his vocational goal was feasible/doable.  He stated, "I think that through the course that I will, at the end offer something to society.  I mean, we don't know yet, but that might be.  I could be working as a park ranger up in Yellowstone or something like that.  Guiding you know, people and running classes on nature or something like that, the water."  Unfortunately, to the extent the Veteran believes he can achieve his vocational goal and obtain and maintain suitable employment as a fly-fishing instructor, the Veteran has not demonstrated the requisite expertise to determine vocational feasibility.  See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1376-1377 (Fed. Cir. 2007).  As such, the Board finds that such testimony is outweighed by the findings of the VRC assigned to the Veteran's case and the VA examiner who evaluated the Veteran's service-connected PTSD in January 2021.

In other words, the persuasive weight of the evidence is against finding that achievement of a vocational goal was reasonably feasible for this Veteran at any point during the period on appeal.  This is because the probative evidence of record demonstrates that the effects of the Veteran's service-connected disabilities, when considered in relation to his circumstances, would ultimately prevent him from becoming "gainfully employed" as a fly-fishing instructor.  

Even if the Board were to find that achievement of the Veteran's vocational goal was currently reasonably feasible, the Board remains unconvinced that a Master's degree would be necessary for the Veteran to become a fly-fishing instructor.  The Veteran acknowledged this during his June 2024 Board hearing.  The undersigned noted that, based on his testimony, it appeared that the Veteran was seeking a Master's degree to assist him with his healing process for his PTSD.  The Veteran noted that there were several fly-fishing instructor accreditation levels (e.g., bronze, silver, and gold) and that the Master's degree would enable him to provide advanced fly-fishing instruction within the community.  He indicated that he was currently at the "silver" skill level but that he was hoping to reach the "gold" skill level.  However, as noted above, the VRC who evaluated the Veteran also specifically opined that having a Master's degree was not required for an occupation as a fly-fishing instructor.  

While the Board does not doubt the Veteran's desire to work as a fly-fishing instructor, the Board finds that the evidence of record does not demonstrate that the Veteran needs a Master's degree to participate in the fly-fishing community.  During his June 2024 Board hearing, the Veteran even acknowledged that having a Master's degree was not a prerequisite of becoming a fly-fishing instructor.  Rather, the Veteran indicated that he wanted the Master's degree for therapeutic reasons and because he believed that it would ultimately help him achieve a higher accreditation level within the field of fly-fishing instruction.  The Board emphasizes that the purpose of VR&E services is to provide a level of training that facilitates suitable employment, not whatever level of training the Veteran desires. 38 C.F.R. § 21.70.  

Finally, the Board notes the Veteran's assertion that he was hospitalized for 5 weeks in 1973 with dyslexia and told he could do nothing.  To that end, the Veteran contends that the VA had a legal responsibility to support the Veteran or place him on a treatment plan.  It is unclear from the testimony what bearing his contention has on the current appeal.  Nevertheless, if the Veteran is seeking an additional VA benefit related to that treatment, he is encouraged to reach out to the appropriate VA Regional Office (RO).

The Board has considered the benefit of the doubt doctrine but finds that the record does not provide an approximate balance of negative and positive evidence on the merits.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); Lynch v. McDonough, 999 F.3d 1391 (Fed. Cir. 2021).  Therefore, after consideration of all the evidence, the Board agrees with the prior determination made by the VRC.  The evidence of record preponderates against the claim, and the Board concludes that the Veteran is not entitled to VR&E benefits under Chapter 31 because his vocational goal was not currently reasonably feasible during the period on appeal.  The claim on appeal is denied.  If the Veteran believes that his circumstances have changed (i.e., his service-connected PTSD has 

?

improved) such that he can complete the necessary training to obtain and maintain suitable employment, he is encouraged to reapply for VR&E benefits in the future.

 

M. C. GRAHAM

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Michael L. Marcum, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.