Citation Nr: A25034260
Decision Date: 04/14/25	Archive Date: 04/14/25

DOCKET NO. 210312-142340
DATE: April 14, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to special monthly compensation based on aid and attendance/housebound (for the purpose of entitlement to accrued benefits only) is granted.

Entitlement to service connection for left arm disability, to include as secondary to a service-connected disability, (for the purpose of entitlement to accrued benefits only) is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for sciatica right side, to include as secondary to a service-connected disability, (for the purpose of entitlement to accrued benefits only) is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran required regular aid and attendance due to his service-connected seizure disorder. 

2. The Veteran's claimed left arm disability did not have its clinical onset during active service and is not etiologically related to active service or any service-connected disability.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for entitlement to special monthly compensation based on aid and attendance (for the purpose of entitlement to accrued benefits only) have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1114, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.350, 3.352.

2. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for left arm disability (for the purpose of entitlement to accrued benefits only) have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served in the Army from February 1968 to February 1985. The Veteran died in January 2020. The Appellant is the Veterans surviving spouse. 

This case is before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a February 2021 Regional Office (RO) rating decision.

In the VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) (NOD), the appellant elected the Direct Review option; therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301.

If evidence was associated with the claims file during a period of time when additional evidence was not allowed, the Board has not considered it in its decision on the claims on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.300.  If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was added to the claims file that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

Accrued Benefits

An individual entitled to accrued benefits may be paid periodic monetary benefits (due and unpaid) to which a payee was entitled at the time of his death under existing ratings or based on evidence in the file at the time of death. 38 U.S.C. § 5121; 38 C.F.R. § 3.1000.

An application for accrued benefits must be filed within one year after the date of death. 38 U.S.C. § 5121 (c); 38 C.F.R. § 3.1000 (c). In order to support a claim for accrued benefits, the Veteran or other payee must have had a claim pending at the time of his death for such benefits or else be entitled to them under an existing rating or decision. 38 U.S.C. §§ 5101 (a), 5121(a); Jones v. West, 136 F.3d 1299 (Fed. Cir. 1998).

Accrued benefits may only be awarded on the basis of the evidence in the file at the Veteran's date of death. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.1000 (a). "Evidence in the file at date of death" means evidence in VA's possession on or before the date of the Veteran's death, even if such evidence was not physically located in the VA claims folder on or before the date of death. 38 C.F.R. § 3.1000 (d)(4).

In this case, the appellant filed a claim for accrued benefits in January 2020. Thus, she filed a timely claim for accrued benefits as it was filed within a year of the Veteran's death.

1. Entitlement to special monthly compensation based on aid and attendance/housebound (for the purpose of entitlement to accrued benefits only).

The Appellant contends that the Veteran was entitled to special monthly compensation based on aid and attendance/housebound.

Special monthly compensation is available when, "as the result of service-connected disability," a veteran suffers additional hardships above and beyond those contemplated by VA's schedule for rating disabilities." Breniser v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 64, 68 (2011) (citing 38 U.S.C. § 1114 (k)-(s)).

Special monthly compensation based on the need for aid and attendance is payable if, as the result of service-connected disability, the Veteran has suffered: (1) anatomical loss or loss of use of both feet; (2) anatomical loss or loss of use of one hand and one foot; (3) blindness in both eyes with visual acuity of 5/200 or less; (4) being permanently bedridden; or (5) being so helpless as to be in need of regular aid and attendance. 38 U.S.C. § 1114 (l); 38 C.F.R. § 3.350 (b).

To be deemed so helpless as to be in need of regular aid and attendance, there must be at least one of the following: (1) an inability to dress or undress or to keep ordinarily clean and presentable independently; (2) frequent need of adjustment of any special prosthetic or orthopedic appliances which by reason of the particular disability cannot be done without assistance; (3) an inability to feed independently through loss of coordination of upper extremities or through extreme weakness; (4) an inability to attend to the wants of nature; or (5) incapacity, either physical or mental, that requires care or assistance on a regular basis to protect from hazards or dangers incident in the daily environment. 38 C.F.R. § 3.352 (a); Turco v. Brown, 9 Vet. App. 222 (1996). A condition requiring the claimant to remain in bed is also a proper basis for such a determination. 38 C.F.R. § 3.352 (a). It is not required that all of the disabling conditions enumerated in 38 C.F.R. § 3.352 (a) be found to exist before a favorable rating may be made. The particular personal functions which a veteran is unable to perform should be considered in connection with his or her condition as a whole. It is only necessary that the evidence establish that a veteran is so helpless as to need regular aid and attendance, not that there is a constant need. Id. 

If a veteran does not qualify for increased benefits for aid and attendance, increased compensation benefits may still be payable if the veteran is able to establish entitlement to special monthly compensation based on housebound status. 38 U.S.C. § 1114 (s); 38 C.F.R. § 3.350 (i). Special monthly compensation is payable at the housebound rate if a veteran has a single service-connected disability rated as 100 percent and either of the following are met: (1) there is additional service-connected disability or disabilities independently ratable at 60 percent, separate and distinct from the 100 percent service-connected disability and involving different anatomical segments or bodily systems; or (2) he or she is permanently housebound by reason of service-connected disability or disabilities. Id. The requirement of "permanently housebound" will be considered to have been met when the veteran is substantially confined to his or her house (ward or clinical areas, if institutionalized) or immediate premises due to a service-connected disability or disabilities which it is reasonably certain will remain throughout his or her lifetime. Id. The Board further defines "substantially confined" to mean that a veteran is restricted to his or her house, except for regular trips for medical treatment purposes.

The Veteran was service connected for psoriasis, seizure disorder, right rib resection, left rib resection, removal of gall bladder, hearing loss of the left ear, and scar associated with removal of gall bladder.

Initially, the Board notes that the evidence does not reflect, nor did the Veteran contend, that his service-connected disabilities cause the anatomical loss or loss of use of both feet or one hand and one foot; cause the Veteran to be blind in both eyes; render him permanently bedridden or render him unable to feed himself due to the loss of coordination of upper extremities or through extreme weakness. The Veteran's service-connected disabilities do not require the use of any prosthetics or appliances, and thus the aid and attendance of another is not required to assist with their adjustment.

The only question remaining accordingly is whether the Veteran is so helpless as to factually be in need of regular aid and attendance. Acknowledgement is given to the finding in the AOJ's February 2021 rating decision that the Veteran requires aid and attendance. This was based on the evidence of record to include an January 2020 and April 2018 Examinations for Housebound Status of Permanent Need for Regular Aid and Attendance (VA Form 21-2680), and numerous lay statements from the Appellant and the Veteran which detailed that the Veteran's disabilities had made him unable to complete daily tasks of living as outlined in 38 C.F.R. § 3.352 (a) such as inability to dress or undress oneself, or to keep oneself ordinarily clean and presentable and assistance needed to attend to the wants of nature. The Board is bound by a favorable finding unless it is rebutted by evidence identifying a clear and unmistakable error in making the finding. 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.104 (c), 20.801(a). No such evidence exists here. As such, the Board accepts that the Veteran is so helpless as to be in need of regular aid and attendance.

All that remains is for the Board to determine if the Veteran is so helpless as to be in need of regular aid and attendance because of a service-connected disability or service-connected disabilities. After a review of the evidence, the Board finds that the Veteran's need for regular aid and attendance is attributable to his service-connected seizure disability. All evidence of record, including VA examination reports, lay statements, statements from the Veteran, and medical treatment records endorse the Veteran's limited mobility as a result of his seizure disability. There is no evidence to the contrary of record, and these findings are consistent with the other competent evidence of record.

Therefore, the Board finds that the Veteran does qualify for SMC based on the need for regular aid and attendance of another person due to service-connected disabilities. This is a greater benefit than SMC at the housebound rate and therefore, further inquiry as to the Veteran's eligibility for SMC by reason of being housebound is not required. Accordingly, the claim is granted on this basis. 38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch, 21 F.4 th 776.

Service Connection for Accrued Benefits 

The law provides that service connection may be granted for disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active military service.  38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.304.  Service connection may be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).

Generally, establishing service connection requires medical or, in certain circumstances, lay evidence of (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a nexus between the claimed in-service disease or injury and the present disability.  See Davidson v. Shinseki, 581 F.3d 1313, 1316 (Fed. Cir. 2009); Hickson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 247, 253 (1999).

Alternatively, service connection may be established under 38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (b) by (a) evidence of (i) the existence of a chronic disease in service or during an applicable presumption period under 38 C.F.R. § 3.307 and (ii) present manifestations of the same chronic disease; or (b) when a chronic disease is not shown as such during service, by evidence of continuity of symptomatology. However, the use of continuity of symptoms to establish service connection is limited only to those diseases listed at 38 C.F.R. § 3.309 (a) and does not apply to other disabilities which might be considered chronic from a medical standpoint. See Walker v. Shinseki, 708 F.3d 1331 (Fed. Cir. 2013).

Service connection may also be established on a secondary basis for a disability which is proximately due to, or the result of, a service connected disability. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310 (a). Secondary service connection may also be established for a disability which is aggravated by a service connected disability.

1. Entitlement to service connection for left arm disability, to include as secondary to a service-connected disability, (for the purpose of entitlement to accrued benefits only).

The Appellant contends that the Veteran is entitled to service connection for a left arm disability, to include as secondary to a service-connected disability. 

The Veteran's service treatment records reflect complaints of numbness in his left arm in 1978 without further diagnosis or complaint. The Veteran was diagnosed with thoracic outlet syndrome and underwent surgery in May 1984 with no neurological deficit shown. Medical treatment records reflect the Veteran was diagnosed with diabetic neuropathy and carpal tunnel syndrome without etiologic opinion.  

A January 2021 VA examination report for the Veteran's claimed left arm disability reflects a negative nexus opinion. The examiner opined that the Veterans left arm condition was at least as likely than not incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness. The examiner stated that the Veteran has a diagnosis of non-service connected thoracic outlet syndrome and his current symptoms related to the left upper extremity are related to that condition. Further, the examiner stated that the Veterans left arm condition was less likely than not proximately due to or the result of a service-connected condition. 

Based upon the evidence of record, the Board finds that the Veteran's left arm disability did not manifest during active service, nor is it related to any service-connected disability. The Veteran's service treatment records contain no indication that the onset of any left arm disability occurred in service. None of the Veteran's medical treatment records contain any evidence that a currently diagnosed left arm disability had its onset within one year of service discharge. Thus, there can be no presumption the claimed disability occurred in service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (b).

Objective medical evidence of record similarly fails to support a nexus between the claimed left arm disability and any service-connected disability. Service treatment records are silent for specific treatment or diagnoses of left arm, and post-service medical treatment records do not establish diagnoses or treatment of the claimed left arm disability within one year of service discharge. Further, no objective medical evidence of record has positively opined the Veteran's left arm disability is related to his active service and the persuasive objective medical evidence of record fails to establish the Veteran's claimed left arm disability is as a result of his service-connected psychiatric disability. The Board finds the opinion of the January 2021 VA examiner to be persuasive. The examiner is shown to have reviewed the evidence of record, including the contentions of the Veteran, and the evidence as to the Veteran's history was adequately considered. See Dalton v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 23 (2007). There is also no contrary medical opinion of record. Therefore, the evidence fails to demonstrate that the claimed left arm disability manifested during active service, fails to establish the claimed left arm disability manifested as a result of service or within one year of service, and fails to demonstrate that the claimed left arm disability is caused by or aggravated by any service-connected disability.

The Veteran and the Appellant's lay statements of record are competent insofar as they report symptomatology which is capable of lay observation. See Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 469 (1994). However, to the extent that the Veteran and the Appellant asserts a nexus between his erectile dysfunction disability and his service-connected disabilities and/or active service, the Board finds them to be less probative and persuasive, as neither the Veteran nor the Appellant is shown to possess expert knowledge which would enable them to render such a nexus opinion. Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1376-77 (Fed. Cir. 2007). As such, the lay statements concerning a nexus between the claimed left arm disability and his service-connected disabilities and/or active service do not constitute competent or persuasive medical evidence and lack probative value. 

Accordingly, as the competing evidence is not in approximate balance, or nearly equal, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule is inapplicable, and service connection must be denied. See 38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b); Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4 th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to service connection for sciatica right side, to include as secondary to a service-connected disability, (for the purpose of entitlement to accrued benefits only) is remanded.

Although the Board regrets the additional delay, a remand is necessary to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error. 

The Appellant asserts that Veteran's claimed right side sciatica disability is related to his active service, or in the alternative, caused by or related to a service-connected disability.

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in January 2021, and the examiner opined that the Veterans condition was less likely than not incurred in or caused by a claimed in-service injury, event, or illness. In support of his opinion, the examiner stated that the Veterans service treatment records are negative for any lower extremity peripheral nerve condition during active-duty service. The Board notes that the Veteran's service treatment records reflect a diagnosis of right-side sciatica in June 1983.  

As service treatment records do indeed note a diagnosis of right side sciatica, the January 2021 opinion is based on an inaccurate factual basis as determined by the Board. See Reonal v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 458 (1993) (medical opinion based on an inaccurate factual premise has reduced value).  As such, the Board finds that the Veteran should be afforded a new VA addendum opinion to determine the etiology of his claimed sciatica condition as this constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error, and remand is warranted on this basis. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain a retrospective addendum opinion from a qualified VA examiner as to the Veteran's claimed sciatica of the right side disability. The examiner should provide opinions on the following:

Is it at least as likely as not (i.e., probability of 50 percent or greater) that the Veteran's claimed sciatica disability had its onset during his period of active duty or is otherwise causally related to an in-service injury or disease? The examiner is directed to provide an opinion which includes the Veteran's June 1983 service treatment notation of sciatica diagnosis. 

 

Neely M. Peden

Acting Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Vample, Erica

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.