Citation Nr: A25034670
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 240912-473119
DATE: April 15, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to a 70 percent rating for PTSD from April 11, 2023, to February 28, 2024, is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

Prior to February 28, 2024, the Veteran's PTSD manifested as occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to a 70 percent rating for PTSD from April 11, 2023, to February 28, 2024, have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.7, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from May 1989 to September 1994.  He appeals an August 2024 rating decision granting an increased rating of 70 percent for PTSD from February 29, 2024.  He opted for direct review of the evidence by this Board.

By way of history, the Veteran filed his initial claim seeking entitlement to service connection for PTSD on April 11, 2023.  The claim was granted, effective April 11, 2023, in a September 2023 rating decision with an initial 50 percent evaluation.  He sought Higher-Level Review but was denied a higher initial rating in a January 2024 rating decision.  Within one year of that decision, the Veteran submitted a March 2024 Supplemental Claim with new and relevant evidence added in form of a June 2024 application for entitlement to TDIU.  An increased 70 percent rating was granted effective February 29, 2024, in an August 2024 rating decision.  This appeal followed. 

Increased Ratings

Disability ratings are determined by the application of a schedule of ratings, which is based on the average impairment of earning capacity.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1.  The Veteran's entire history is reviewed when making disability evaluations.  See generally, Schafrath v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 589 (1991); 38 C.F.R. § 4.1.  Where the question for consideration is the propriety of the initial evaluation assigned, consideration of the medical evidence since the effective date of the award of service connection is required.  See Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 199, 125-26 (1999).  Where entitlement to compensation already has been established and an increase in the disability rating is at issue, it is the present level of disability that is of primary concern.  See Francisco v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 55, 58 (1994).  Further, "[w]here there is a question as to which of two evaluations shall be applied, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating.  Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned."  38 C.F.R. § 4.7.

Consideration is given to the frequency, severity, and duration of psychiatric symptoms, the length of remission, and the Veteran's capacity for adjustment during periods of remission.  The rating agency shall assign an evaluation based on all the evidence of record that bears on occupational and social impairment, rather than solely on the examiner's assessment of the level of disability at examination.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.126(a).  Further, when evaluating the level of disability arising from a mental disorder, the rating agency will consider the extent of social impairment but shall not assign an evaluation solely based on social impairment.  38 C.F.R. § 4.126(b). It is necessary to evaluate a disability from the point of view of the Veteran working or seeking work. 38 C.F.R. § 4.2.

1. Entitlement to a rating greater than 50 for PTSD prior to February 28, 2024.

The Veteran is currently assigned a 50 percent rating for PTSD from April 11, 2023, and a 70 percent rating from February 29, 2024, under 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, Diagnostic Code (DC) 9411.  He contends that the higher 70 percent rating is also warranted prior to February 28, 2024.  After a review of the evidence, the Board finds that a 70 percent rating, but no higher, is warranted throughout the period on appeal.

The current regulations establish a general rating formula for mental disorders.  38 C.F.R. § 4.130.  Ratings are assigned according to the manifestation of particular symptoms.  However, the use of the term "such as" in 38 C.F.R. § 4.130 demonstrates that the symptoms after that phrase are not intended to constitute an exhaustive list, but rather are to serve as examples of the type and degree of the symptoms, or their effects, that would justify a particular rating.  See Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112 (Fed. Cir. 2013).

Pursuant to DC 9411, a 50 percent rating is warranted for PTSD where there is occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to such symptoms as: flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short- and long-term memory such as, retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks; impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships.  Id.

A 70 percent rating is warranted when there is objective evidence demonstrating occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities, speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately, or effectively; impaired impulse control, such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence; spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work-like setting; and the inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.  Id.

A maximum 100 percent evaluation is for application when there is total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; and memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name.  Id.

In rating mental disorders under the General Formula, the Board must conduct a "holistic analysis" that considers all associated symptoms, regardless of whether they are listed as criteria.  Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 10, 22 (2017); 38 C.F.R. § 4.130.  The Board must determine whether unlisted symptoms are similar in severity, frequency, and duration to the listed symptoms associated with specific disability percentages.  Then, the Board must determine whether the associated symptoms, both listed and unlisted, caused the level of impairment required for a higher disability rating.  Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 114-18 (Fed. Cir. 2013).

Turning to the evidence, the RO assigned an effective date of February 29, 2024, in the August 2024 rating decision for the grant of an increased 70 percent rating for PTSD.  That date was based on an intent to file (IFT) submitted by the Veteran.  However, the evidence shows that the claim has been continuously pursued since April 11, 2023.  Thus, the issue before the Board is narrowed to whether a 70 percent rating is warranted for the Veteran's PTSD from April 11, 2023, to February 28, 2024.  

The Veteran underwent a VA examination in July 2023 to evaluate his PTSD.  The July 2023 VA examiner found the Veteran to have occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas due to symptoms such as depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks that occur weekly or less often, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss, such as forgetting names, directions or recent events, impaired judgment, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work like setting, Impaired impulse control, such as unprovoked irritability with periods           of violence, and neglect of personal appearance and hygiene.  

At the time, the Veteran reported that he kept to himself as much as possible, avoiding social interactions outside the home, though he did enjoy working out, hiking in the woods, or spending time with his dogs.  He admitted to irritability and a stressed marriage because of his PTSD.  He was not as interested in previous hobbies and admitted to not attending to personal hygiene as regularly as he should.  He continued to work fulltime as a letter carrier for the post office.  He had been a personal trainer but found the interaction with others too stressful.  He occasionally had difficulty dealing with supervisors or coworkers and needed to take time off due to work related stress.  Behaviorally, he was oriented to all spheres, acted appropriately, with no evidence of a thought disorder.  The was no evidence of psychosis and he denied suicidal thoughts.

Several weeks later, in August 2023, the Veteran was afforded another VA examination to assess the severity of his PTSD.  On this occasion, the examiner found social and occupational impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to symptoms such as depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss, disturbances of motivation and mood, and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships.  The Veteran reported he has nausea and vomiting sometimes when he becomes very upset, but this has not happened since he started his psychiatric medication.  He reported bouts of depressed mood for 2-3 days at a time, but his wife usually helped him cheer up within a couple of days.  He has never actually considered suicide because of his religious beliefs.  Behaviorally, he was casually dressed and appropriately groomed.  His eye contact, social, and conversational skills were appropriate.  His affect was appropriate and there was no evidence of hallucinations or delusional thinking.

Weeks later in August 2023, the Veteran walked-in to his local VA mental health clinic, complaining of stress at work.  He spoke with his supervisor and union representative, and they told him to resign or go to the doctor.  He plans to look for another job.  He continued to deny suicidal or homicidal ideation.  During a follow-up in September 2023, the Veteran reported finding a new, less stressful job at Lowe's.  He was casually dressed, well groomed, and oriented to all spheres.  His affect within normal limits, speech was clear, logical, and goal directed.  No thought disorder or other psychotic symptoms were reported or observed.  He continued to deny any current violent ideation toward himself or others.

At another VA examination in August 2024, a different VA examiner found occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas due to symptoms such as depressed mood, anxiety, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work like setting, and obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities.  The Veteran reported enjoying physical activities, such as working out, hiking, and being in his yard, as well as spending time with his wife and his dogs.  He enjoyed structured activities with a clear plan.  He and his wife are friends with one other couple, and he would like to be more involved with veterans' groups.  The examiner noted that, since his time at the post office, the Veteran had only been able to maintain two jobs for a few months a piece due to his PTSD symptoms. 

The Board observes that the 70 percent criteria tends to reflect symptoms that render an individual barely able to care for themselves, if at all, are a danger to themselves and others, and are frequently unable to control their own actions.  Here, the Veteran's symptoms do not reach a level where he is a harm to himself or others.  Overall, the Board finds the severity of his symptoms rest in between the 50 and 70 percent criteria.  Notably, although the symptoms varied on the day of each examination, 2 of the 3 VA examiners-all of whom essentially evaluated the Veteran within a single calendar year, found occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas.  Board finds it unlikely that the Veteran's PTSD symptoms increased in severity on day of the August 2024 VA examination, and the effective date for his 70 percent rating should not be assigned mechanically based on the results of a single examination.  See Swain v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 219, 224 (2015).  The evidence tends to show that the Veteran's symptoms reached the level contemplated by the 70 percent criteria prior to February 29, 2024.  After affording the Veteran the benefit of the doubt, the Board finds that his symptoms are best characterized by the 70 percent criteria throughout the entire appeal period.

Next, although the general rating formula provides specific examples of symptoms that may result from various acquired psychiatric disorders, the Board emphasizes that its analysis should not be limited to only these symptoms but should also consider any other relevant criteria outside of the rating code in order to determine the level of occupational and social impairment.? Mauerhan v. Principi, 16?Vet. App.?436, 444 (2002).? As such, the Board has also considered the extent to which there are other indications of occupational and social impairment.? 

In this regard, the Veteran's disorder certainly impacted his occupational and social functioning.? His anger, anxiety and depression are disabling to such a degree that he has had problems getting along with people at each job he has had.  His abilities to attend to basic activities of daily living, such as basic hygiene, are impaired, and his anxiety has resulted in obsessional behaviors.  Based on the evidence, the Board finds that the Veteran's level of occupational and social impairment rose to the level of impairment in most area, warranting a 70 percent for the entire appeal period.

Notably, the evidence does not show, nor does the Veteran contend, that the next higher 100 percent rating is warranted.  At no time during the period on appeal does the evidence show symptoms commensurate with total occupational and social impairment.  The Veteran has not exhibited gross impairment in thought processes or communication, persistent delusions or hallucinations, grossly inappropriate behavior, a persistent danger of hurting self or others, disorientation to time or place, or memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name.  Thus, a rating greater than 70 percent is not warranted at any time during the period on appeal.

In considering the appropriate disability ratings, the Board has also considered the assertions of the Veteran that his PTSD is worse than the rating he currently receives.? While the Board agrees that a 70 percent rating is warranted, the next higher 100 percent rating is not.  In rendering a decision on appeal, the Board must analyze the credibility and probative value of the evidence, account for the evidence which it finds to be persuasive or unpersuasive and provide the reasons for its rejection of any material evidence favorable to the claimant.? See Gabrielson v. Brown, 7?Vet. App.?36, 39-40 (1994); Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1?Vet. App.?49, 57 (1990).? 

Competency of evidence differs from weight and credibility.? While the Veteran is competent to report symptoms because this requires only personal knowledge as it comes to him through his senses, he is not competent to identify a specific level of disability of his PTSD according to the appropriate diagnostic codes.? Rucker v. Brown, 10?Vet. App.?67, 74 (1997); Layno v. Brown, 6?Vet. App.?465, 469 (1994); see also Cartright v. Derwinski, 2?Vet. App.?24, 25 (1991) ("although interest may affect the credibility of testimony, it does not affect competency to testify").  During the period under consideration, the Veteran consistently reported and exhibited symptoms of a frequency, duration, and severity most consistent with those contemplated under the 70 percent criteria.? See also Rucker v. Brown, 10 Vet. App, 67, 73 (1997) (statements made in the context of treatment have heightened credibility over those made in the context of a claim for benefits).??? 

On the other hand, competent evidence concerning the nature and extent of the Veteran's PTSD has been provided by VA medical personnel who have examined and treated him during the period on appeal and who have rendered pertinent opinions and observations in conjunction with the evaluations.? The medical findings (as provided in the examination reports and treatment records) directly address the criteria under which these disabilities are evaluated.?  

In summation, the Board determines that a 70 percent rating, but no higher, is warranted for the Veteran's PTSD throughout the period on appeal.  The claim is granted.  

?

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided.  This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability.  38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.

 

 

B.T. KNOPE

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Ballinger, Daniel