Citation Nr: A25034510
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 240924-476698
DATE: April 15, 2025

ORDER

Service connection for a low back disorder is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran served on active duty from November 2009 to June 2010, March to November 2014, and March to July 2020.

2. The Veteran did not sustain a low back injury or disease during service; a current low back disorder, diagnosed as a lumbosacral strain, is not causally or etiologically related to service.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

A low back disorder was not incurred in service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5103(a), 5103A, 5107 (2012); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.159, 3.303 (2024).

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSION

This decision has been written under the guidelines of the Veterans Appeals Improvement and Modernization Act, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA). In February 2024, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) denied the claim. In September 2024, the Veteran appealed to the Board via a VA Form 10182 and elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301.

Turning to the relevant laws and regulations, service connection may be granted on a direct basis as a result of disease or injury incurred in service based on nexus using a three-element test: (1) the existence of a present disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by service. See 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303(a), (d); Holton v. Shinseki, 557 F.3d 1363, 1366 (Fed. Cir. 2009).

The Veteran asserts that a lumbosacral strain, which was diagnosed during the October 2023 VA examination, was incurred during service. Specifically, he contends the disorder resulted from an overseas deployment in 2014 in which he had been lifting heavy equipment. Notably, he reported to the VA examiner that at the time of this back injury, he did not seek treatment.

Turning to the evidence, the Veteran has been diagnosed with a lumbosacral strain. As such, the first element of direct service connection has been met.

As to an in-service incurrence, the service treatment records (STRs) do not document complaints of, treatment for, or symptoms related to a low back injury which is consistent with the Veteran's statement during the VA examination that he did not seek treatment for low back complaints. 

Additionally, while the Veteran indicated that he injured the back in 2014 while deployed, the October 2014 Post Deployment Health Assessment reflects that he specifically denied back pain. Similarly, in an April 2015 Post Deployment Health Assessment and in May 2016 and April 2017 Annual Personal Health Assessments, he asserted he had no recurring back pain. Therefore, the medical evidence shows that not only did he not report back pain at the time of the claimed injury but he consistently denied back pain at subsequent evaluations.

Further, at the May 2018 annual physical, the Veteran checked yes to recurring muscle, joint, or low back pain but later clarified that it was a shoulder injury from March 2016. At an annual health assessment in August 2019, he denied recurring muscle, joint, or low back pain.

As noted, the Veteran acknowledged that he did not seek treatment for back pain; however, the evidence shows that he sought treatment for a variety of other medical complaints including a persistent cough, being hit in the head by a vehicle door, a shoulder and neck injury while unloading a pallet of supplies, headaches, esophageal reflux, wrist pain, abdominal pain, lower leg pain, swollen left eye, sore throat, and right shin pain.

Thus, his statements that he experience back pain but did not report it are given less probative weight as he sought treatment for multiple other symptoms. See Kahana v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 428, 438 (2011) (VA may use silence in the STRs as evidence contradictory to a veteran's assertions if the STRs appear to be complete and the injury, disease, or symptoms involved would ordinarily have been recorded had they occurred) (Lance, J., concurring). Therefore, the second element of direct service connection is not met. 

To the extent that the Veteran asserts a medical nexus between service and the current disorders, a February 2024 VA examiner opined that it was less likely than not (likelihood is less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) that the lumbosacral strain was incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness. 

The Board finds that the examination was adequate for evaluation purposes. Specifically, the examiner reviewed the claims file, interviewed the Veteran, and conducted a physical examination.  There is no indication that the VA examiner was not fully aware of the Veteran's past medical history, including the lay statement regarding in-service back pain due lifting heavy equipment, or that they misstated any relevant fact.  Moreover, the examiner has the requisite medical expertise to render a medical opinion regarding the etiology of the disorder and had sufficient facts and data on which to base the conclusion.  Further, there is no contradicting medical evidence of record.  Therefore, the Board finds the VA examiner's opinion to be of great probative value.

Here, the Board is not merely relying on the absence of evidence, but also on the contemporaneous medical records that specifically show that the Veteran repeatedly denied low back problems while in service, specifically during his Annual Periodic Health Assessments and Post Deployment Health Assessments when it would be more likely for him to identify all medical problems. 

To the extent that he asserts that he now has a chronic low back disorder related to service, the Board finds that the current assertions made for VA compensation purposes are given less probative weight, because they are contradicted and outweighed by the more contemporaneous lay and medical evidence. See Harvey v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 390, 394 (1994) (Board decision properly assigned more probative value to a private hospital record that included lay history that was made for treatment purposes than to subsequent statements made for compensation purposes).

The Board has considered the Veteran's lay statements that the current lumbosacral strain was caused by service. While he is competent to report symptoms as this requires only personal knowledge as it comes to them through their senses, he is not competent to offer an opinion as to the etiology of the current disorder due to the medical complexity of the matter involved. 

Specifically, the Veteran's statements about pain in his low back that affects his ability to stand, lift heavy objects, and sleep do not describe symptoms of a particular disorder of the low back, or suggest a particular etiology of any such disorder.  Such competent evidence concerning the nature and extent of the Veteran's low back disorder has been provided by the medical personnel who examined him during the current appeal, and who rendered pertinent opinions in conjunction with the evaluations. 

Those findings (as provided in the examination report and other clinical evidence) directly address the criteria under which this disorder is evaluated. The VA medical professional explained their reasoning based on an accurate characterization of the evidence. Therefore, the Board attaches greater probative weight to the examination report than to the lay statements regarding etiology. 

In sum, after a careful review of the record, the evidence weighs persuasively against the claim for service connection, and there is no doubt to be resolved. As such, the appeal is denied.  

Finally, the Veteran has not raised any other issues, nor have any other issues been reasonably raised by the record, for the Board's consideration.  See Doucette v. Shulkin, 28 Vet. App. 366, 369-370 (2017) (confirming that the Board is not required to address issues unless they are specifically raised by the claimant or reasonably raised by the evidence of record).

 

 

L. HOWELL

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	B. J. Ferguson, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.