Citation Nr: A25034547
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 240518-443133
DATE: April 15, 2025

ORDER

Whether the character of the Appellant's discharge from service constitutes a bar to the receipt of Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) benefits is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for treatment purposes only for an acquired psychiatric disorder, including generalized anxiety disorder, posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), and/or major depressive disorder, is denied

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The misconduct leading to the Appellant's discharge was willful and persistent.

2. There are not compelling circumstances in this case to mitigate the misconduct leading to the Appellant's discharge from service.

3. The Appellant received a bad conduct discharge.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for establishing status as a veteran for the purposes of receiving VA benefits have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 5303, 1700 et seq.; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.12, 3.360.

2. The criteria for establishing service connection for treatment purposes only for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include generalized anxiety disorder, PTSD, and/or major depressive disorder, have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5303, 1700 et seq.; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.12, 3.303, 3.360.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Appellant entered on active duty with the United States Marine Corps in February 1994 and was discharged from service in July 1997; the character of this service is the subject of this appeal.

The rating decision on appeal was issued by the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) in March 2024.  In a timely VA Form 10182 (Decision Review Request: Board Appeal) received in May 2024, the Appellant elected the Direct Review option for this appeal.  Therefore, the Board may consider only the evidence in the record at the time of the March 2024 decision.  See 38 C.F.R. § 20.301.

Status as a Veteran

When a person is seeking VA benefits, it first must be shown that the service member, upon whose service such benefits are predicated, has attained the status of a 'veteran' for VA purposes.  Holmes v. Brown, 10 Vet. App. 38, 40 (1997).  "The term veteran means a person who served in the active military, naval or air service, and who was discharged or released therefrom under conditions other than dishonorable."  38 U.S.C. § 101(2).  VA benefits are not payable unless the period of service upon which the claim is based was terminated by discharge or release under conditions other than dishonorable.  38 U.S.C. § 5303; 38 C.F.R. § 3.12(a).

A 2024 amendment to the regulation governing character of discharge updated the regulatory bars enumerated in section 3.12(d).  See Update and Clarify Regulatory Bars to Benefits Based on Character of Discharge, 89 Fed. Reg. 32,361 (April 26, 2024) (codified at 38 C.F.R. pt. 3) (effective June 25, 2024).  Under the amended subsection, a discharge or release because of one of the following offenses is considered to have been issued under dishonorable conditions:  (1) acceptance of a discharge under other than honorable conditions or its equivalent in lieu of trial by general court-marital; (2) mutiny or spying; (3) offenses involving moral turpitude (this includes, generally, conviction of a felony); and (4) willful and persistent misconduct.  38 C.F.R. § 3.12(d).  

The determination as to whether a discharge is based on willful and persistent misconduct is a matter of fact to be determined by the Board.  See Stringham v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 445, 447 (1995); see also 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.  The term "willful misconduct" means an act involving conscious wrongdoing or known prohibited action.  38 C.F.R. § 3.1(n).  It involves deliberate or intentional wrongdoing with knowledge of or wanton and reckless disregard of its probable consequences.  Id.

Additionally, for discharges based on willful and persistent misconduct, instances of minor misconduct occurring within two years of each other are defined as persistent; an instance of minor misconduct occurring within two years of more serious misconduct is persistent; and instances of more serious misconduct occurring within five years of each other are persistent.  For purposes of the willful and persistent misconduct bar, minor misconduct is misconduct for which the maximum sentence imposable pursuant to the Manual for Courts-Martial United States would not include a dishonorable discharge or confinement for longer than one year if tried by general court-martial.  38 C.F.R. § 3.12(d)(2)(ii) (effective June 25, 2024). 

The amendments to the regulation governing character of discharge allow VA to apply the compelling circumstances exception to cases involving willful and persistent misconduct and offenses involving moral turpitude, formerly only available in cases with absences without official leave (AWOLs) exceeding 180 continuous days.  See Update, 89 Fed. Reg. 32,361 (amending 38 C.F.R. § 3.12(d)-(e)). 

The bar to benefits will not be applied if compelling circumstances mitigate the prolonged AWOL or misconduct at issue.  38 C.F.R. § 3.12(e) (effective June 25, 2024).  In a compelling circumstances determination, VA will consider the length and character of service exclusive of the misconduct, the reasons for the misconduct, and whether a valid legal defense would have precluded a conviction under the Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ).

Regarding the length and character of service, it should generally be of such quality and length that it can be characterized as honest, faithful, and meritorious and of benefit to the Nation.  38 C.F.R. § 3.12(e)(1).

Factors considered in determining the reasons for the misconduct include:  mental or cognitive impairment at the time of the misconduct; physical health, to include physical trauma and any side effects of medication; combat-related or overseas-related hardship; sexual abuse/assault; duress, coercion, or desperation; family obligations or comparable obligations to third parties; and age, education, cultural background, and judgmental impairment.  38 C.F.R. § 3.12(e)(2).  The mental or cognitive impairment may include, but is not limited to, clinical diagnosis of, or evidence that could later be medically determined to demonstrate existence of, PTSD, depression, bipolar disorder, schizophrenia, substance use disorder, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), impulsive behavior, or cognitive disabilities.  38 C.F.R. § 3.12(e)(2)(i).

For purposes of a valid legal defense for the misconduct, the defense must go directly to the substantive issue of absence or misconduct rather than to procedures, technicalities, or formalities.  38 C.F.R. § 3.12(e)(3).

In this case, the Appellant enlisted in the Marine Corps in February 1994 for a period of four years, at the age of twenty.  He had completed high school and worked at a chemical plant prior to enlisting.  He later reported that substance use complicated his ability to keep the job prior to service.

From February 1994 to April 1995, the Appellant received proficiency and conduct scores of 4.0 and above, out of 5.0.  In April 1995, his conduct score was 3.0, and in July 1995, it was 2.0.

In September 1994, the Appellant was assigned to a unit stationed in Japan.  

In March 1995, the Appellant was counseled for conduct unbecoming of a Marine by frequently being involved in several documented Provost Marshal's Office (PMO) blotter entries.  As part of the counseling, the Appellant was informed that failure to take corrective action could result in administrative separation or limitation of further service.  

In April 1995, the Appellant received a nonjudicial punishment (NJP) for assaulting a fellow enlisted Marine at a nightclub, being drunk and disorderly, and impersonation of a Marine non-commissioned officer (NCO).  Later in April 1995, the Appellant was referred by his command for substance abuse evaluation.  He reported that he began drinking heavily in October 1994; he was diagnosed with alcohol dependence and recommended for Level III treatment, to begin on May 24, 1995.

On May 2, 1995, the Appellant was counseled for an alcohol-related incident, as well as what was noted to be "repeated violations of the UCMJ and Japanese law concerning alcohol."  As part of the counseling, the Appellant was informed that failure to take corrective action could result in administrative separation or judicial proceedings.  On May 4, 1995, the Appellant received another NJP for possessing hard liquor in the barracks; it appears from the record that the misconduct underlying this NJP was the alcohol-related incident described in the counseling record two days prior.  The punishment was imposed but suspended for six months; in July 1995, the suspension was vacated and the punishment was executed, including 45 days of restriction and extra duty.

On May 16, 1995, the Appellant was counseled for another alcohol-related incident that took place on May 10, 1995, when he reported for restriction while intoxicated.  As part of the counseling, the Appellant was informed that failure to take corrective action could result in administrative separation or limitation of further service.  

In June 1995, during his Level III alcohol rehabilitation treatment, the Appellant broke his curfew and consumed alcohol.  The Appellant was dismissed from the Level III treatment due to this violation.

At the end of July 1995, the Appellant was found to be breaking restriction, and he disobeyed a lawful order to stop running away.  In August 1995, the Appellant was found to be drunk and disorderly; he failed to put on his assigned uniform and report to the duty desk, he used disrespectful language toward a superior NCO, and struck the NCO in the face with his fist.  Related to these violations, the Appellant was placed in confinement for 30 days, and he was charged before a special court-martial.

In September 1995, six days after release from confinement, the Appellant was referred by his command for a mental health evaluation.  He reported that he felt he was performing well in the military until he was transferred to Japan.  He reported receiving a meritorious mast during his military occupational specialty (MOS) training.  The Appellant reported the misconduct noted above, and reported that he did not stop drinking alcohol until he was confined for the assault in August 1995.  The Appellant reported that, during his time in confinement, he had a chance to consider his situation and the consequences of continuing in the same manner.  He reported wanting to improve his situation by changing his behavior; he reported making the conscious decision to stop drinking alcohol.  The psychologist assessing the Appellant verified that he had made appointments with the Substance Abuse Counseling Center (SACC), and the Appellant also reported having begun to attend Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) meetings.  The Appellant reported he had not sought any type of mental health treatment prior to the Level III treatment earlier that year.  He also expressed desire to remain in the military but understanding that he would probably not be allowed to finish his enlistment contract.

The psychologist noted the Appellant "gave the impression of sincerity in terms of insights and decisions to improve his station."  The psychologist developed a psychological profile of the Appellant based on the clinical interview and administration of the Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory assessment.  The psychologist provided the following discussion about individuals with psychological profiles similar to that of the Appellant: 

They are often described as impulsive and unable to delay gratification of their impulses.  They tend to have little respect for social standards and often find themselves in direct conflict [with] societal values.  Their acting-out behavior is likely to involve excessive use of [alcohol], and their histories often include alcoholic benders, arrests, job loss, and family discord associated [with] drinking.  Individuals [with] similar profile types frequently feel frustrated by their own lack of accomplishment and are often resentful of demands placed on them by other people.  They may react to stress by drinking extremely or by using addictive drugs.  After periods of acting out, they express a great deal of remorse and guilt about their misdeeds.  They may report feeling depressed, anxious, and worthless, but their expressions do not seem to be sincere.  In spite of their resolution to change, they are likely to act out again in the future.  When not in trouble, people [with] similar profile types seem energetic, sociable, and outgoing.  They create favorable [first] impressions, but their tendencies to manipulate others produce feelings of resentment in long-term relationships.  Beneath the outer façade of competent, comfortable persons, these people tend to be introverted, self-conscious, and passive-dependent.  

The psychologist diagnosed the Appellant with alcohol dependence, early partial remission, with antisocial personality disorder features.  He opined the Appellant was fit for full duty; he opined the Appellant was responsible for his behavior and should be treated accordingly if he does not comply with the UCMJ.  The psychologist added:

It is important to note that the [Appellant] is experiencing much pressure to conform to societal rules and may be resolving to do well as a result.  As mentioned previously, persons [with] personalities as described above often resolve to improve until the pressure to do so is removed.  However, in this case, it is believed that the [Appellant] has learned significant lessons based on his recent experiences (e.g., detainment in the brig) and will continue to work within the AA program [and] SACC Counseling even after the pressure is removed.  In these instances the best prediction of future success is the actual response of the individual and past behavior.

In October 1995, the Appellant pled guilty to all charges and specifications filed against him for the misconduct that occurred in July and August 1995.  The special court-martial found him guilty on all but two specifications, and sentenced the Appellant to confinement, followed by 30 days of restriction, and a bad conduct discharge.

The Appellant served the period of confinement until release on October 31, 1995, after which he was placed on voluntary appellate leave.  He was discharged from service in July 1997, after appellate review of his sentence.  

In June 2006, the Appellant submitted an application to the Naval Discharge Review Board (NDRB) for an upgrade in the character of his discharge.  In December 2006, the NDRB denied the application.

In November 2023, the Appellant reported that he experienced a tremendous amount of stress during service, when the same NCO he later assaulted engaged in several instances of physical assault and mental abuse against the Appellant.  The Appellant asserted that this pattern of behavior from his NCO led to depression, anxiety, and PTSD until the Appellant "broke mentally and emotionally" and assaulted the NCO in August 1995.  

In a January 2024 VA psychiatric examination, the Appellant reported that he began drinking in Japan due to the separation from his mother.  He also reported that the NCO was "always badgering" him and referred to the Appellant as a drunk.

After careful review of the evidence of record, the Board finds the Appellant has not established status as a veteran for the purposes of receiving VA benefits.

First, the Board finds that the only potentially applicable bar in this case is the bar based on discharge due to willful and persistent misconduct.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.12(d)(4).  The Appellant was not discharged as a conscientious objector, by reason of a general court-martial sentence, as a deserter, as an alien during a period of hostilities, or as a result of an absence for more than 180 continuous days; the Appellant was not an officer resigning for the good of the service.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.12(c).  The Appellant was not discharged for the good of the service to avoid trial by a general court-martial, for mutiny or spying, or for an offense involving moral turpitude.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.12(d).

Next, the Board finds that the bar based on willful and persistent misconduct applies in this case.  The misconduct leading to discharge was the misconduct in July and August 1995, which included breaking restriction, disobeying a lawful order, and striking his superior NCO in the face with his fist, among other instances of misconduct on these two occasions.  The Board finds this misconduct to be willful, as these were known prohibited acts and the Appellant engaged in them with knowledge of their probable consequences.  Further, as these instances of misconduct are less than two years apart, it is persistent misconduct under VA's definition.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.12(d)(2)(ii).  

Finally, the Board finds that, in this case, there are not compelling circumstances to mitigate the misconduct.  

Regarding the length and character of service exclusive of the misconduct leading to discharge, the Board notes that, although the Appellant was not discharged from service until July 1997, he did not return to duty after release from confinement at the end of October 1995.  Therefore, the service the Board will consider is from February 1994 to October 1995.  The Appellant did receive average proficiency and conduct scores until April 1995, and he reported receiving a meritorious mast during MOS training.  However, beginning in approximately March 1995, the Appellant engaged in a pattern of misconduct, and was dismissed from substance abuse treatment.  While the Appellant had a little over one year of average service with no disciplinary action, he then had four months with multiple instances of misconduct.  Therefore, the Board finds this factor to be neutral in the analysis of whether there were compelling circumstances to mitigate the misconduct leading to discharge.

The Board further notes the Appellant did not assert any valid legal defense at any point during his service, in his application to the NDRB, or during this appeal.  This factor is therefore a negative factor in this analysis.

Regarding the reasons for the misconduct, the Board first notes that the Appellant was 20 years old; that he had completed high school; and that he had worked in a job at a chemical plant at the time he enlisted in the Marines.  The Board also notes the reported overseas-related hardship, that the Appellant began drinking alcohol due to being away from his mother.  The last reason raised by the record is the Appellant's potential mental or cognitive impairment caused by his alcohol dependence at the time of the misconduct.  

Although the record is clear the Appellant was experiencing alcohol dependence at the time of the misconduct leading to discharge, the September 1995 mental health evaluation provides insight to the extent of the mental impairment.  The psychologist's opinion indicates the Appellant had little respect for social standards and often found himself in direct conflict with societal values, such as obeying a military chain of command.  The opinion indicates the Appellant likely felt frustrated and resentful of the demands placed on him by the military environment.  The opinion also indicates the Appellant was experiencing a lot of pressure to conform to societal rules, which may have been the impetus for his resolution to stop drinking and engage meaningfully in alcohol dependence treatment.  The psychologist opined that the Appellant would continue in his efforts to treat his alcohol addiction even after the pressure to conform was removed, i.e., after he was separated from service.  

The Board finds the mental impairment caused by the diagnosed alcohol dependence with antisocial personality disorder features was not such that it makes the reasons for the misconduct a favorable factor in this case.  In particular, the Appellant was informed in writing on three occasions in March 1995 and May 1995 that further misconduct could result in separation from service; he continued to use alcohol until he was confined in August 1995.  At that point, he was faced with serious disciplinary action and the tangible prospect of separation, and the Appellant chose to participate in treatment, when less than two months prior, in June 1995, he declined to participate in treatment and continued drinking and engaging in behavior that he knew would lead to repercussions.  Therefore, the Board finds the mental impairment arising from the alcohol dependence was low, as he was able to identify and take corrective actions when confronted with an outcome - separation from service - that was against his wishes.

This conclusion is derived from and consistent with the September 1995 mental health evaluation.  The psychologist opined that the Appellant would continue treatment for alcohol dependency, even after separation from service, indicating that the Appellant had the ability to make the decision to engage in treatment and the ability to remain in treatment.  Therefore, even if the mental impairment from the alcohol dependence with antisocial personality disorder features contributed to the Appellant's resentment of the demands of military service, the psychologist's opinion does not reflect that any such impairment inhibited or prevented the Appellant's ability to make positive behavioral changes. 

Further, the Board finds that the Appellant's age and experiences prior to joining the military indicate sufficient judgmental maturity to navigate the demands of military service.  In particular, the Appellant reported having difficulty keeping his job prior to service due to substance use.  With that experience, and with multiple warnings that further misconduct could result in separation from service, the Board finds the Appellant had the judgmental maturity to understand that continued misconduct would lead to adverse consequences.  

For these reasons, the Board finds the factor considering the reasons for the misconduct leading to discharge is also a negative factor in this analysis.  

Weighing the three factors together, the Board finds there are not compelling circumstances in this case to mitigate the misconduct.  The length and character of the Appellant's service exclusive of the misconduct leading to discharge is the strongest factor, and the Board found that it is only a somewhat neutral factor, given the pattern of misconduct prior to the two instances of misconduct that led to the Appellant's special court-martial.  As the reasons for the misconduct and the lack of any valid legal defense are both negative factors in this analysis, the Board finds that there are not compelling circumstances in this case.

As there are not compelling circumstances in this case to mitigate the misconduct leading to discharge, the bar to the receipt of VA benefits applies.  The appeal is denied.

Service connection for treatment purposes only for an acquired psychiatric disorder, including generalized anxiety disorder, PTSD, and/or major depressive disorder

Healthcare benefits shall be provided to certain former service persons with administrative discharges under other than honorable conditions for any disability incurred or aggravated during active military, naval, or air service in line of duty.  38 C.F.R. § 3.360(a).  These benefits shall be furnished for any disability incurred or aggravated during a period of service terminated by a discharge under other than honorable conditions.  38 C.F.R. § 3.360(b).  However, they may not be furnished for any disability incurred or aggravated during a period of service terminated by a bad conduct discharge or when one of the bars listed in section 3.12(c) applies.  Id.

In this case, the Appellant was discharged from service with a bad conduct discharge.  Therefore, he is not entitled to healthcare benefits for disabilities, even if they are found to be related to service.  Therefore, he is not entitled to service connection for treatment purposes only for an acquired psychiatric disorder, including generalized anxiety disorder, PTSD, and/or major depressive disorder.

 

 

M. HYLAND

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	K. Josey, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.