Citation Nr: A25034443
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 240729-458813
DATE:  April 15, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for tinnitus is granted.

Entitlement to service connection for headaches as secondary to service-connected posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is granted.

Entitlement to service connection for left hip strain as secondary to service-connected left ankle residual pain status post avulsion fracture of lateral malleolus with degenerative arthritis is granted.

Entitlement to service connection for gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) as secondary to service-connected low back disability, left ankle disability, and right shoulder disability is granted.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran's tinnitus is related to his military service.

2. The Veteran's headaches are due to/aggravated by service-connected PTSD.

3. The Veteran's left hip strain is due to/aggravated by service-connected left ankle residual pain status post avulsion fracture of lateral malleolus with degenerative arthritis.

4. The Veteran's GERD is due to/aggravated by service-connected low back disability, left ankle disability, and right shoulder disability.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for tinnitus have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

2. The criteria for service connection for headaches as secondary to service-connected PTSD are met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.310.

3. The criteria for service connection for left hip strain as secondary to service-connected left ankle residual pain status post avulsion fracture of lateral malleolus with degenerative arthritis are met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.310.

4. The criteria for service connection for GERD as secondary to service-connected low back disability, left ankle disability, and right shoulder disability are met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.310.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran had active duty service in the U.S. Army from September 2009 to September 2013.

Regarding his service connection claim for tinnitus, in May 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, and requested readjudication of service connection for tinnitus most recently addressed in a November 2022 rating decision. In January 2024, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the supplemental claim decision on appeal, which found that new and relevant evidence had been received and denied the claim based on the evidence of record at the time of that decision. 

Regarding his service connection claim for headaches, in July 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, and requested readjudication of service connection for headaches most recently addressed in a January 2023 rating decision. In December 2023, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the supplemental claim decision on appeal, which found that new and relevant evidence had been received and denied the claim based on the evidence of record at the time of that decision. 

Regarding his service connection claim for his left hip disability and GERD, in May 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, and requested readjudication of service connection for a left hip disability and GERD most recently addressed in separate January 2023 rating decisions. In August 2023, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the supplemental claim decision on appeal, which found that new and relevant evidence had been received and denied the claim based on the evidence of record at the time of that decision. 

In the July 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket for review of his service connection claims for tinnitus, headaches, a left hip disability, and GERD.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the August 2023, December 2023, and January 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) supplemental claim decisions on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted after the AOJ issued the supplemental claim decision on appeal, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Service Connection

Generally, service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from a disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service. 38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303. To establish entitlement to service-connected compensation benefits, a veteran must show: "(1) the existence of a present disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166-67 (Fed. Cir. 2004). Service connection may be granted for any disease initially diagnosed after service when all of the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).

For veterans with 90 days or more of active service during a war period or after December 31, 1946, certain chronic diseases, including organic diseases of the nervous system such as sensorineural hearing loss, are presumed to have been incurred in service if they manifested to a compensable degree within one year of separation from service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1112, 1113; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307, 3.309.

Pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(b), where a chronic disease is shown as such in service, subsequent manifestations of the same chronic disease are generally service connected. If a chronic disease is noted in service but chronicity in service is not adequately supported, a showing of continuity of symptomatology after separation is required. Entitlement to service connection based on chronicity or continuity of symptomatology pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(b) applies only when the disability for which the Veteran is claiming compensation is due to a disease enumerated on the list of chronic diseases in 38 U.S.C. § 1101(3) or 38 C.F.R. § 3.309(a). Walker v. Shinseki, 708 F.3d 1331 (Fed. Cir. 2013).

Service connection may also be granted for a disability that is due to, or aggravated by, service-connected disease or injury. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310.

Service connection may also be granted on a presumptive basis for Persian Gulf War veterans who exhibit objective indications of a qualifying chronic disability that became manifest to any degree at any time. 38 U.S.C. § 1117.

For purposes of section 1117, there are three types of qualifying chronic disabilities: (1) an undiagnosed illness; (2) a medically unexplained chronic multi-symptom illness (MUCMI); and (3) a diagnosed illness that the Secretary determines in regulations prescribed under 38 U.S.C. § 1117(d) warrants a presumption of service connection. 38 U.S.C. § 1117(a)(2).

A MUCMI is defined by a cluster of signs or symptoms, such as: chronic fatigue syndrome, fibromyalgia, and irritable bowel syndrome. 38 U.S.C. § 1117(a)(2)(B). A MUCMI means a diagnosed illness without conclusive pathophysiology or etiology that is characterized by overlapping symptoms and signs and has features such as fatigue, pain, disability out of proportion to physical findings, and inconsistent demonstration of laboratory abnormalities. See Stewart v. Wilkie, 30 Vet. App. 383, 389 (2018) (holding that under 38 C.F.R. § 3.317, "an illness is a MUCMI where either etiology or pathophysiology of the illness is inconclusive"). Chronic multi-symptom illnesses of partially understood etiology and pathophysiology, such as diabetes and multiple sclerosis, will not be considered medically unexplained. 38 C.F.R. § 3.317(a)(2).

Objective indications of chronic disability include both signs, in the medical sense of objective evidence perceptible to an examining physician, and other, non-medical indicators that are capable of independent verification. 38 C.F.R. § 3.317 (a)(3). Signs or symptoms of an undiagnosed illness or a MUCMI include, but are not limited to: (1) fatigue; (2) signs or symptoms involving skin; (3) headache; (4) muscle pain; (5) joint pain; (6) neurologic signs or symptoms; (7) neuropsychological signs or symptoms; (8) signs or symptoms involving the respiratory system (upper or lower); (9) sleep disturbances; (10) gastrointestinal signs or symptoms; (11) cardiovascular signs or symptoms; (12) abnormal weight loss; and (13) menstrual disorders. 38 C.F.R. § 3.317(b).

Initially, the Board notes that the Veteran had service in the Southwest Asia Theater of operations during the applicable period, specifically in Afghanistan from November 2012 through January 2013, and meets the definition of a Persian Gulf War veteran, and the provisions of section 3.317 are applicable. 

However, as discussed in detail below, since the Veteran's claimed conditions can be attributed to a known clinical diagnosis, service connection for the below conditions cannot be granted on a presumptive basis under 38 C.F.R. § 3.317. Therefore, the analysis below focuses on whether the Veteran's claimed conditions may be granted on a direct or secondary basis.

1. Entitlement to service connection for tinnitus is granted.

The Veteran contends that his tinnitus is related to his military service.

At the outset, a diagnosis of tinnitus is conceded. See January 2024 rating decision.

Second, as to an in-service incurrence, the Veteran reported that he experienced acoustic trauma while in service, to include "high-blasts" and artillery. See December 2023 Hearing Loss and Tinnitus VA examination, p. 4. Given the Veteran's credible and competent statements as well as his service in Afghanistan, the Board finds that the second element of service connection has been met. 

Therefore, the only remaining issue is whether a nexus may be established.

The evidence against the claim includes VA opinions in November 2022 and December 2023. 

In November 2022, the examiner concluded that his tinnitus was less likely than not (less than 50 percent probability) a symptom associated with the Veterans hearing loss. The examiner reasoned that his tinnitus was at least as likely as not (50 percent probability or greater) caused by or a result of military noise exposure. The examiner reasoned that his tinnitus was intermittent. Specifically, the examiner noted that the Veteran reported hearing intermittent ringing in both ears 2 to 3 times a day mostly in quiet situations.

In December 2023, the examiner concluded that his tinnitus was less likely than not (likelihood is less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) caused by or a result of military noise exposure. The examiner reasoned that a review of the Veteran's military records did not reveal any documented complaints of tinnitus. He denied ringing in his hearing on his 2013 separation examination. The examiner further noted that his hearing was within normal limits at separation, and there were no significant hearing threshold shifts.

In December 2023, the examiner also concluded that his tinnitus was less likely as not (likelihood is less approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not less) caused by his service in Southwest Asia after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran. The examiner reasoned that the evidence of record noted multiple types of potential exposures included waterborne, bloodborne, particulate matter, and chemicals from burn pits. Potential health risks were also included in the evidence, to include irritation of eyes, ears, nose, and throat as well as pulmonary and cardiac problems. The examiner noted that tinnitus was not listed as a potential health risk for any of the above exposures. A survey of the medical literature reported that there was suspicion of occupational chemical toxicity, but, to date, the available studies were limited due to the lack of evidence based on human studies, the lack of support for what level of exposure is toxic, bias based on other contributory factors not eliminated from the results, etc. The examiner noted that it would be speculation to try and create a nexus between the Veteran's toxic exposures as listed in his TERA memo and any findings of hearing loss or tinnitus. Therefore, the examiner concluded that it was not likely the Veteran's contingency of tinnitus was connected to his military service toxic exposure.

The Board finds the November 2022 and December 2023 VA opinions, even when taken together, inadequate, as the examiners did not consider the Veteran's lay statements that his tinnitus was due to acoustic trauma in service. 

In contrast, the evidence in favor of the claim includes the Veteran's lay statements as well as a private, May 2023 opinion. As to the Veteran's lay statements, the Veteran stated that he has experienced ringing in his ears since his acoustic trauma in service. The Board finds the Veteran's assertions regarding the onset of his tinnitus adequate. In addition, the Veteran is competent to report symptoms such as ringing or buzzing in his ears as this requires only personal knowledge as it comes to him through his senses. See Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 470 (1994); Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 309 (2007). In addition, the Veteran is competent to identify a disorder such as tinnitus for diagnostic purposes. 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(a)(2); Barr, 21 Vet. App. at 310; Charles v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 370, 374 (2002); Falzone v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 398, 405 (1995). The Board finds the Veteran's assertions regarding the onset of his tinnitus to be credible. The Board also finds the Veteran's opinion related to his tinnitus probative. 

In May 2023, the private provider concluded that it was at least as likely as not that the Veteran's tinnitus was due to military acoustic trauma during his service. The provider acknowledged that his MOS as signal support system specialist had a low probability of acoustic trauma. Regardless, the Veteran reported experiencing acoustic trauma while undergoing military training. The provider also reasoned that the literature supported the prevalence of Veterans being exposed to acoustic trauma while in service. The Board further finds the May 2023 private opinion probative, as the report is based on the Veteran's statements, in-person examination, and the examiner's observations. Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 30205 (2008). 

Based on the Veteran's lay statements and May 2023 private opinion, the Board finds that a nexus has been established. Therefore, service connection for tinnitus is warranted.

2. Entitlement to service connection for headaches as secondary to service-connected PTSD is granted.

The Veteran contends that his headaches are related to his military service, to include exposure to toxins as a Gulf War Veteran. Alternatively, the Veteran contends that his headaches were secondary to his service-connected PTSD.

At the outset, the Board notes that the Veteran has a diagnosis of migraines, including migraine variants. See July 2023 VA headache examination. 

As to whether service connection may be granted on a direct basis, in January 2023, the examiner concluded that the Veteran's headache disability was less likely than not (less than 50 percent probability) incurred in or caused by an in-service injury, event or illness. The examiner reasoned that there was no objective medical record evidence of a diagnosis of a headache condition or headache symptoms while in service. The examiner noted that there was a lack of evidence of chronicity of headache symptoms.

In January 2023, the examiner concluded that his headache disability was at least as likely as not aggravated beyond its natural progression by his service-connected PTSD. The examiner specified that the Veteran's claimed common headaches were less likely than not (less than 50 percent probability) aggravated beyond its natural progression by the Veteran's service-connected PTSD. The examiner reasoned that although PTSD can aggravate headache conditions, the Veteran's medical records were silent for any evidence that his PTSD aggravates his claimed common headaches.

In July 2023, the examiner concluded that the Veteran's migraine headaches had clear etiologies (familial, vascular, post-concussion) and were not medically caused by Gulf War inhalation exposure.

In November 2023, the examiner concluded that his headaches were less likely than not (likelihood is less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activities, after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran. The examiner reasoned that the claimed common headache (delineated to be Migraine including migraine variants) was a genetically influenced complex disorder and common neurological disease that caused a variety of symptoms including headaches. However, the examiner noted that there were no scientific data to suggest that this condition was more prevalent in Veterans who served in the Gulf War or Southwest Asia area. The examiner also noted that there were multiple risk factors for headaches outside of military service, such as hormonal imbalances, demographic factors (advancing age, female sex), metabolic factors (obesity, dyslipidemia, diabetes, hypertension), genetic and epigenetic factors, psychological factors, and factors including lower level of education and lower socioeconomic status. The examiner noted that nothing in the Veteran's medical record indicate that the Veteran was exposed to specific toxins that caused the headache condition. There was no current medical or scientific evidence available that provides any indication of a relationship between the development of the headache condition the TERA. Therefore, the examiner concluded that his headache disability was less likely than not (likelihood is less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activities, after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran.

The Board finds the January 2023, July 2023, and November 2023 VA opinions adequate and probative, as the opinions are based on the Veteran's statements, in-person examination, and the examiner's observations. Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 30205 (2008).

As to whether service connection for headaches may be granted on a secondary basis, in January 2022, the VA examiner concluded that it was less likely than not that Veteran's headaches were incurred or caused by the Veteran's service-connected PTSD given that there was no specific documentation or objective evidence in Veteran's file or based on examination that would support any causal relationship between these conditions. The examiner reasoned that, even though the likelihood of developing some type of headaches is higher in people with PTSD, there was no direct cause-effect relationship between headaches and PTSD. 

In October 2022, the examiner concluded that the Veteran's headaches were less likely than not (less than 50 percent probability) due to or the result of the Veteran's service-connected PTSD. The examiner reasoned that there was no medical basis for the Veteran's PTSD to cause his claimed headaches. The examiner noted that no such direct causal relationship existed.

In September 2023, the examiner concluded that the Veteran's headaches were less likely than not (likelihood is less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) due to or the result of the Veteran's service-connected PTSD. The examiner reasoned that there was no medical causation of PTSD causing chronic, common, or any other type of headaches.

In the November 2023 addendum, the examiner concluded that there was no medical evidence that PTSD caused migraine headaches. The examiner noted that the private medical opinion indicated a correlation, but did not quote any medical literature that states that PTSD is a "medical causation" for migraine headaches.

The Board finds the January 2022, October 2022, September 2023, and November 2023 VA opinions, even when taken together, inadequate, as the examiners based their opinions primarily on a lack of evidence in the record. The Board notes that reliance on the lack of evidence in the STRs, especially without consideration of lay statements, is inadequate rationale. The mere absence of evidence does not equate to unfavorable evidence. See Forshey v. Principi, 284 F.3d 1335, 1358 (Fed. Cir. 2002) (en banc) (cautioning that negative evidence, meaning actual evidence weighing against a party, must not be equated with the absence of substantive evidence). See also Dalton v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 23, 39-40 (2007) (holding that an examination must consider lay evidence of in-service incurrence or continuity of symptomatology since service).

In contrast, in July 2023, the private provider concluded that it was at least as likely as not that the Veteran's migraine condition was secondary to, related to, and/or aggravated by the Veteran's service-connected PTSD. The provider reasoned that the medical literature supported a connection between migraines and PTSD. Moreover, the provider noted that the medical literature demonstrated that PTSD symptoms were associated with a higher likelihood of having migraines. The Board finds the July 2023 private opinion probative, as the report is based on the Veteran's statements, in-person examination, and the examiner's observations. Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 30205 (2008).

Based on the July 2023 private opinion, the Board finds that a nexus has been established. Accordingly, service connection for a headache disability is warranted on a secondary basis.

3. Entitlement to service connection for left hip strain as secondary to service-connected left ankle residual pain status post avulsion fracture of lateral malleolus with degenerative arthritis is granted.

The Veteran contends that his left hip disability is secondary to his service-connected left ankle disability. Specifically, the Veteran contends that his left ankle disability altered his center of gravity and gait pattern. 

At the outset, a diagnosis of left hip strain is conceded. See August 2023 rating decision; see also October 2022 hip VA examination.

Therefore, the only remaining issue is whether a nexus may be established on a secondary basis.

In January 2022, the examiner was unable to render an opinion on his left hip disability as there was no objective evidence of a left hip condition. 

In March 2022, the examiner concluded that it was less likely than not (less than 50 percent probability) incurred in or caused by an in-service injury, event, or illness. The examiner reasoned that there was no evidence of a diagnosis of a left hip/thigh condition.

As opinions were not rendered on the etiology of the Veteran's left hip disability, the January 2022 and March 2022 VA opinions were inadequate.

In October 2022, the examiner concluded that the Veteran's left hip disability was less likely than not (less than 50 percent probability) due to or the result of the Veteran's service-connected left ankle disability. The examiner reasoned that the Veteran's left ankle disability was not severe enough to affect an antalgic gait that would cause his left hip condition. The Board also find the October 2022 VA opinion inadequate, as the examiner did not address the private April 2023 opinion suggesting a correlation between his left hip and left ankle disabilities. 

In contrast, in April 2023, the private provider concluded that his left hip strain was at least as likely as not secondary to his service-connected left ankle disability. The provider reasoned that the medical literature supported the notion that alterations in joint kinematics, particularly of the feet and ankles, affected other major joints, to include the hips. The Board finds the April 2023 private opinion probative, as the report is based on the Veteran's statements, in-person examination, and the examiner's observations. Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 30205 (2008).

Based on the April 2023 private opinion, the Board finds that a nexus has been established. Accordingly, service connection for a left hip disability is warranted on a secondary basis.

4. Entitlement to service connection for gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) as secondary to service-connected low back disability, left ankle disability, and right shoulder disability is granted.

The Veteran contends that his GERD is secondary to his service-connected disabilities.

At the outset, a diagnosis of GERD is conceded. See August 2023 rating decision; see also June 2023 GERD VA examination. 

In January 2022, the examiner concluded that the Veteran's GERD was less likely than not (less than 50 percent probability) due to or the result of the Veteran's service-connected conditions, to include lumbosacral strain with degenerative arthritis, right shoulder strain with degenerative arthritis, residuals of left AC separation and labral tear, and left ankle fracture. The examiner noted that there were no specific documentation or objective evidence in veteran's file that would support any causal relationship between his GERD and these conditions. The examiner also explained that the development of GERD reflects an imbalance between injurious or symptom-eliciting factors (reflux events, acidity of refluxate, esophageal hypersensitivity) and defensive factors (esophageal acid clearance, mucosal integrity). The examiner further noted that there were also risk factors for GERD such as Hiatus hernia, obesity, diet, medications, specific foods, caffeine, alcohol, smoking, and drugs can cause reflux by inducing LES hypotension. Although an increase of symptoms of GERD (heartburn and acid regurgitation) was observed in patients treated with NSAIDs, the examiner noted that the mechanism of action was not determined, and NSAIDs do not modify the motility of lower esophagus sphincter or of esophageal body. The examiner noted that although erosive esophagitis is common in elderly claimants taking NSAIDs it is not proven that an increased risk of esophagitis exists with NSAID therapy. 

In January 2023, the examiner concluded that his GERD was less likely than not (less than 50 percent probability) incurred in or caused by an in-service injury, event or illness. The examiner reasoned that a review of the medical records was silent for a diagnosis of GERD during service, as the earliest diagnosis of GERD was in 2022. The examiner also noted that a diagnosis of GERD was premature in light of Veteran's reporting of black stool, which is usually not associated with GERD and should be evaluated by his treating physicians for significant pathology. Given the lack of objective medical record evidence to connect GERD to military service, the examiner concluded that a nexus or chronicity were not established.

In June 2023, the examiner concluded that his GERD was less likely than not (likelihood is less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activities, after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran. The examiner conceded that the Veteran was exposed to particulate airborne matter during deployment in Gulf War. However, the examiner stressed other causes of GERD, to include drinking orange juice and obesity. As to obesity, the examiner noted that obesity had a direct causal relationship in the development of GERD. The examiner noted that his BMI was 26.4, which is considered overweight and likely another contributing factor to GERD. The examiner explained that excessive food intake and a higher percentage of body fat may prevent the lower esophageal sphincter from closing properly, which allows acid to back up out of the stomach and into the esophagus. The examiner noted that a claimed condition with an etiology not associated with toxic exposure does not qualify as a TERA claim. Thus, the examiner concluded that a nexus was not established. 

The Board finds the January 2022, January 2023, and June 2023 VA opinions, even when taken together, inadequate, as the opinions did not specifically address the November 2022 and May 2023 private opinions that concluded that his GERD was secondary to his service-connected disabilities. 

Indeed, in November 2022, the private provider concluded that his GERD was more likely than now secondary to his service-connected back disability, left ankle disability, and right shoulder disability. The provider emphasized that the medical literature supported a connection between GERD and the use of NSAIDs. The provider based her rationale on a review of the medical literature and evidence of record, to include the Veteran's lay statements.

In May 2023, the private provider concluded that his GERD was at least as likely as not secondary to, related to, and/or aggravated by his service-connected low back disability, left ankle disability, and right shoulder disability. The provider reasoned that the medical literature supported a connection between GERD and the use of NSAIDs. The provider based her rationale on a review of the medical literature and evidence of record, to include the Veteran's lay statements. The Board finds the November 2022 and May 2023 private opinions probative, as they are based on the Veteran's statements, in-person examination, and the provider's observations. Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 30205 (2008).

Based on the November 2022 and May 2023 private opinions, the Board finds that a nexus has been established. Accordingly, service connection for GERD is warranted on a secondary basis.

 

 

Paul R. Casey

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Grossman, Christine

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.