Citation Nr: A25034810
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 240912-472715
DATE: April 15, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran's diagnosed PTSD was manifest in and is attributable to service.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for service connection for PTSD have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.304.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from October 1982 to April 1988.   

This matter is before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a May 2024 Appeals Modernization Act (AMA) higher-level review rating decision by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA).  That rating decision was a higher-level review of an earlier December 2023 rating decision.

In September 2024, the Veteran submitted a Form 10182 (Notice of Disagreement) with the May 2024 higher-level review rating decision.  The Veteran selected the direct review docket.  As this is an AMA case on the direct review docket and the rating decision on appeal is a higher-level review, the Board may only consider the evidence already of record at the time of the VA's initial December 2023 rating decision.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.

Service Connection

Service connection is granted for disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service in the line of duty.  See 38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.  "To establish a right to compensation for a present disability, a veteran must show: "(1) the existence of a present disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service" - the so-called "nexus" requirement."  Holton v. Shinseki, 557 F.3d 1362, 1366 (Fed. Cir. 2010) (quoting Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004)).

Service connection for PTSD requires medical evidence diagnosing the condition in accordance with 38 C.F.R. § 4.125(a) (conforming to the American Psychiatric Association's Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM); a link, established by medical evidence, between current symptoms and an in-service stressor; and credible supporting evidence that the claimed in-service stressor occurred.  38 C.F.R. § 3.304(f).

Regarding stressors based on a Veteran's fear of hostile military or terrorist activity, under 38 C.F.R. § 3.304(f)(3), a Veteran's lay testimony alone, indicating that his claimed in-service stressor is related to his fear of hostile military or terrorist activity, may establish the occurrence of the claimed in-service stressor if it is consistent with the places, types, and circumstances of his service.  See 75 Fed. Reg. 39843 through 39852 (July 13, 2010).

It is also required that a VA psychiatrist or psychologist, or a contract psychiatrist or psychologist, confirm that the claimed stressor is adequate to support a diagnosis of PTSD and that the Veteran's symptoms are related to the stressor.  Id. 

In making all determinations, the Board must fully consider the lay reports as to the onset and recurrence of symptoms since a Veteran is competent to report on that of which he or she has personal knowledge.  See Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 470 (1994).

The Veteran's DD-214 shows that his military specialty occupation (MOS) was security specialist.  The Veteran has stated that while stationed at the Ramstein Air Force Base in Germany, he experienced intense and stressful situations.  In a November 2022 correspondence, the Veteran noted that he held a high stress position as a Security Controller.  He also noted that while there, he was aware of over 100 terrorist attacks in close proximity to his base, to include fuel dump and missile bombings.  He noted that the daily receipt of information was confusing and terrifying.  This information included confirmed sightings of a Red Army Faction leader in the area and the report of the explosion at Chernobyl.  In addition, his duties for his MOS included being aware of aircraft malfunctions, aircraft crashes, and incidences on and surrounding the base which needed heightened attention.   

A January 2022 private medical report shows that the Veteran reported that while in service, he was near nuclear bombs and noted that he would experience worry and fear for multiple days.  Post service, the Veteran noted that his mood was intense, that he experienced hopelessness, was irritable and that his concentration was not good.  He noted suicidal ideations, but with no plan.  He noted being close to his family.  Diagnoses of PTSD, generalized anxiety disorder and recurrent major depressive disorder were provided.  The private examiner opined that it was more likely than not that the diagnosed disabilities were the result of events experienced and/or witnessed by the Veteran while serving in the military.  

The Veteran was afforded a VA PTSD examination in May 2023.  Diagnoses of PTSD, persistent depressive disorder, and insomnia disorder were provided.  The VA examiner noted that he was in the 86th Security Police Squadron.  It was noted that the Veteran's stressor was related to his fear of hostile military or terrorist activity and that the Veteran was exposed to a traumatic event where he experienced, witnessed, or was confronted with an event or events that involved actual or threatened death or serious injury, or a threat to the physical integrity of self or others and his response to the trauma involved intense fear, helplessness, or horror.  The VA examiner noted a review of the Veteran's November 2022 correspondence which noted the Veteran's stressors.  

The Veteran was afforded a VA PTSD examination in July 2023.  Diagnoses of PTSD and persistent depressive disorder were provided.  The VA examiner noted that the Veteran's symptoms met the criteria for PTSD.  The VA examiner opined that the claimed condition was at least as likely as not incurred in or caused by the Veteran's in-service injury, event or illness.  It was noted that the condition appeared to be related to working with numerous terrorist incidents while deployed in security in West Germany.  The Veteran's symptoms also met criteria for persistent depressive disorder.  This condition was, at least as likely as not, secondary to PTSD: chronic depressive symptoms had developed in the context of ongoing aversive internal experience and functional difficulty related to PTSD.  

A private PTSD examination report, dated in July 2023, shows that the Veteran was diagnosed with PTSD, recurrent, severe major depressive disorder and generalized anxiety disorder.  The private examiner stated that based on the assessments and the Veteran's self-report, his PTSD was due to events he experienced while service in the military.  

In a November 2023 correspondence, the Veteran added that due to bombings at a Berlin discotheque and in Libya, there were increased security levels put in place at the Ramstein Air Force Base and that he had to work longer, stressful and demanding, patrol shifts due to the incidents.  

After carefully considering the record on appeal and affording the Veteran the benefit of the doubt, the Board finds that service connection for PTSD is warranted.

As noted above, if a stressor claimed by a Veteran is related to the Veteran's fear of hostile military or terrorist activity and a VA psychiatrist or psychologist confirms that the claimed stressor is adequate to support a diagnosis of PTSD and that the Veteran's symptoms are related to the claimed stressor, in the absence of clear and convincing evidence to the contrary, and provided the claimed stressor is consistent with the places, types, and circumstances of the Veteran's service, the Veteran's lay testimony alone may establish the occurrence of the claimed in-service stressor.  38 C.F.R. § 3.304(f)(3).

The Veteran has consistently maintained that while he was serving on active duty, there were incidents that occurred that he relates to his current diagnoses.  The Board finds the Veteran's statements regarding the incidents have been consistent throughout the record, not only reported as evidence, but also reported to private and VA examiners.  In addition, the private and VA medical nexus opinions of record have been positive regarding the etiology of the Veteran's psychiatric disorder.   

Based on these facts, the Board finds that, resolving all reasonable doubts in favor of the Veteran, the evidence of record is at least as likely as not in favor of finding that his current PTSD arose due to his active service.  Accordingly, the claim for service connection for PTSD is granted.

 

 

Timothy Cothrel

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Evans, A-L

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.