Citation Nr: A25034329
Decision Date: 04/14/25	Archive Date: 04/14/25

DOCKET NO. 200225-69501
DATE: April 14, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea, to include as secondary to persistent depressive disorder with pure dysthymic syndrome, and hypertension is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from May 1994 to April 2007.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a December 2019 rating decision by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In the February 2020 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal, the Veteran elected the Evidence Submission docket. 

In a September 2023 decision, the Board denied the Veteran's claim for entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea. The Veteran appealed that decision to the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court). In November 2024, the parties filed a Joint Motion for Partial Remand (JMPR) moving for vacatur of the September 2023 decision's denial of entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea.  On December 2, 2024, the Court issued an Order granting the JMPR and remanding the matter to the Board for further development and proceedings pursuant to 38 U.S.C. ยง 7252(a).

In the JMPR, the parties agreed that the Board did not provide  an  adequate  statement  of  reasons  or  bases because  it  did  not address: (1) the Veteran's contentions about the adequacy of the August VA 2019 examination and its September 2019 addendum; (2) The Veteran's challenge of the VA examiner's  competency;  (3) the Veteran's arguments  with evidence related  to service  connection, specifically that  his obstructive sleep apnea is  related  to his  service-connected acquired  psychiatric disorder and/or hypertension; (4) whether the Veteran's direct  and  secondary theories of  service connection could be adequately addressed using the August 2019 VA examination and its September 2019 VA addendum; and (5) the Regional Office's (RO) October and December 2019 findings that Veteran's "is secondary to a service-connected disability. You are service connected for unspecified depressive disorder."

The Board finds that a remand is necessary to address the duty to assist errors. The Board acknowledges that the examinations relied upon are inadequate. The direct service medical opinion did not address the Veteran's contentions, or provide an adequate rationale. The secondary service medical opinions did not provide an aggravation medical opinion. The Veteran contends that none of the medical opinions were adequate because the examiner was not competent, as the examiner was a nephrologist.

The Board notes that in the November 2019 supplemental claim the Veteran raised the contention that "apnea does many bad things, such as hypertension and depression." Thus, raising the potential issue of a relationship between the Veteran's sleep apnea and hypertension, which requires an addendum medical opinion.

The Board also notes that the Board did not previously address the October and December 2019 RO findings. The Board finds that the RO did not clearly articulate the favorable finding. While the RO noted that the Veteran's sleep apnea was not secondary to his depression within the substantive portion, the RO noted that "the claimed issue is secondary to a service-connected disability. You are service connected for unspecified depressive disorder." The Board interprets these statements to mean that the Veteran is eligible to make the contention that his service-connected unspecified depressive disorder may have caused or aggravated his sleep apnea. However, these statements cannot be relied upon as to demonstrate that the RO finds that the Veteran's sleep apnea is secondary to his unspecified depressive disorder, as the language within the substantive portion of the RO decision provides an explanation that contradicts such a finding. 

The Board finds that there is no rationale provided in the "favorable finding section" that would allow for a grant on this basis. It is not clear if the RO copied and pasted incorrect text or clicked the wrong box within a program, but the designation is not consistent with the rationale above. Thus, the Board finds that this designation has no probative value, and is clearly erroneous under 38 C.F.R. ยง 3.104(c).

The Board acknowledges that the RO made the same error in the December 2019 rating decision, where the RO found that no new and material evidence was provided, and left the prior language intact. Findings noted within the "favorable findings section" must be consistent with the rationale provided in order to be probative. The Board does not find that the language constituted a favorable finding, but instead an inadvertent mistake, typographical error, as it was clearly inconsistent with the RO's own statements, and thus clearly erroneous. 

In order to address the Veteran's contentions listed above, the Board finds that addendum medical opinion(s) must be secured, by an appropriate clinician.  

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

1. The RO must ensure that statements provided in rating decisions are consistent within the body of the decision, and any favorable finding found.

2. Obtain an addendum opinion from an appropriate medical professional who has the requisite experience to render the requested medical opinions. Provide the examiner with the Veteran's complete record, to include a copy of all remands, and the claims folder. No examination of the Veteran is necessary unless the examiner deems otherwise.

(a.) Whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's sleep apnea disability had its onset during or is otherwise etiologically related to the Veteran's active service.

i.	The examiner must specifically address the Veteran's contentions, and provide a rationale.

ii.	The examiner should provide an opinion regarding the nature and etiology of the Veteran's sleep apnea disability, with rationale.

(b.) Whether the Veteran's sleep apnea is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) caused by the Veteran's service-connected hypertension or acquired psychiatric disorder.

(c.)  Whether the Veteran's sleep apnea disability is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) aggravated beyond its natural progression by the Veteran's service-connected hypertension or acquired psychiatric disorder.

The examiner must provide the underlying reasons for any opinions provided. If the examiner is unable to provide this opinion without resorting to speculation, he or she must indicate why this is so.

If aggravation is shown, the examiner should quantify the degree of aggravation, if possible. The question of secondary aggravation must be addressed separately from the question of secondary causation. The examiner must note that an opinion to the effect that one disability is not "caused by," "a result of," or "secondary to" another disability does not answer the question of aggravation and will necessitate a further opinion.

 

 

Michael Martin

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	M. Quist, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.1303.