Citation Nr: A25034773
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 240821-471758
DATE: April 15, 2025

ORDER

Service connection for obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran had service in the Southwest Asia Theater of operations during the Persian Gulf War. 

2. The Veteran's sleep-related symptoms are not related to, or manifestations of, an undiagnosed illness, a medically unexplained chronic multisymptom illness (MUCMI), or other qualifying chronic disability; rather, such have been attributed to a known clinical diagnosis of OSA, which has a conclusive etiology and pathophysiology. 

3. OSA is not shown to be causally or etiologically related to any disease, injury, or incident during service, to include a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA) associated with service in Southwest Asia. 

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for service connection for OSA have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1117, 1119, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.317. 

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from June 1988 to June 1992 and January 1995 to January 1997.  

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a rating decision issued in April 2024 by a Regional Office of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) under the modernized appeals system known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA).  

In August 2024, the Veteran filed a timely Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) (VA Form 10182) and requested direct review of the evidence considered by the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ). 

In this regard, the Board notes that, in his August 2024 VA Form 10182 the Veteran indicated he was appealing an October 2020 rating decision that denied service connection for OSA; however, as such appeal was received more than one year after such rating decision, it is untimely. Nonetheless, as his claim for service connection for OSA was most recently denied in the April 2024 rating decision, the Board has liberally construed his appeal and accepts it in regard to such rating decision.  38 C.F.R. § 20.202(a).  

Thus, the Board's review is limited to the evidence of record at the time of the April 2024 AOJ decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Therefore, any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, he may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

The Board notes that, throughout the pendency of the claims, the Veteran has been represented by Disabled American Veterans (DAV); however, in February 2025, an Appointment of Veterans Service Organization as Claimant's Representative (VA Form 21-22) in favor of Texas Veterans Commission (TVC) was received. However, as the Veteran's VA Form 10182 was received in August 2024 and such change in representation was submitted more than 90 days thereafter without good cause, the Board finds that, at the current time, DAV retains representation in the instant appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1304(a), (b). However, the Veteran's appointment of TVC is referred to the AOJ for appropriate action. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1304(b)(1). 

Entitlement to service connection for OSA, claimed as due to exposure to environmental hazards coincident with service in Southwest Asia. 

The Veteran contends that he currently has OSA that is directly related to his in-service exposure to environmental hazards coincident with his service in Southwest Asia.

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a).  Service connection may also be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge, when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).  Direct service connection may not be granted without evidence of a current disability; in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and a nexus between the claimed in-service disease or injury and the present disease or injury.  Id.; see also Caluza v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 498, 506 (1995) aff'd, 78 F.3d 604 (Fed. Cir. 1996).  

Service connection may also be granted for a disability due to a qualifying chronic disability of a veteran who served in the Southwest Asia Theater of operations during the Persian Gulf War provided that such disability became manifest during either active service in the Southwest Asia Theater of Operations during the Persian Gulf War or to a degree of 10 percent or more, under the appropriate diagnostic code of 38 C.F.R. Part 4, not later than December 31, 2026, and by history, physical examination, and laboratory tests, the disability cannot be attributed to any known clinical diagnosis.  38 U.S.C. § 1117; 38 C.F.R. § 3.317(a)(1). 

However, pursuant to the Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxins Act of 2022 (PACT Act), as of August 10, 2022, the foregoing statue and regulation has been amended to indicate that such disability must become manifest to any degree at any time.

A chronic qualifying disability means a chronic disability resulting from an (A) undiagnosed illness; (B) the following MUCMIs that are defined by a cluster of signs or symptoms: (1) chronic fatigue syndrome; (2) fibromyalgia; (3) functional gastrointestinal disorders; or (4) any other illness that the Secretary determines meets the criteria in paragraph (a)(2)(ii) of this section for a MUCMI; or (C) any diagnosed illness that the Secretary determines in regulations prescribed under 38 U.S.C. § 1117 (d) warrants a presumption of service connection.  38 C.F.R. § 3.317 (a)(2)(i).

For the purposes of this section the term MUCMI means a diagnosed illness without conclusive pathophysiology or etiology, that is characterized by overlapping symptoms and signs and has features such as fatigue, pain, disability out of proportion to physical findings, and inconsistent demonstration of laboratory abnormalities.  Chronic multisymptom illnesses of partially understood etiology and pathophysiology will not be considered medically unexplained.  38 C.F.R. § 3.317(a)(2)(ii).

In the instant case, the record reflects that the Veteran served in Southwest Asia during the requisite time period and, therefore, such laws and regulations are applicable to his claim.  However, his sleep-related symptoms are not related to, or manifestations of, an undiagnosed illness, a MUCMI, or other qualifying chronic disability; rather, such have been attributed to a known clinical diagnosis of OSA, which has a conclusive etiology and pathophysiology.  Specifically, a March 2020 VA examiner determined that the Veteran did not have any diagnosed illnesses for which no etiology was established, or signs and/or symptoms that may represent an undiagnosed illness or a diagnosed MUCMI; rather, she attributed the Veteran's reported symptoms to the aforementioned diagnosed disorder.  Thus, presumptive service connection pursuant to 38 U.S.C. § 1117 and 38 C.F.R. § 3.317 is not warranted.

However, the PACT Act changed medical examination requirements when there is documented TERA.  Specifically, Section 303, implemented in 38 U.S.C. § 1168, requires VA to obtain a medical opinion as to whether there is a nexus between the disability and the documented TERA. 

In this regard, the record reflects a current diagnosis of OSA since 2010 and, while the Veteran's service treatment records (STRs) are negative for any complaints, treatment, or diagnosis referable to OSA, a September 2023 VA Memorandum reflects that he participated in a TERA, identified as exposure to fuels, polychlorinated biphenyl, and chemical agent resistant coating, by virtue of his documented service in Southwest Asia.  Additionally, he reported that he first experienced sleep-related symptoms following his return from deployment in Southwest Asia in 1992, which were witnessed by his spouse, S.P. (as noted in a February 2024 written statement); however, OSA was not diagnosed until a later time.  Thus, the remaining inquiry is whether his currently diagnosed OSA is related to his military service, to include his participation in a TERA therein. 

In connection with the Veteran's original claim for service connection for OSA, which he alleged was related to in-service exposure to environmental hazards, to include poor air quality due to oil field fires, coincident with his service in Southwest Asia, a March 2020 VA examiner found that the Veteran was diagnosed with severe OSA in 2010; there was no direct correlation between OSA and deployment to Southwest Asia, with the exception for posttraumatic stress disorder, which was not noted in his STRs; OSA was a condition in which breathing stopped involuntarily for brief periods of time during sleep typically caused by excessive weight; and the Veteran's OSA did not have supporting medical literature or research to prove that it was related to a specific exposure event coincident with his service in Southwest Asia. 

Similarly, in a separate VA opinion obtained in April 2024, a different examiner opined that the Veteran's OSA was less likely than not caused by the indicated TERA, after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all TERAs of the Veteran.  In support thereof, she indicated that OSA was a disorder that was characterized by obstructive apneas, hypopneas, and/or respiratory effort-related arousals caused by repetitive collapse of the upper airway during sleep; and common causes and risk factors for developing sleep apnea included excess weight, neck circumference, a narrowed airway, being male, older, family history, use of alcohol, sedatives or tranquilizers, smoking, and nasal congestion.  Here, the examiner noted that the Veteran was diagnosed with OSA in 2010, which was 13 years post-discharge from active duty.  She further noted, with citation, that the medical literature did not support OSA being caused by environmental exposures, and there was no medical or scientific evidence available that provided any indication of a relationship between the development of OSA and the TERA.  Here, the examiner concluded that, a review of the Veteran's records indicated he had the following risk factors outside of military service which far outweighed the factors indicated in the TERA: age, being male, large neck circumference, obesity, smoking history, and alcohol use history. 

Upon review of the foregoing, the Board affords great probative weight to the March 2020 and April 2024 VA examiners' opinions as such considered all of the pertinent evidence of record, to include the Veteran's statements and his relevant medical history, and provided a complete rationale, relying on and citing to the records reviewed.  Moreover, the examiners offered clear conclusions with supporting data as well as reasoned medical explanations connecting the two.  Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295 (2008) (it is the factually accurate, fully articulated, sound reasoning for the conclusion that contributes to the probative value of a medical opinion); Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 124 (2007) ("[A]medical opinion... must support its conclusion with an analysis that the Board can consider and weigh against contrary opinions").  Notably, there is no medical opinion to the contrary. 

The Board has also considered the Veteran's assertions as to the etiology of his OSA; however, as a lay person, he does not have the requisite training and experience necessary to address such a complex medical matter.  See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1376-77 (Fed. Cir. 2007) (noting general competence to testify as to symptoms but not to provide medical diagnosis).  In this regard, the etiology of such disorder involves a medical subject concerning an internal physical process extending beyond an immediately observable cause-and-effect relationship.  Specifically, such requires knowledge of the respiratory system, to include the structure therein, and the impact, if any, exposure to various environmental hazards has on the function of such system.  Therefore, such matter may not be competently addressed by lay statements.  See Woehlaert v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 456, 462 (2007) (explaining that while the claimant is competent in certain situations to provide a diagnosis of a simple condition such as a broken leg or varicose veins, the claimant is not competent to provide evidence as to more complex medical questions). 

Moreover, whether the symptoms the Veteran reportedly experienced during or after service, to include as reported by himself and S.P., are in any way related to his currently diagnosed OSA is a matter that also requires medical expertise to determine.  See Clyburn v. West, 12 Vet. App. 296, 301 (1999) ("although the veteran is competent to testify to the pain he has experienced since his tour in the Persian Gulf, he is not competent to testify to the fact that what he experienced in service and since service is the same condition he is currently diagnose with.").  

In the same vein, the Board finds that the statements regarding the onset of the Veteran's sleep-related symptoms in 1992 are contradicted by the contemporaneous evidence of record.  As noted above, his STRs, to include from his second period of service, are negative for any complaints, treatment, or diagnosis referable to OSA, and his October 1994 Report of Medical Examination reflects clinical evaluation was normal in all pertinent respects, and he denied currently or previously experiencing frequent trouble sleeping in the corresponding Report of Medical History.  See Davidson v. Shinseki, 581 F.3d 1313, 1316 (Fed. Cir. 2009) (lack of corroborating contemporaneous evidence may be a factor in determining credibility).  Accordingly, the Veteran's opinion as to the onset and etiology of his OSA is not competent evidence and, consequently, is afforded no probative weight.

Based on the foregoing, the Board finds that OSA is not shown to be causally or etiologically related to any disease, injury, or incident during service, to include as a result of a TERA.  Therefore, service connection for such disorder is not warranted.  

In reaching this decision, the Board has considered the applicability of the benefit of the doubt doctrine.  However, as the weight of the probative evidence is against the Veteran's claim for service connection for OSA, such doctrine is not applicable in the instant appeal and his claim must be denied.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102. 

 

 

A. JAEGER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Koria B. Stanton, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.