Citation Nr: A25034291
Decision Date: 04/14/25	Archive Date: 04/14/25

DOCKET NO. 231109-391396
DATE: April 14, 2025

ORDER

A compensable rating for bilateral hearing loss is denied.

Service connection for a disability manifested by loss of sense of smell is denied.

Service connection for chronic headaches is denied.

Service connection for a bilateral foot disability is denied. 

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disability other than posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a disability manifested by fatigue, to include chronic fatigue syndrome, is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a right hip disability is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. During the period on appeal, the Veteran's bilateral hearing loss is shown to have been manifested by auditory acuity no worse than Level II in the right ear and Level III in the left ear.

2. None of the credible and probative evidence available for review indicates that the Veteran has a current disability manifested by loss of sense of smell that might be associated with service.

3. None of the credible and probative evidence available for review indicates that the Veteran has a current headache disability that might be associated with service.

4. None of the credible and probative evidence available for review indicates that the Veteran has a current disability of either foot that might be associated with service.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for a compensable rating for bilateral hearing loss have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.85, 4.86, Diagnostic Code 6100.

2. The criteria for an award of service connection for a disability manifested by loss of sense of smell have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

3. The criteria for an award of service connection for a chronic headache disability have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

4. The criteria for an award of service connection for a disability of either foot have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Air Force from August 2008 to April 2009.  His decorations include the Global War on Terrorism Service Medal.

This matter comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from December 2022 and September 2023 rating decisions issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).  In the December 2022 decision, the RO, in pertinent part, granted service connection and an initial 0 (zero) percent (noncompensable) rating for bilateral hearing loss, effective October 2, 2022, and denied service connection for chronic fatigue syndrome and disability of the feet.  In the September 2023 decision, the RO denied service connection for chronic headaches, polysubstance abuse (claimed as major depression with anxiety, drug abuse, sleep disturbances, and sexual trauma), loss of sense of smell, sleep apnea, and a right hip disability.  The Veteran timely appealed to the Board by filing a VA Form 10182 (Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement)) in November 2023, requesting direct review of the evidence considered by the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ).  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.201, 20.202(b)(1).

Under the direct review option, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the respective AOJ decisions on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  The Board cannot consider evidence submitted after those decisions were promulgated.

As set out below, the Board is entering a decision denying the Veteran's claims for a higher rating for his bilateral hearing loss, as well as his claims for service connection for a disability manifested by the loss of sense of smell, chronic headaches, and bilateral foot disability.  If evidence was associated with the claims file during a period of time when additional evidence was not allowed, the Board has not considered it in its decision on those claims.  38 C.F.R. § 20.300.  If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was added to the claims file that the Board could not consider, he may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify that evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on those claim(s), considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

As to the claims for service connection for an acquired psychiatric disability, sleep apnea, chronic fatigue, and right hip disability, the Board is remanding those claims to the AOJ for correction of pre-decisional duty to assist errors.  The AOJ will consider any additional evidence that has been submitted when those claims are readjudicated.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

As a final preliminary matter, the Board notes that in his November 2023 VA Form 10182, the Veteran also expressed dissatisfaction with the December 2022 rating decision insofar as it denied service connection for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), bronchiectasis, and a left hip disability.  In a November 2023, letter, the Board informed him that the Board could not review those issues in the current appeal stream.  

In this regard, the Board notes that following the December 2022 decision, the Veteran filed a VA Form 20-0995 (Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim) in August 2023 seeking review of the denials of service connection for PTSD, bronchiectasis, and a left hip disability.  Thereafter, in November 2023, while the supplemental claim as to those issues was still pending, and without withdrawing the previously filed VA Form 20-0995, he filed the current VA Form 10182 seeking Board review of the same issues.  Because the filing of the VA Form 10182 under those circumstances violated the prohibition on concurrent elections set out at 38 C.F.R. § 3.2500(b) as it applies to those issues, the claims for service connection for PTSD, bronchiectasis, and a left hip disability are not properly before the Board at present.  See also Bailey v. Wilkie, 33 Vet. App. 188, 203-204 (2021).

Higher Ratings

Disability evaluations are determined by the application of a schedule of ratings, which is in turn based on the average impairment of earning capacity caused by a given disability.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1.  Separate diagnostic codes identify the evaluations to be assigned to the various disabilities.

If there is a question as to which of two evaluations shall be applied, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating.  Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7.  If different disability ratings are warranted for different periods of time over the life of a claim, "staged" ratings may be assigned.  Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007); Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119, 125-26 (1999).

1. Entitlement to a compensable rating for bilateral hearing loss

The Veteran is currently in receipt of a 0 (zero) percent (noncompensable) rating for bilateral hearing loss.  On appeal, he seeks a higher rating.

Hearing loss is evaluated under Diagnostic Code 6100. The condition is normally rated on the basis of controlled speech discrimination (Maryland CNC) tests, together with the results of puretone audiometry tests.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.85. Ordinarily, the results of these tests are charted on Table VI, as set out in the Rating Schedule, to determine the appropriate Roman numeral designation (I through XI) to be assigned for the hearing impairment in each ear.  These numeric designations are then charted on Table VII to determine the rating to be assigned.  Id. See, e.g., Lendenmann v. Principi, 3 Vet. App. 345, 349 (1992) (indicating that evaluations of hearing loss are determined by a mechanical application of the rating schedule).

However, not all patterns of hearing loss are rated in this manner.  For example, if the puretone threshold at 1000, 2000, 3000, and 4000 Hertz is 55 decibels or more, the Roman numeral designation for that ear is taken from either Table VI or VIa, whichever results in the higher numeral.  38 C.F.R. § 4.86(a).  See also 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.85(c) and 4.86(b) (indicating that alternative methodologies also apply when the examiner certifies that use of the speech discrimination test is not appropriate or when the puretone threshold is 30 decibels or less at 1000 Hertz and 70 decibels or more at 2000 Hertz).

The Veteran was examined in connection with his claim in November 2022. Audiometric testing at that time revealed puretone thresholds, in decibels, as follows:

  	 	 	HERTZ	 	 

 	1000	2000	3000	4000	Avg

RIGHT	 35	45	50	45	44

LEFT	35	35	35	40	36

His Maryland CNC speech recognition score was 84 percent in the right ear and 76 percent in the left ear.  Applying these results to Table VI yields a numeric designation of Level II for the right ear and Level III for the left ear; which, in turn, warrants a 0 percent rating under Table VII.  An exceptional pattern of hearing impairment under 38 C.F.R. § 4.86 was not shown.

In light of the foregoing, it is the Board's conclusion that the evidence is persuasively against the Veteran's claim for a compensable rating for bilateral hearing loss.  As set forth above, the only available audiometric report pertaining to the period on appeal demonstrates entitlement to nothing more than a noncompensable rating.

In arriving at this conclusion, the Board has considered the Veteran's lay assertions regarding his diminished hearing.  However, as noted, the assignment of disability ratings for hearing impairment is derived by a mechanical application of the Rating Schedule to the numeric designations based on audiometric test results.  See Lendenmann v. Principi, 3 Vet. App. 345, 349 (1992).  The rating criteria for hearing loss contemplate functional effects such as difficulty understanding speech, as this is precisely the type of effect that VA's audiometric tests are designed to measure.  See Doucette v. Shulkin, 28 Vet. App. 366 (2017).  A higher rating can be awarded only when loss of hearing has reached a specified measurable level.

For the reasons stated, the evidence is persuasively against the claim.  38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7.  The appeal of this issue must be denied.

Service Connection

Service connection is warranted where the evidence of record establishes that a particular injury or disease resulting in disability was incurred in the line of duty in the active military service or, if pre-existing such service, was aggravated thereby.  38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a).

Generally, in order to prove service connection, there must be competent, credible evidence of (1) a current disability, (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of an injury or disease, and (3) a nexus, or link, between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury.  See, e.g., Davidson v. Shinseki, 581 F.3d 1313 (Fed. Cir. 2009); Pond v. West, 12 Vet. App. 341 (1999).

The requirement of a current disability is satisfied when the claimant is shown to have the disability either at the time she files her claim for service connection, or during the pendency of that claim, even if the disability resolves prior to final adjudication.  McClain v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 319, 321 (2007).  When the record contains a recent diagnosis of disability prior to the filing of a claim for benefits based on that disability, the report of diagnosis is relevant evidence that must be addressed in determining whether a current disability existed at the time the claim was filed or during its pendency.  Romanowsky v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 289, 294 (2013).

The existence of a current disability is the cornerstone of a claim for VA disability compensation.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; see Degmetich v. Brown, 104 F.3d 1328, 1332 (1997).  In the absence of proof of a present disability, there can be no valid claim.  Brammer v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 223, 225 (1992).

A layperson is generally incapable of opining on matters requiring medical knowledge.  However, lay evidence can be competent and sufficient to establish a diagnosis of a condition when: (1) a layperson is competent to identify the medical condition, (e.g., a broken leg, separated shoulder, pes planus (flat feet), varicose veins, tinnitus (ringing in the ears), etc.), (2) the layperson is reporting a contemporaneous medical diagnosis, or (3) lay testimony describing symptoms at the time supports a later diagnosis by a medical professional.  See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 (Fed. Cir. 2007).

In essence, lay testimony is competent when it pertains to the readily observable features or symptoms of injury or illness and "may provide sufficient support for a claim of service connection."  Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 469 (1994); see also 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(a)(2).  A determination as to whether medical evidence is needed to demonstrate that a Veteran presently has the same condition he or she had in service or during a presumptive period, or whether lay evidence will suffice, depends on the nature of the Veteran's present condition (e.g., whether the Veteran's present condition is of a type that requires medical expertise to identify it as the same condition as that in service or during a presumption period, or whether it can be so identified by lay observation).  See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 310 (2007).

Thus, medical evidence is not always or categorically required when the determinative issue involves either medical diagnosis or etiology, but rather such issue may, depending on the facts of the particular case, be established by competent and credible lay evidence under 38 U.S.C. § 1154(a).  See Davidson, supra.

When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, the Secretary shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.  An approximate balance of the evidence includes, but is not limited to, equipoise.  Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).  Evidence is not in "approximate balance" or "nearly equal" when the evidence persuasively favors one side or the other.  Id.

2. Entitlement to service connection for loss of sense of smell

3. Entitlement to service connection for chronic headaches

The Veteran seeks to establish service connection for chronic headaches and a disability manifested by loss of the sense of smell.  He contends, in essence, that the conditions began in service and have continued since.

The question for the Board is whether the Veteran has a chronic headache disability, or a disability manifested by loss of the sense of smell that began during service or is at least as likely as not related to an in-service injury, event, or disease.  Following review of the record as it existed at the time of the September 2023 rating decision, the Board must conclude that he does not.  In short, the evidence properly available for review is persuasively against a finding that he had a cognizable disability of chronic headaches, or a disability manifested by loss of the sense of smell at any time during the pendency or proximate to the filing of his claim.  Romanowsky, 26 Vet. App. at 294; McClain, 21 Vet. App. at 321.

The Board acknowledges that the Veteran is competent to identify headaches and loss of the sense of smell, as they are observable by a layperson.  See Barr, supra.  In this case, however, the medical evidence does not support his statements with regard to the presence of those conditions.  Post-service treatment records are entirely silent for any complaints, treatment, or diagnoses pertaining to headaches or loss of the sense of smell. 

Even if it could be conceded that the Veteran had a current disability, a review of his service treatment records does not reveal any complaints, diagnosis, or treatment for headaches, loss of smell, or related symptoms.  To the extent that he is claiming continuity of symptoms since service with regard to the claimed conditions, his statements in that regard are inconsistent with his service records, and a nexus based on continuity of symptoms has not been established.

In arriving at these conclusions, the Board has considered whether the AOJ committed a pre-decisional duty to assist error when it did not to afford the Veteran a VA medical examination and/or opinion in connection with these claims.  See McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006).  However, in the absence of any credible and probative evidence indicating the presence of a current disability that might be associated with service, no VA examinations and/or medical opinions were required.

For the reasons stated, the Board finds that the evidence is persuasively against the claims.  As such, the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine does not apply.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b).  The appeal of these issues is denied.

4. Entitlement to service connection for a bilateral foot disability.

The Veteran also seeks to establish service connection for a bilateral foot disability.  The question for the Board is whether, at the time of the December 2022 rating decision, he had a current disability of either foot that began during service or was at least as likely as not related to an in-service injury, event, or disease.  Following review of the record as it existed at the time of the December 2022 rating decision, the Board must conclude that he did not.  In short, the evidence properly available for review is persuasively against a finding that he had a cognizable disability of either foot at any time during the pendency or proximate to the filing of his claim.  Romanowsky, 26 Vet. App. at 294; McClain, 21 Vet. App. at 321.

The Board acknowledges that the Veteran has contended that he broke his fibula and tibia from the ankle bone and that the condition worsened because of military service.  See October 2022 VA Form 21-526EZ (Application for Disability Compensation and Related Compensation Benefits).  However, his statements with respect to onset of symptoms in service are contradicted and outweighed by his service treatment records, including the report of his June 2008 enlistment examination, when he denied having a history of foot trouble and his feet were found to be normal on clinical evaluation.  In addition, a review of his service treatment records does not otherwise reveal any complaints, diagnosis, or treatment for any issues or symptoms related to his feet.  To the extent that he is claiming continuity of symptoms since service, his statements in that regard are inconsistent with his service records, and a nexus based on continuity of symptoms has not been established.

In arriving at this conclusion, the Board has considered whether the AOJ committed a pre-decisional duty to assist error when it did not to afford the Veteran a VA medical examination and/or opinion in connection with this claim.  See McLendon, supra.  However, in the absence of any evidence indicating the presence of a current disability that might be associated with service, no VA examination and/or medical opinion was required.

As there is not an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence, the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine is inapplicable.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.  The appeal of this issue is denied.

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disability other than PTSD is remanded.

The Veteran seeks compensation for an acquired psychiatric disability.  He has asserted that he has a psychiatric disorder (variously claimed as PTSD, sexual trauma, major depression, anxiety, and drug abuse) that was incurred in or caused by service. See November 2020 VA 21-526EZ (Application for Disability Compensation and Related Compensation Benefits).

The Board notes that a VA mental disorders examination was obtained in August 2023.  That examination found a current diagnosis of polysubstance use disorder, to include opioid, cannabis, and amphetamine use.  The examiner opined that the Veteran's polysubstance abuse was less likely than not incurred in or caused by service.  The examiner noted that the substance abuse began prior to the Veteran's military service and led to administrative separation.  

The Board finds that the foregoing examination and medical opinion are not entirely adequate for adjudication purposes.  While the examiner noted a current polysubstance abuse disorder, the record reflects that the Veteran has other psychiatric disorders.  See, e.g., June 2023 Avenues Recovery Center treatment records.  Further, his service treatment records reflect a diagnosis of adjustment disorder with anxiety during his separation physical.  See March 2009 Record of Medical Care.

Under the circumstances, the AOJ should have obtained a new or addendum medical opinion addressing all psychiatric disorders prior to entering a decision on the Veteran's claim.  The failure to do so constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error that must be corrected.

2. Entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea is remanded.

3. Entitlement to service connection for a disability manifested by fatigue, to include chronic fatigue syndrome, is remanded.

The Veteran seeks to establish service connection for sleep apnea.  VA treatment records dated in June 2023 indicate a medical history of sleep apnea "as reported by the Veteran and in [the] medical record."  Further, his service treatment records reflect findings of trouble sleeping and use of medication for poor sleep.  In light of the foregoing, the AOJ should have resolved doubt in his favor and secured a medical examination and opinion prior to adjudicating his claim. See McLendon, supra; Colvin v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 171, 175 (1991).  The failure to do so constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error that must be corrected.

With respect to the claim for service connection for chronic fatigue syndrome, while it is unclear from the record whether the Veteran has a current diagnosis, the Veteran is competent to report symptoms capable of lay observation, including fatigue.  Additionally, as noted, his service treatment records reflect findings of trouble sleeping at night.  Further, the record indicates that the Veteran's fatigue might be due to his service-connected tinnitus.  In his October 2022 application for benefits, the Veteran indicated that his fatigue was due to a constant ringing in his right ear from servicing aircraft on a flight line.  Thus far, no medical examination been afforded the Veteran to address the nature and etiology of his claimed chronic fatigue syndrome.  In light of the foregoing, the AOJ should have secured a medical examination and opinion prior to adjudicating his claim.  See McLendon, supra; Colvin, supra.  The failure to do so constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error that must be corrected.

4. Entitlement to service connection for a right hip disability is remanded.

The Veteran attended a VA examination for his right hip disability in August 2023.  Following the examination, the examiner found that the Veteran's right hip disability was less likely as not due to his military service.  The examiner reached that conclusion on grounds that documented in-service tendonitis of the hip resolved with physical therapy and the Veteran did not present again until 2023 with complaints of hip pain.  The examiner stated that without further complaints immediately following the initial injury, a nexus could not be established.

The Board finds the foregoing opinion inadequate for purposes of adjudication.  Specifically, in arriving at an opinion as to etiology, the examiner relied on the absence of post-service treatment and did not consider the Veteran's competent statements concerning continued pain.  For example, in his July 2023 application for benefits, the Veteran stated that he "tore [his] hip muscles in training and now causes problems walking and doing daily activities."  Additionally, in July 2023, he presented with right hip pain that reportedly began in 2009 when he tore his right hip flexor muscle.  See July 2023 VA treatment record.

In light of the foregoing, the AOJ should have secured a new or addendum medical opinion prior to adjudicating the Veteran's claim.  The failure to do so constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error that must be corrected.

These matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Arrange to provide the record on appeal to the VA clinician who examined the Veteran in August 2023 for an acquired psychiatric disorder.  

After reviewing the record, the examiner should prepare a supplemental report identifying all acquired psychiatric disorders (other than PTSD) that have been present since July 2023 (when the Veteran filed his current claim for service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder).

For each psychiatric disability that is identified, the examiner should offer an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (i.e., whether the likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the disability had its onset in, or is otherwise attributable to, service.  In so doing, the examiner should consider the March 2009 service treatment record noting that the Veteran was diagnosed with adjustment disorder with anxiety.

If the August 2023 VA examiner is no longer employed by VA or is otherwise unable to offer the requested opinion(s), arrange to obtain the requested information from another qualified examiner. The need for another in-person examination, or video or telephone interview of the Veteran is left to the discretion of the examiner.

A complete medical rationale for all opinions expressed must be provided.

2. Arrange to have the Veteran examined for the purpose of assessing the etiology of his sleep apnea.  The examiner should review the record.  All indicated tests should be conducted and the results reported.

After examining the Veteran and reviewing the record, together with the results of any testing deemed necessary, the examiner should offer an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (i.e., whether the likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran has a current sleep apnea disability that had its onset in, or is otherwise attributable to, his period of service.

A complete medical rationale for all opinions expressed must be provided.

3. Arrange to have the Veteran examined for the purpose of assessing the etiology of his chronic fatigue.  The examiner should review the record.  All indicated tests should be conducted and the results reported.

After examining the Veteran and reviewing the record, together with the results of any testing deemed necessary, the examiner should offer an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (i.e., whether the likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran has a current disability manifested by fatigue, including chronic fatigue syndrome, that had its onset in, or is otherwise attributable to, his period of service.

If it is deemed unlikely that any currently identified disability manifested by fatigue, including chronic fatigue syndrome, had its onset in, or is otherwise attributable to, the Veteran's period of service, the examiner should offer a further opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran has a disability manifested by chronic fatigue that (a) was caused or (b) has been aggravated by his service-connected tinnitus.  The examiner should be careful to address both causation and aggravation, specifically and separately.

A complete medical rationale for all opinions expressed must be provided.

4. Arrange to provide the record on appeal to the VA clinician who examined the Veteran in August 2023 for a right hip disability.  

After reviewing the record, the examiner should prepare a supplemental report addressing whether it is at least as likely as not (i.e., whether the likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's right hip disability had its onset in, or are otherwise attributable to, his period of service.

In the supplemental report, the examiner should consider and address the Veteran's statements to the effect that he continued to experience pain following the documented in-service tendonitis of the hip.

In arriving at a conclusion, the examiner may consider whether the Veteran's post-service statements with respect to onset and continuity of symptoms are consistent or inconsistent with other entries or medical facts as set out in the STRs and elsewhere in the record. If there is a medical reason to accept or reject the Veteran's statements with respect to in-service onset and continuity of symptoms since, that should be noted.

If the August 2023 VA examiner is no longer employed by VA or is otherwise unable to offer the requested opinion(s), arrange to obtain the requested information from another qualified examiner.  The need for another in-person examination, or video or telephone interview of the Veteran is left to the discretion of the examiner.

A complete medical rationale for all opinions expressed must be provided.

 

 

DAVID A. BRENNINGMEYER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	R. Kettler, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.