Citation Nr: A25034764
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 240917-477097
DATE: April 15, 2025

ORDER

The reduction of the rating for major depressive disorder with anxious distress and traumatic brain injury (herein referred to as an acquired psychiatric disability) from 70 percent to 50 percent from June 1, 2023 was improper; reinstatement of the 70 percent rating from June 1, 2023 is granted.

Entitlement to a disability rating greater than 70 percent for an acquired psychiatric disability is denied.

Entitlement to a total disability rating based on individual unemployability (TDIU) is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. In a March 2023 rating decision, subject to higher-level review and subsequently confirmed in an August 2023 rating decision, the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) reduced the disability rating for an acquired psychiatric disability from 70 percent to 50 percent, effective to June 1, 2023; at the time of the March 2023 rating decision, sustained improvement in the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disability under the ordinary conditions of life and work had not been demonstrated.

2. The Veteran's acquired psychiatric disability was not manifested by symptoms resulting in total occupational and social impairment.

3. The persuasive evidence of record does not reflect that the Veteran was unable to obtain or retain substantially gainful employment due to his service-connected disabilities.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for reinstatement of the 70 percent disability rating for an acquired psychiatric disability from June 1, 2023 are met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.105, 3.344, Diagnostic Codes (DCs) 8045-9434.

2. The criteria for a disability rating greater than 70 percent for an acquired psychiatric disorder are not met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5103, 5103A, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.159, 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.126, 4.130, DCs 8045-9434.

3. The criteria for entitlement to TDIU are not met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.340, 3.341, 4.3, 4.16.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from March 2017 to April 2019.  He appeals an August 2023 higher-level review rating decision by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) AOJ reducing the Veteran's disability rating for an acquired psychiatric disability from 70 percent to 50 percent, effective June 1, 2023, and requested the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) conduct a direct review of the evidence considered by the AOJ.  See September 2023 VA Form 10182.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the August 2023 rating decision, which was subject to higher-level review.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim[s], considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Rating Reduction

In a December 2022 rating decision, the AOJ proposed to reduce the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disability rating from 70 percent to 50 percent.  A March 2023 rating decision decreased the Veteran's rating to 50 percent, effective June 1, 2023.  In May 2023 the Veteran filed VA Form 20-0996, requesting a higher-level review of the March 2023 rating decision.  An August 2023 rating decision confirmed the March 2023 rating decision.  The Veteran's rating was reduced to 50 percent in June 2023.

When a reduction in the evaluation of a service-connected disability is considered warranted and the lower evaluation would result in a reduction of compensation payments, a rating proposing the reduction will be prepared setting forth all material facts and reasons.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.105.  The Veteran must be notified at his latest address of record of the contemplated action and furnished detailed reasons thereof.  Additionally, a Veteran must be given notice that he has: (1) 60 days to present additional evidence to show that compensation payments should be continued at the present level; and (2) 30 days to request a predetermination hearing.  38 C.F.R. § 3.105(e), (i).

Here, the Veteran was provided a December 2022 rating decision and corresponding notification letter describing that his combined rating would be reduced from 80 percent to 70 percent with the proposed reduction of his acquired psychiatric disability rating from 70 percent to 50 percent.  The notification letter discussed material facts and reasons why VA proposed the reduction and notified the Veteran that he had 60 days to present additional evidence and 30 days to request a predetermination hearing.  The Veteran did not request a hearing.  Accordingly, the Board finds the requirements of 38 C.F.R. § 3.105 were met.

A veteran's disability rating shall not be reduced unless an improvement in the disability is shown to have occurred.  See 38 U.S.C. § 1155.  When a rating has been in effect for less than five years, such as this Veteran's rating, an adequate reexamination that discloses improvement in the condition will warrant reduction in rating.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.344(c).  "VA rating reductions, as with all VA rating decisions, [must] be based upon a review of the entire history of the [Veteran's] disability."  Brown v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 413, 420 (1993).  A rating reduction requires an inquiry as to "whether the evidence reflects an actual change in the disability and whether the examination reports reflecting such change are based upon thorough examinations."  Brown, 5 Vet. App. at 421.  Importantly, and critical to this case, "in any rating-reduction case not only must it be determined that an improvement in a disability has actually occurred but also that that improvement actually reflects an improvement in the Veteran's ability to function under the ordinary conditions of life and work."  Id. at 421.

Significantly, in a rating reduction case, VA has the burden of establishing that the disability has improved.

The Veteran's acquired psychiatric disability is rated under DC 8045-9434.  Hyphenated diagnostic codes are used when a rating under one diagnostic code requires the use of an additional diagnostic code to identify the basis for the evaluation assigned; the additional code is shown after the hyphen.  38 C.F.R. § 4.27.  Here, DC 8045 provides the rating criteria for TBI residuals.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.124A, DC 8045.  Individual acquired psychiatric disorders stemming from a TBI are rated separately, so long as symptoms do not overlap.  Id.  As a result, the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder is rated under DC 9434, which provides the rating criteria for major depressive disorder.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, DC 9434.  All acquired psychiatric disorders are rated under the same General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders.

Under the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders, a 50 percent rating is warranted for occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to such symptoms as: flattened affect, circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech, panic attacks more than once a week, difficulty in understanding complex commands, impairment of short-and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks), impaired judgment, impaired abstract thinking, disturbances of motivation and mood, and difficulty in establishing effective work and social relationships.  Id.  Whereas, a 70 percent rating is warranted for occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a work-like setting); inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.  Id.

At the Veteran's initial November 2020 examination, the clinician noted symptoms of depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty establishing and maintaining relationships, and obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities.  See November 2020 VA examination report.  It is unclear exactly what obsessional rituals the clinician found interfered with the Veteran's routine activities, but the examination report noted the Veteran "checks doors and windows regularly to ensure safety" even in the middle of the night.  Id.  Also, the clinician noted the Veteran had blunted affect upon examination.  Id.  After a thorough evaluation, the clinician opined that the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder resulted in occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas.  Id.

In December 2021, the Veteran received a second examination wherein the examiner found the Veteran's symptoms remained the same with the exception of mild memory loss, and obsessional rituals.  See December 2021 VA examination report.  The examiner noted the Veteran endorsed hallucinations and increased concentration impairment, but ultimately stated his reports and responses on a memory test "suggested an attempt to exaggerate symptoms."  Id.  Additionally, in April 2022, a physician assessed the Veteran's TBI symptoms and opined that "there is no change" and the Veteran reported his symptoms have "stayed the same."  See April 2022 VA examination report.  Overall, the Board finds the evidence of record does not persuasively reflect an improvement in the Veteran's disability occurred.

As noted above, in reduction cases, the burden of proof lies with VA to show by a preponderance of the evidence that the Veteran's disability has undergone an observable improvement such that a rating reduction is warranted.  See Brown, 5 Vet. App. at 421.  The Board finds no evidence the Veteran's psychiatric disability materially improved.  Thus, VA has not met its burden and any reduction in the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disability rating was therefore improper.  Reinstatement of the Veteran's 70 percent disability rating is warranted.  See Stern v McDonough, 34 Vet. App. 51 (2021).

Increased Rating

Disability ratings are determined by applying a schedule of ratings that is based on average impairment of earning capacity.  Separate diagnostic codes identify the various disabilities.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R., Part 4.  Each disability must be viewed in relation to its history and the limitation of activity imposed by the disabling condition should be emphasized.  38 C.F.R. § 4.1.

When considering the propriety of the initial evaluation assigned, consideration of the medical evidence since the effective date of the award of service connection is required.  See Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 199, 125-26 (1999).  The Board will consider whether separate ratings may be assigned for separate periods of time based on facts found, a practice known as "staged ratings," whether it is an initial rating case or not.  See Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505, 509-10 (2007).

Where there is a question as to which of two evaluations shall be applied, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria for that rating; otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7.

As noted above, the Veteran's service-connected acquired psychiatric disability includes MDD and TBI and is rated under DC 8045-9434.  The rating criteria for a 70 percent disability rating under DC 9434 are listed above.  See C.F.R. § 4.130, DC 9434.  The next highest rating is a 100 percent rating, which is warranted for total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (ADLs) (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation or name.  Id.

For any acquired psychiatric disorder rating, the Board must conduct a holistic analysis that considers the severity, frequency, and duration of all associated symptoms with the Veteran's level of occupational and social impairment.  Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 10, 22 (2017); 38 C.F.R. § 4.126(a).  Then, the Board must determine whether the Veteran's symptomatology caused a level of impairment in "most areas" applicable to the relevant percentage rating criteria.  See Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 116-19 (2013).

After review of the record, the Board finds the Veteran did not meet the criteria for a 100 percent rating.  Although the Veteran reported to check the locks and windows in his house and the November 2020 examiner stated the Veteran had obsessional rituals interfering with routine activities, there is no evidence of record the Veteran exhibited grossly inappropriate behavior or gross impairment in thought or communication.  In July 2022, the Veteran endorsed prior suicidal ideation "late last year" due to financial issues, but he consistently denied any plan or intent.  See July 2022 VA treatment records.  Treatment records received from the Social Security Administration (SSA) reflect anger, irritability, and frustration, but the Veteran was never found a persistent danger to himself or others, and the record supports this finding.  See January 2022 SSA disability determination; see also December 2021 VA examination report.  The Veteran denied any legal or behavioral history during the appeal period, and he denied a history of violence, gambling, or substance abuse.  Id.  Also, the Veteran reported that he heard voices and had olfactory and gustatory hallucinations.  Id.  For example, the Veteran reported he saw "black fog in the corners" of rooms and has seen and heard his grandfather, but there is no evidence his reported hallucinations are persistent or contribute to social and occupational impairment.  Id.  Additionally, no examiner has found the Veteran to suffer from persistent delusions or hallucinations, and the Board finds the examiner's expert opinions probative when weighed with the Veteran's statements of record.

Further, the Veteran was consistently oriented to time, place, person, and situation.  See November 2020, December 2021 and April 2022 VA examination reports.  Additionally, the Veteran was consistently found to have adequate hygiene and grooming, with no intermittent inability to perform ADLs.  Id.  Finally, the record does not suggest the Veteran suffered from memory loss so severe he forgets the names of close relatives or his own name.  Id.  Thus, based on VA treatment records in conjunction with the VA examination reports or record, there is no evidence the Veteran suffered from total social and occupational impairment.

As such, the Board finds the Veteran's symptoms did not rise to the level of total social or occupational impairment, the criteria required for a 100 percent rating.  Accordingly, the Board denies an initial rating greater than 70 percent for the Veteran's service-connected acquired psychiatric disability.  See Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49, 55-57 (1990); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

TDIU

The Veteran filed a November 2021 VA Form 21-8940 requesting entitlement to TDIU.  When a veteran appeals for a higher disability rating and it is coupled with evidence of unemployability, the issue of entitlement to TDIU is raised for the entire appeal period.  See Harper v. Wilkie, 30 Vet. App. 356, 361 (2018).

Total disability will be considered to exist where there is any impairment of mind and body that is sufficient to render it impossible for the average person to follow a substantially gainful occupation.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.340.  Total disability ratings for compensation may be assigned, where the schedular rating is less than total, when the disabled person is unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation as a result of service-connected disabilities, provided that the Veteran meets the schedular requirements.  Specifically, if there are two or more disabilities, there shall be at least one disability that is ratable at 40 percent or more and sufficient additional disability to bring the combined rating to 70 percent or more.  See 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.340, 3.341, 4.16(a).

Here, the Veteran's service-connected PTSD is rated at 70 percent during the entire appeal period, and he has a combined disability rating of 80 percent.  Thus, the Veteran meets the schedular criteria for the entire appeal period.  As such, the narrow issue before the Board is whether the Veteran was unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation due to his service-connected disabilities.

In determining whether a veteran can secure, follow, and maintain a substantially gainful occupation, the Board must consider: (1) the Veteran's occupational history, education, skill, and training; (2) whether the Veteran has the physical ability (both exertional and non-exertional) to perform the type of activities required by the occupation at issue; and (3) whether the Veteran has the mental ability to perform the activities required by the occupation at issue.  See Ray v. Wilkie, 31 Vet. App. 58, 73 (2019).  Additionally, "substantially gainful employment" is employment "which is ordinarily followed by the nondisabled to earn their livelihood with earnings common to the particular occupation in the community where the veteran resides."  Moore v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 356, 358 (1991).

The Veteran completed high school and reported no other education or training.  See November 2021 VA Form 21-8940; see also January 2022 SSA disability determination.  He worked fulltime as a team member and manager at a fast-food restaurant from January 2013 to January 2015.  Id.  In January 2015, the Veteran switched jobs to be a fitness instructor until March 2017 when he enlisted in the Army.  Id.  The Veteran served in the Army as a combat engineer from March 2017 to April 2019.  Id.  After discharge, he worked fulltime in retail sales with a phone company from May 2019 to August 2020 until he quit rather than be fired for not making his sales-quota for three consecutive months.  Id; see also November 2020 and December 2020 VA examination reports.  Notably, the Veteran attributed not meeting quota as "due to COVID" and not his own service-connected disabilities.  See November 2020 VA treatment records ("not worked since August 2020 due to COVID-19"); November 2021 VA treatment records; December 2021 VA examination report.

The Veteran reported he became too disabled to work in August 2020, which is prior to the current appeal period.  Id.  Thus, he has not been substantially employed during the appeal period.

Overall, the Board finds the Veteran has the occupational background and education to work in any unskilled labor position or customer service position, such as the position he previously held as team member and manager, in addition to any standard unskilled clerical position within a typical office setting.  He also has the background to work as a physical trainer or as an employee in a gym-setting, including varied customer service positions.

Mentally, the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disability is rated at 70 percent and produces occupational and social impairment in most areas, with symptoms of depression, anxiety, sleep impairment, mild memory loss, poor concentration, difficulty establishing and maintaining effective relationships, and suspiciousness.  See November 2020 and December 2021 VA examination reports.  Additionally, the Veteran suffers from "almost daily bi-temporal headaches" with sensitivity to light and sound that last from one to two hours but are not characteristic prostrating attacks and reduce the Veteran's ability to concentrate.  See January 2021 and April 2022 VA examination reports.  The Veteran's headaches are currently rated as noncompensable during the entire appeal period and a January 2021 TBI examiner noted the Veteran's neurobehavioral effects from his TBI do not interfere with workplace interactions.  Thus, the record reflects the Veteran's headaches would decrease the Veteran's ability to concentrate, but not such that it would significantly interfere with any job for which the Veteran is qualified.

A January 2022 SSA disability determination report noted the Veteran's psychiatric symptoms resulted in "abnormal" memory and concentration, but the SSA examiner noted the Veteran "retains the capacity to sustain the mental demands associated with carrying out simple and detailed tasks over the course of a routine workday...within acceptable attention, persistence and pace tolerances," despite being "unable to do so for complex tasks requiring sustained concentration."  Overall, the SSA examiner stated the Veteran could perform "simple, repetitive tasks."  See January 2022 SSA disability determination report.  The Board finds the SSA disability determination report highly probative as the examiners evaluated the Veteran and provided a comprehensive report on the Veteran's potential impairment to employment based on his statements, the medical records, and his physical and mental disabilities.

In June 2022, a psychologist noted the Veteran's psychiatric symptoms "may" impair his ability to be at work on time, and "may affect the ability to concentrate at work" or affect his work performance and concern coworkers.  See June 2022 VA medical opinion.  An August 2022 medical opinion by a neurologist considered the aforementioned medical opinions, reviewed the record, and stated that the Veteran's TBI residuals, including his headaches and psychiatric disability would affect his ability to concentrate, focus, and think, but would not prevent typical seated work.  See August 2022 VA medical opinion.

Overall, the Board finds these opinions, when taken together, to be probative and reflective of the Veteran's occupational impairment due to his acquired psychiatric disability and TBI residuals.  The Veteran's symptoms would prevent employment in a high-stress or skilled position, but his symptoms do not prevent his ability to obtain and maintain substantial employment in a field or similarly-situated field in which he was previously employed.  For example, the Veteran could not work in a high-stress job similar to his previous sales position as his performance was based on his ability to meet a specific quota; however, there are numerous other sales positions and customer service positions that do not have strict retention policies and are based on completing unskilled customer service job requirements.

Physically, the Veteran is service connected for tinnitus, rated at 10 percent disabling, bilateral shin splints rated at 10 percent, left ankle sprain rated at 10 percent, and left and right knee strains each rated at 10 percent disabling.  See August 2023 rating decision codesheet.

The Veteran contends his tinnitus "gives [him] massive headaches" which "sometimes...lead to stomachaches," and the Veteran will have to leave a noisy area and lie down or cup his ears to stop the ringing.  See November 2020 VA examination report.  The Veteran is not competent to state that his tinnitus leads to headaches and stomach symptoms absent contemporaneous medical evidence, of which there is none.  See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 n.4 (Fed. Cir. 2007); see also Kahana v. Shinseki, 24. Vet. App. 428 (2011).  Thus, this statement of impairment caused by tinnitus is not probative.  As such, the probative evidence reflects the tinnitus creates a ringing at least four times a day lasting up to ninety minutes that could potentially cause a decrease in concentration or impact the Veteran's ability to hear, but there is minimal affect on the Veteran's ability to obtain and maintain employment.  See November 2020 VA examination report.

The Veteran reported severe, constant knee and shin pain that was aggravated by prolonged sitting, standing, and walking.  See January 2021, March 2021, and April 2022 VA examination reports.  At examinations, the Veteran's shins were painful on palpation and with all movement.  Id.  Despite the pain, the Veteran maintained normal range of motion upon most knee testing and denied any functional loss or impairment with repeated use over time other than increased pain and difficulty with continued standing and walking.  See March 2021 and April 2022 VA examination reports (range of motion from 0 to 140 degrees); January 2021 VA examination report (range of motion from 0 to 125 degrees).  The Veteran also noted the inside of his knees swell up with continued use over time and he has instability when lunging forward; however, all stability testing reflected normal stability.  Id.  After examination, the March 2021 examiner stated that although the Veteran would have difficulty with a job requiring prolonged standing and walking, his knee and shin conditions did not otherwise preclude any employment duties.  Id.

For the left ankle, the Veteran reported a "dull to throbbing left ankle pain most days" that is precipitated by activities such as prolonged standing, walking, and running.  See January 2021 VA examination report.  Upon examination, the Veteran's left ankle dorsiflexion was limited to 15 degrees out of 20 degrees, and his plantar flexion was limited to 30 degrees out of 45 degrees with pain on all movement.  Id.

In May 2022, a clinician reviewed the Veteran's records and stated that the Veteran's left ankle sprain with bilateral shin splints and knee strain would limit his ability to walk and stand "more than one hour at a time without a rest period" and that he could not lift or carry anything more than 25 pounds and would be limited in climbing.  See May 2022 VA medical opinion.  A January 2022 SSA disability determination focused on the Veteran's lumbar spine condition and noted "all issues are due to back and bilateral lower extremity weakness."  See January 2022 SSA disability determination report.  Upon examination, the Veteran's knees were able to bend to 90 degrees, his left ankle's range of motion was limited to 10 degrees in every direction, and he reported constant pain in multiple joints, including his service-connected knees and left ankle.  Id.  The January 2022 physical functional capacity testing reflected that the Veteran could sit for over six hours in a typical workday and could stand and/or walk for about six hours over an eight hour workday.  Id.  These findings are relatively consistent with the May 2022 medical opinion and the Board finds both opinions probative as they were provided by medical professionals who reviewed the relevant evidence of record and considered the Veteran's statements.  Generally, the record reflects the Veteran's knees, shin splints, and left ankle conditions would prevent employment in any hard labor position.  However, such physical limitations would not prevent work in a typical customer service position, such as his previous managerial position, any unskilled office setting, or even in his prior physical trainer position where the Veteran could coach and train individuals without needing to physically overexert himself.

Thus, the probative evidence persuasively reflects the Veteran's service-connected mental and physical conditions would impair but not prevent his ability to obtain and maintain substantially gainful employment in a field for which he was qualified.  As such, the Board denies the Veteran's claim for entitlement to TDIU.

 

 

DONNIE R. HACHEY

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Bona, J.F.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.