Citation Nr: A25034735
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 240202-414148
DATE: April 15, 2025

ORDER

The claim of entitlement to service connection for hypertension is denied.

The claim of entitlement to service connection for ischemic heart disease is denied.

The claim of entitlement to service connection for myocarditis is denied.

REMANDED

The claim of entitlement to service connection for irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The record on review does not show a current diagnosis of hypertension or symptoms of high blood pressure.

2. The record on review does not show a current diagnosis of ischemic heart disease.

3. The record on review does not show a current diagnosis of myocarditis.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for service connection for hypertension have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1153, 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.

2. The criteria for service connection for ischemic heart disease have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1153, 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.

3. The criteria for service connection for myocarditis have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1153, 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from April 2011 to April 2017.

This appeal is from a January 2024 rating decision.  The Veteran timely appealed to the Board, asking for placement on the direct review docket.  This means that the record closed as of the date of notification of the decision on review, which, here, is January 26, 2024.  The Board's consideration of the evidence is restricted to that which was of record on the date.  The Veteran is advised that if he has knowledge or possession of evidence relevant to the claims denied herein, he is advised to file it along with a supplemental claim within a year of this decision.

Service Connection

1. The claim of entitlement to service connection for hypertension is denied.

2. The claim of entitlement to service connection for ischemic heart disease is denied.

3. The claim of entitlement to service connection for myocarditis is denied.

The Veteran has appealed the denial of service connection for hypertension, an ischemic heart disability, and myocarditis.

Service connection is granted for any current disability that is the result of a disease contracted or an injury sustained while on active duty service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a).  Service connection may also be granted for a disease diagnosed after discharge, where all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).

Service connection requires competent evidence showing: (1) the existence of a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service.  Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

With regard to the first prong of service connection, the presence of a chronic disability at any time during the claim process can justify a grant of service connection, even where the most recent diagnosis is negative.  McClain v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 319, 321 (2007); see also Romanowsky v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 289, 293 (2013).

Here, the record on review does not show a current diagnosis of hypertension, an ischemic heart disease, or myocarditis. In this regard, the rating schedule contains a definition of hypertension, located at 38 C.F.R. § 4.101, DC 7101. It provides that the term hypertension means that the diastolic blood pressure is predominantly 90mm. or greater, and isolated systolic hypertension means that the systolic blood pressure is predominantly 160mm. or greater with a diastolic blood pressure of less than 90mm. The record does not contain blood pressure readings that meet this definition.

Indeed, the January 2024 VA hypertension examination shows that the Veteran reported that he had been told that his blood pressure was "borderline high" and that he was not taking any medication.  Blood pressure readings were taken multiple times in January 2024.  The examiner opined that he did not have any pathology showing hypertension.

The January 2024 VA examination of the heart also shows no current diagnosis.  The Veteran reported shortness of breath with strenuous activity.  Physical examination showed regular rhythm, normal heart sounds, normal peripheral pulses, and no peripheral edema.  Diagnostic testing were normal, except for a nonspecific T-wave abnormality, which the examiner explained was not necessarily an abnormality and is not indicative of a cardiac diagnosis.  An exercise stress test conducted during the examination was negative for exercised induced chest pain.  Indeed, he denied experiencing any symptoms attributable to a cardiac diagnosis during any level of activity.  Rather, the Veteran had good exercise tolerance with normal heart rate recovery.  The test did not show ischemia.  The examiner opined there was no pathology to render a diagnosis of an ischemic heart disease or myocarditis.

The Veteran's VA treatment records do not show or suggest the Veteran has hypertension, an ischemic heart disease, or myocarditis.  He did not authorize VA to obtain any non-VA records.

In sum, the record does not show a current diagnosis of hypertension, an ischemic heart disease, or myocarditis.  There is not competent evidence of functional loss leading to the impairment of earning capacity in relation to these three claims. See Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356 (Fed. Cir. 2018).  A current diagnosis or functional loss is required for service connection to be granted.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303; Shedden, supra.  The evidence is not in approximate equipoise as to whether there are current disabilities shown in the record.  As none of his current claims have corresponding current diagnoses, or show symptoms causing functional impairment, these claims must be denied.  

The Board acknowledges the Veteran's reports of having these disabilities.  However, he has not been shown to have the training or expertise to competently render these diagnoses and the medical evidence of record does not provide support to his reports.  Rather, the VA examiner was asked to investigate his claims and found that he did not have current diagnoses.  The Board places more weight on the examination reports.

The Board further acknowledges his reports of having shortness of breath during strenuous activity.  However, upon exercise stress testing, this was not shown and, during interviewed-based testing, he denied any cardiac symptoms with any level of activity.  The Board places more weight on the VA examiner's examination and report, which did not show that he had any clinically significant symptoms.  

The Board finds the VA examinations are adequate for adjudication.  They included interview and physical examination.  The Veteran has not raised any objections or issues as to the January 2024 VA examinations.   

The Board notes that service department medical records have been associated with the claims file in December 2024, which had not been previously obtained for review.  However, they are not relevant to these claims.  They do not show diagnosis of hypertension, ischemic heart disease, or myocarditis.  Accordingly, reconsideration of these claims on a de novo basis by the AOJ (agency of original jurisdiction) is not warranted.  38 C.F.R. § 3.156(c).   

Accordingly, without current diagnoses or functional loss, the claims for service connection for hypertension, ischemic heart disease, and myocarditis must be denied.  As noted above, if the Veteran has been diagnosed with or received treatment for any of the claimed disabilities since the January 2024 rating decision, he is advised to file evidence of such along with a supplemental claim within a year of this decision.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Board only has the authority to remand issues back to the AOJ in limited circumstances: (1) to correct errors in fulfilling the duty to assist committed by the AOJ prior to the issuance of the decision on appeal; and (2) to correct other errors in fulfilling statutory or regulatory duties if correction would have a reasonable possibility of substantiating the claim.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

1. The claim of entitlement to service connection for IBS is remanded.

The Board has identified a duty to assist error committed by the AOJ prior to issuance of the decision on review.  The January 2024 VA examination opinion purports to address the Veteran's toxic exposure risk activities (TERA) but does not specifically address the exposures noted in the March 2023 Individual Longitudinal Exposure Record (ILER report).  The ILER report shows exposure to whole body vibration, forceful exertion, petroleum distillates, and noise.  On remand, an opinion that addresses the Veteran's actual exposures shall be obtained.

Further, the Veteran has asserted that IBS is caused or aggravated by his service-connected GERD, which was not addressed by the examiner at all.

It was error for the AOJ to have relied on the VA examination opinion of record because it is inadequate.  On remand, an updated examination and opinion shall be obtained.

Finally, the Board observes that updated STRs were associated with the record after the January 2024 rating decision on review.  These records will be considered on readjudication of this claim following the VA examination.  The Veteran is advised that if he has any evidence pertinent to this claim for service connection for IBS, he is advised to file it as soon as possible so that it may be considered in conjunction with the readjudication of this claim.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Schedule the Veteran for an appropriate examination for an opinion on whether it is approximately as likely as not that IBS is related to the Veteran's service, including toxic exposure risk activities (TERA), or that IBS is caused or aggravated by the Veteran's service-connected GERD.  The examiner is asked to review the record prior to the examination and to elicit a detailed history of the Veteran's IBS during the examination.  The examiner should consult with the relevant literature in rendering the following opinions:

(a) TERA: a March 2023 ILER report shows exposure to whole body vibration, forceful exertion, petroleum distillates, and noise.  The examiner should ask the Veteran whether he has any additional exposures, and opine on whether IBS is caused by the exposures.  The examiner should consider the total potential exposure through all deployments, and also the synergistic combined effect of all TERA exposures.  

(b) GERD: the Veteran asserts his IBS symptoms coincide with his GERD symptoms and that GERD is related to IBS.  The examiner is to opine (i) whether it is approximately as likely as not that GERD CAUSED IBS, and (ii) whether it is approximately as likely as not that GERD AGGRAVATED IBS.  The examiner is advised that that the question of aggravation is separate from that of causation.  "Aggravation" means to have caused any increase in severity that need not be permanent in nature.

All opinions must be supported with explanation.

 

 

Nathaniel J. Doan

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Gibson, Amanda

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.