Citation Nr: A25034940
Decision Date: 04/16/25	Archive Date: 04/16/25

DOCKET NO. 241020-483336
DATE: April 16, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for dizziness is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for multiple sclerosis is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a back disorder is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from March 1970 to March 1974.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a January 2024 rating decision.

Following the January 2024 rating decision, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996 and requested higher-level review (HLR).  The AOJ confirmed the denial of the claims in a May 2024 HLR decision.

The Veteran then submitted a VA Form 10182 in October 2024 in which he specifically identified the January 2024 rating decision as opposed to the May 2024 rating decision, and he elected the direct review docket. See Terry v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 1 (2023) (a claimant may file more than one administrative review request within one year of an initial AOJ decision on a claim, provided that such an administrative review request is not pending concurrently with another administrative review request).  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the January 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the January 2024 rating decision, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. However, because the Board is remanding the case, any evidence that the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Upon review, the Board finds that a remand is necessary to correct pre-decisional duty to assist errors.

Dizziness

A September 2023 diagnosed the Veteran with bilateral vestibular hypofunction, but she opined that the disorder was less likely than not caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activity(ies) (TERA), after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all TERAs of the Veteran.  She explained that there is currently insufficient medical or scientific evidence available showing a relationship between the development of vestibular hypofunction and the TERA. The examiner also noted that the Veteran has risk factors outside of his military exposures, to include a diagnosis of multiple sclerosis (MS), that likely outweigh the risk factors identified in the TERA.  She stated that medical literature suggests symptoms arising from vestibular system dysfunction are observed in 49 to 59 percent of people with MS.  Although MS affects the central nervous system (CNS), people with MS can present with peripheral symptoms if the lesion affects the vestibular nerve in isolation as it enters the CNS. 

Nevertheless, the Board notes that the examiner did not address the service treatment records showing that the Veteran became very dizzy in October 1970, passed out, and had vertigo with painful drainage in his right ear.  Therefore, the Board finds that another VA medical opinion was needed.

Neurological Disorder

A September 2023 VA examiner confirmed a diagnosis of multiple sclerosis (MS), but she opined that the disorder was less likely than not caused by the indicated TERAs, after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all TERAs of the Veteran.  She explained that, while there are no obvious risk factors identified in the Veteran's records for the development of MS, there is still insufficient medical or scientific evidence available that notes a relationship between the development of multiple sclerosis and the TERA. 

Nevertheless, the examiner did not address whether the Veteran's current multiple sclerosis could be directly related to his military service, to include whether he had any symptoms therein, such as dizziness, that could have been indicative of or early manifestations of the disorder.  Therefore, the Board finds that another VA medical opinion was needed. 

Back Disorder

A September 2023 VA examiner diagnosed the Veteran with degenerative disc disease and degenerative arthritis, but she opined that disorders were less likely than not incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness. She acknowledged that his service treatment records documented back problems in February 1973, May 1973, and September 1973, but she found that there was a lack of objective and subjective evidence following the back injuries to suggest that a back disorder has persisted and progressed in severity since the Veteran's military service.  The examiner concluded that the current disorders were not caused by the treatment and complaints of back pain due a to football injury and weightlifting.

Nevertheless, the examiner did not explain the significance of the fact that there was no chronicity in service or address whether any injury or symptomatology in service could have resulted in the delayed onset of the current disorder.  It would have been helpful if she had addressed how the current disorder generally presents or develops.  Therefore, the Board finds that another VA medical opinion was needed. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1.  The AOJ should obtain a medical opinion to determine the etiology of the Veteran's dizziness.  A physical examination is only needed if one is deemed necessary by the individual providing the opinion.

The examiner is requested to review all pertinent records associated with the claims file.

It should be noted that the Veteran is competent to attest to factual matters of which he has first-hand knowledge.  If there is a medical basis to support or doubt the history provided by the Veteran, the examiner should state this with a fully reasoned explanation.

The examiner should opine as to whether the Veteran dizziness that is causally or etiologically related to his military service, to include any symptomatology or exposures therein.  He or she should specifically address the service treatment records showing that the Veteran became very dizzy in October 1970, passed out, and had vertigo with painful drainage in his right ear

In rendering his or her opinion, the examiner should consider the Veteran's total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments and the synergistic, combined effect of all TERAs.

A clear rationale for all opinions should be provided.

2.  The AOJ should obtain a medical opinion to determine the etiology of the Veteran's multiple sclerosis.  A physical examination is only needed if one is deemed necessary by the individual providing the opinion.

The examiner is requested to review all pertinent records associated with the claims file.

It should be noted that the Veteran is competent to attest to factual matters of which he has first-hand knowledge.   If there is a medical basis to support or doubt the history provided by the Veteran, the examiner should state this with a fully reasoned explanation.

The examiner should opine as to whether the Veteran has a neurological disorder, including multiple sclerosis, that is causally or etiologically related to his military service, to include any symptomatology or exposures therein.

The examiner should address whether the Veteran had any symptoms in service that could have been indicative of or early manifestations of multiple sclerosis.

In rendering his or her opinion, the examiner should consider the Veteran's total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments and the synergistic, combined effect of all TERAs.

A clear rationale for all opinions should be provided.

3.  The AOJ should obtain a medical opinion to determine the etiology of the Veteran's back disorder.  A physical examination is only needed if one is deemed necessary by the individual providing the opinion.

The examiner is requested to review all pertinent records associated with the claims file.

It should be noted that the Veteran is competent to attest to factual matters of which he has first-hand knowledge.   If there is a medical basis to support or doubt the history provided by the Veteran, the examiner should state this with a fully reasoned explanation.

The examiner should state whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran has a back disorder that manifested in service or that is otherwise causally or etiologically related to his military service, to include any injury or symptomatology therein.

In rendering this opinion, the examiner should address the service treatment records showing that the Veteran sought treatment for back problems multiple times.

If the examiner finds any gap in time between the Veteran's military service and the onset of a current disorder to be probative, he or she should provide an explanation of its medical significance.  He or she should also discuss the medically known or theoretical causes of any current low back disorder and describe how such a disorder generally presents or develops.

A clear rationale for all opinions should be provided.

 

J.W. ZISSIMOS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	G.W. Neiman

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.