Citation Nr: A25034450
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 240220-418765
DATE: April 15, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on a period of active duty for training from November 1989 to April 1990 and on active duty from February 2003 to May 2003, with additional periods of service in the Army Reserve.

The rating decision on appeal was issued in April 2023 and constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.

In the February 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the April 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

1. Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea is remanded.

The Veteran contends that his obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is due to his service connected PTSD, bilateral plantar fasciitis with pes planus and capsulitis, right knee strain, left knee strain, left hallux valgus, and/or right hallux valgus.

One of the effects of the AMA is to narrow the set of circumstances in which the Board must remand appeals to the AOJ for further development instead of immediately deciding them directly. Nevertheless, even under the AMA, the Board still has the duty to remand issues when necessary to correct a pre-decisional duty-to-assist error. See 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

The December 2022 VA examiner opined the Veteran's OSA was less likely than not proximately due to or the result of the Veteran's service-connected PTSD. The rationale was that OSA is due to collapse or near collapse of the soft tissues of the pharynx when they relax in sleep. OSA is caused by repetitive bouts of upper airway obstruction during sleep as a result of the narrowing of respiratory passages. The most common site of obstruction is the nasopharynx. Risk factors include obesity, some abnormal tongue shapes, tonsillar hypertrophy, and abnormalities (congenital) jaw shapes. This is a physiologic physical condition unrelated to mental health conditions which do not cause relaxation of the soft tissues in sleep.

The April 2023 VA examiner opined the Veteran's OSA was less likely than not proximately due to or the result of the Veteran's service-connected bilateral plantar fasciitis with pes planus and capsulitis, right knee strain, left knee strain, left hallux valgus, or right hallux valgus. The rationale was there is no pathophysiological or literature that documents bilateral plantar fasciitis with pes planus and capsulitis, right knee strain, left knee strain, left hallux valgus, or right hallux valgus as a nexus for OSA.

The VA examiners, however, did not address whether the Veteran's claimed OSA was "aggravated" by the Veteran's service-connected PTSD, bilateral plantar fasciitis with pes planus and capsulitis, right knee strain, left knee strain, left hallux valgus, or right hallux valgus. The United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) held that phrases such as "caused by" and "related to" do not address the aggravation aspect of secondary service connection.  Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439, 449 (1995). The Court has held that when an examiner determines whether service connection is warranted on a secondary basis, he or she must address both direct causation as well as aggravation. Id. The Board finds the December 2022 and April 2023 opinions do not address aggravation. Therefore, on remand, the addendum opinion must address this deficiency.

This is a pre-decisional duty-to-assist error and therefore remand is appropriate.

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain an addendum opinion by an appropriate clinician to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea. The entire file must be made available to the examiner.

The examiner must opine whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea is AGGRAVATED by service-connected PTSD, bilateral plantar fasciitis with pes planus and capsulitis, right knee strain, left knee strain, left hallux valgus, or right hallux valgus.

The examiner is requested to provide a clear rationale and explain in detail the underlying reasoning for any opinions expressed.  A discussion of the facts and medical principles involved would be of considerable assistance to the Board.  If an examiner cannot provide the requested opinion without resorting to speculation, he or she should expressly indicate this and provide a supporting rationale as to why an opinion cannot be made without resorting to speculation.

 

 

TANYA SMITH

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Alexia Palacios-Peters, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.