Citation Nr: A25034342
Decision Date: 04/14/25	Archive Date: 04/14/25

DOCKET NO. 240222-419387
DATE: April 14, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to specially adapted housing is granted.

Entitlement to a special home adaptation grant is dismissed. 

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran has a permanent and total service-connected disability that precludes locomotion without the aid of braces, crutches, canes, or a wheelchair due to the loss of use of his lower extremities together with the loss of use of his upper extremities which significantly affect the functions of balance and propulsion.?

2. As the Veteran is granted entitlement to specially adapted housing herein, he is not eligible for a special home adaptation grant. 

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for entitlement to specially adapted housing are met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 2101, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.809. 

2. The criteria for dismissal of the issue of entitlement to a special home adaptation grant are met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 2101, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.809a(a).

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Air Force from September 1965 to January 1969. These matters come to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from a February 2024 rating decision that denied entitlement to both specially adapted housing and a special home adaptation grant. In an April 2024 decision, the Board also denied these claims; and the Veteran appealed to the Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (the Court).

In a November 2024 order, the Court, pursuant to a Joint Motion for Remand, vacated the Board's decision and remanded it for readjudication. These matters now return to the Board. 

Entitlement to specially adapted housing

Specially adapted housing?is available to a veteran who has a permanent and total service-connected disability due to: (1) amyotrophic lateral sclerosis rated?as 100?percent disabling under?38?C.F.R. §?4.124a?, Diagnostic Code 8017; (2) blindness in both eyes, having only light perception, plus the anatomical loss or loss of use of one lower extremity; (3) full thickness or subdermal burns that have resulted in contractures with limitation of motion of two or more extremities or of at least one extremity and the trunk; or (4) the loss or loss of use of both upper extremities such as to preclude use of the arms at or above the elbows. 

Specially adapted housing?is also available to a veteran with a permanent and total disability that precludes locomotion without the aids of braces, crutches, canes, or a wheelchair due to: (5) the loss, or loss of use, of both lower extremities; (6) the loss or loss of use of one lower extremity, together with residuals of organic disease or injury which so affect the functions of balance and propulsion; or, (7) the loss or loss of use of one lower extremity together with the loss or loss of use of one upper extremity which so affect the functions of balance or propulsion.?38?U.S.C. §?2101?(a);?38?C.F.R. §?3.809?(a), (b), (d). 

The phrase "precludes locomotion" is defined as the necessity for regular and constant use of a wheelchair, braces, crutches, or canes as a normal mode of locomotion, although occasional locomotion by other methods may be possible.?38?C.F.R. §?3.809(c). 

The term "loss of use" is not defined under?38?C.F.R. §?3.808. However, under other relevant VA regulations, "loss of use of a hand or foot" is defined as no effective function remaining other than that which would be equally well served by an amputation stump at the site of election below the elbow or knee with use of a suitable prosthetic appliance. This determination will be made on the basis of the actual remaining function, whether the acts of grasping, manipulation, etc., in the case of the hand, or of balance, propulsion, etc., in the case of a foot, could be accomplished equally well by an amputation stump with prosthesis. See?38?C.F.R. §§?3.350(a)(2)(i), 4.63. 

At the time of the decision on appeal, the Veteran was service connected for multiple disabilities that stemmed from his service-connected Parkinson's Disease. Specifically, he was service connected for Parkinson's Disease with right upper extremity impairment (rated at 40 percent), right and left lower extremity impairment secondary to Parkinson's Disease (rated at 40 percent each), left upper extremity impairment secondary to Parkinson's Disease (rated at 30 percent), and cranial nerve impairment with difficulty chewing secondary to Parkinson's Disease (rated at 10 percent). 

For the purpose of establishing entitlement to specially adapted housing, disabilities resulting from a common etiology can be treated as one disability. 38 C.F.R. § 4.16. Here, the disability ratings for all of the Veteran's service-connected Parkinson's Disease-related conditions combine to 100 percent. The Veteran, therefore, meets the threshold requirement for specially adapted housing because he has a permanent and total (100 percent) disability. 

The remaining question is whether the Veteran's Parkinson's Disease and related disabilities result in any of the types of impairment enumerated above. The Board concludes that they do, in fact, result in such. Specifically, the Board finds that the Veteran's Parkinson's Disease and related disabilities preclude locomotion without the aid of braces, crutches, canes, or a wheelchair due to the loss of use of his lower extremities together with the loss of use of his upper extremities which significantly affect the functions of balance and propulsion.

Treatment records and multiple functional assessments from 2023 and 2024 indicate that the Veteran's Parkinson's Disease affects his ability to walk without assistive devices such that he is a significant fall risk. He ambulates throughout his house by grabbing onto furniture or using a cane; and he is completely unable to go upstairs unless he "crawl[s] up the stairs and slid[es] down on his butt." He falls constantly, as he has reported falling 20 or 30 times per day, sometimes causing injury. Indeed, furniture is placed strategically throughout his house so that he can land on it safely when he loses his balance. Still, his significant tremors in his hands make it difficult for the Veteran to hold onto furniture and other assistive devices; and the Veteran is unable to feed or groom himself. The Veteran's son, who lives most of the time with the Veteran due to safety concerns, supervises the Veteran while he showers because of the Veteran's balance issues. When his son leaves the house to run errands, the Veteran "stays on the sofa" until he returns. 

The Veteran's doctor has confirmed that the Veteran struggles with handling most activities of daily life. Indeed, in a January 2024 letter, he explained that the Veteran's "ambulation has been altered" and that he requires assistance at home for bathing, cooking and basic needs.

Based on the foregoing, the Board finds that the Veteran's service-connected Parkinson's Disease and related disabilities interfere with his ability to ambulate to the point that he cannot walk without significant risk of falling and he is unable to take care of himself. Therefore, the Board finds that these disabilities significantly affect the Veteran's balance or propulsion even with assistive aids.?Accordingly, specially adapted housing is warranted. The claim is granted.

Entitlement to a special home adaptation grant

The Veteran also seeks entitlement to a special home adaptation grant. However, VA regulations provide that entitlement to a special home adaptation grant is not warranted where entitlement to specially adapted housing has been granted. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.809a(a). 

As the Veteran has been granted entitlement to the greater benefit of specially adapted housing, entitlement to the lesser benefit of a special home adaptation grant is, therefore, moot. 

 

Wendy Daknis

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Freda J. F. Smith, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.