Citation Nr: A25034654
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 240415-429818
DATE:  April 15, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent for discogenic low back pain is denied.

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent for irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran's lumbar spine disability is productive of flexion limited to, at worst, 70 degrees and painful motion.

2. The Veteran's IBS is productive of constipation with associated bloating and stomach cramps.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for a rating in excess of 10 percent for discogenic low back pain have not been met. 38 U.S.C. § 1155;?38 C.F.R. §§ 4.7, 4.71a,?Diagnostic Code 5243. 

2. The criteria for a rating in excess of 10 percent for IBS have not been met. U.S.C. § 1155;?38 C.F.R. §§ 4.7, 4.114, Diagnostic Code 7319.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran had active naval service from January 1988 to September 2003. 

This matter comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a March 2024 rating decisions issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ).? 

In the April 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2024 AOJ decision on appeal. 38?C.F.R. §?20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decisions on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§?20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. §?3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Increased Rating - Discogenic Low Back Pain

The Veteran asserts that their lumbar spine disability is worse than what is contemplated by the currently assigned rating.

At a February 2024 VA examination, the Veteran reported that they experienced constant back pain that was aching and dull in nature, with occasional sharp pain that was described as feeling like a "knife stabbing my back" by the Veteran. The Veteran reported experiencing difficulty with prolonged sitting. The Veteran reported experiencing severe flare-ups of her back disability that occurred 2-3 times per week and lasted approximately 2-3 hours at a time. The Veteran reported that the flare-ups were precipitated by overuse. Upon physical examination, range of motion (ROM) testing revealed flexion to 90 degrees, extension to 30 degrees, right and left lateral flexion to 30 degrees each, and right and left lateral rotation to 30 degrees each. The Veteran was noted to experience pain on all excursions of motion. Passive ROM testing was not performed, as the examiner noted it was medically contraindicated. There was pain on weight-bearing and active motion, but there was no evidence of crepitus or tenderness to palpation of the spine. The Veteran was able to perform repetitive testing, and there was no additional functional impairment or limitation of motion following three repetitions. The examiner noted that the Veteran would be significantly due to pain following repeated use over a period of time and during a flare-up. The examiner estimated ROM following repeated use over a period of time and during flare-ups as flexion to 70 degrees, extension to 20 degrees, right and left lateral flexion to 20 degrees each, and right and left lateral rotation to 20 degrees each. There was no localized tenderness, guarding, or muscle spasm of the thoracolumbar spine, to include that which would result in abnormal gait or spinal contour. Muscle strength testing was normal, there was no muscle atrophy, sensory examination was normal, and deep tendon reflexes were normal. The Veteran did not have radicular pain or any other signs or symptoms due to radiculopathy. There was no ankylosis of the spine. The Veteran did not have intervertebral disc syndrome (IVDS), let alone IVDS that resulted in incapacitating episodes requiring medically prescribed bed rest. The Veteran did not require an assistive device for ambulation. The examiner determined that the Veteran's back disability impacted their ability to work in that they were limited in their ability to perform activities that required prolonged sitting. 

A review of the record shows that the Veteran has received treatment for various disabilities at the VA Medical Center and from private treatment providers for various disabilities. A review of the treatment records does not show that the Veteran has symptoms of their back disability that are worse than those reported in the VA examination report of record, to include limitation of motion or functional impairment during flare-ups or following repeated use over a period of time.

Based on the foregoing, the Board finds that the Veteran is not entitled to a rating in excess of 10 percent for their back disability. In this regard, there is no indication from the record that the Veteran had flexion limited to 60 degrees or less, or that they had a combined thoracolumbar spine ROM of 120 degrees or less. In fact, the Veteran was noted to have flexion limited to, at worst, 70 degrees; and a thoracolumbar spine ROM limited to, at worst, 170 degrees. Additionally, the Board notes that the VA examiner took into consideration additional limitation due to pain, fatigability, weakness, lack of endurance, or incoordination following repeated use over a period of time and during a flare-up when reporting ROM measurements and functional impairment. As such, there remains no basis for assignment of a higher rating even when considering all pertinent disability factors. As such, a rating in excess of 10 percent is not warranted. 38 C.F.R. §4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5243 (2024).

Consideration has been given to assigning a higher rating for the Veteran's back disability under another diagnostic code pertaining to the spine. However, although the Veteran is rated under the diagnostic code for IVDS, there is no indication from the record that the Veteran experienced incapacitating episodes resulting from their back, let alone incapacitating episodes requiring medically prescribed bed rest of a duration of at least two weeks in a 12-month period. As such, the Veteran is appropriately rated based on pain and limitation of motion. 38 C.F.R. §4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5243.

Consideration has also been given to assigning separate compensable ratings for neurological impairment in the lower extremities. However, there is no indication from the record that the Veteran has symptomatic radiculopathy in either leg. As such, separate compensable ratings for lower extremity neurological impairment are not warranted.

Consideration has been given to assigning staged ratings. However, at no time during the period in question has the disability warranted a higher schedular rating than that assigned. Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007). 

Accordingly, the Board finds that the benefit-of-the-doubt rule is not applicable as the evidence weights persuasively against the claim and is not in approximate balance. Therefore, entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent for a back disability is not warranted. 38 U.S.C. § 5107?(b) (2018); Lynch v. McDonough,?21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc). 

Increased Rating - IBS

The Veteran asserts that they should have a higher rating for their IBS as their symptoms are worse than those contemplated by the currently assigned 10 percent rating.

During the pendency of the appeal, the rating criteria for evaluating digestive disabilities under 38 C.F.R. § 4.114 were amended effective May 19, 2024. These amendments revised select diagnostic codes to ensure that the rating schedule uses detailed and updated criteria for the evaluation of digestive disabilities.

If a law or regulation changes during the course of a claim or an appeal, the version more favorable to the Veteran will apply, to the extent permitted by any stated effective date in the amendment in question. 38 U.S.C. § 5110 (g). If the revised version of the regulation is more favorable, the implementation of that regulation under 38 U.S.C. § 5110 (g) can be no earlier than the effective date of that change. If the former version is more favorable, VA can apply the earlier version of the regulation for the period prior to, and from, the effective date of the change. 38 U.S.C. § 5110. Therefore, the Board will consider the Veteran's claim under the old criteria prior to May 19, 2024, and both the old and new rating criteria from May 19, 2024, with regard to the claimed IBS. The criteria that is more favorable to the Veteran will be applied.

Under the old criteria for Diagnostic Code 7319, a 10 percent rating is warranted for moderate symptoms, described as frequent episodes of bowel disturbance with abdominal distress. A maximum 30 percent rating is warranted for severe symptoms, described as diarrhea, or alternating diarrhea and constipation, with more or less constant abdominal distress. 38 C.F.R. § 4.114.

Under the new criteria for Diagnostic Code 7319, a 10 percent rating is warranted for abdominal pain related to defecation at least once during the previous three months; and two or more of the following: (1) change in stool frequency, (2) change in stool form, (3) altered stool passage (straining and/or urgency), (4) mucorrhea, (5) abdominal bloating, or (6) subjective distension. A 20 percent rating is warranted for abdominal pain related to defecation for at least three days per month during the previous three months, and two or more of the concurrent symptoms listed above. A maximum 30 percent rating is warranted for abdominal pain related to defecation at least one day per week during the previous three months, and two or more of the concurrent symptoms listed above. 38 C.F.R. § 4.114.

At a February 2024 VA examination, the Veteran reported current symptoms of ongoing constipation with bloating and stomach cramps, and described the stomach cramps as feeling like "bullets exploding" in the stomach. Upon examination, the examiner determined that the Veteran experienced primary constipation with associated bloating and stomach cramps. The examiner noted that the Veteran did not experience diarrhea, alternative diarrhea and constipation, abdominal distension, anemia, nausea, or vomiting. The examiner noted that the Veteran did not experience episodes of bowel disturbance with abdominal distress, or exacerbations or attacks of the intestinal condition. The examiner noted that the Veteran did not have weight loss that was attributable to an intestinal condition, nor did they have malnutrition, serious complications, or other general health effects attributable to their IBS. Complete blood count (CBC) laboratory testing completed at that time was within normal limits. The examiner found that the Veteran's IBS would not impact their ability to work. 

A review of the record shows that the Veteran has received some treatment for their IBS. However, a review of the treatment notes of record do not show the Veteran to have symptoms worse than those reported at their VA examination. 

Based on the foregoing, the Board finds that the Veteran is not entitled to a rating in excess of 10 percent for service-connected IBS under either the old or new criteria. Under the old criteria, prior to May 19, 2024, the evidence indicates that the Veteran's IBS was "moderate" in nature with the Veteran only experiencing constipation with associated bloating and stomach cramps. In fact, the February 2024 VA examiner specifically noted that the Veteran did not experience diarrhea or alternating constipation and diarrhea. Under the new criteria, in effect beginning May 19, 2024, the evidence indicates that the Veteran did not have symptoms that meet the criteria for a rating in excess of 10 percent. In this regard, there is no indication from the record that the Veteran experiences symptoms such as change in stool frequency, change in stool form, altered stool pattern, mucorrhea, or subjective abdominal distension. The Veteran has been noted to experience primary constipation and bloating. Those symptoms are not severe enough to meet the criteria for a 10 percent rating under the new criteria. As such, even with consideration of all disability factors considered under both the old criteria and the new criteria, there remains no basis for the assignment of a rating in excess of 10 percent for the Veteran's IBS. Therefore, a higher rating is not warranted at this time. 38 C.F.R. § 4.114, Diagnostic Code 7319.

Consideration has been given to assigning staged ratings. However, at no time during the period in question has the disability warranted a higher schedular rating than that assigned. Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007). 

Accordingly, the Board finds that the benefit-of-the-doubt rule is not applicable as the evidence weights persuasively against the claim and is not in approximate balance. Therefore, entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent for IBS is not warranted. 38 U.S.C. § 5107?(b) (2018); Lynch v. McDonough,?21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc). 

 

 

Kristin Haddock

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	UmezEronini, Ikechukwu

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.