Citation Nr: A25034635
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 230405-336847
DATE: April 15, 2025

ORDER

New and relevant evidence has been received to permit reopening the Veteran's claim for entitlement to service connection for facial neuropathy, also claimed as trigeminal neuralgia.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for facial neuropathy, also claimed as trigeminal neuralgia, is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

Evidence received since the November 2017 rating decision is new and relevant to the issue of entitlement to service connection for facial neuropathy.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

New and relevant evidence sufficient to readjudicate the claim for entitlement to service connection for facial neuropathy has been received. 38 U.S.C. §§ 101(35), 1110, 5108; 38 C.F.R. § 3.2500, 3.2501

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the Army from August 1969 until his honorable discharge in March 1971. He is a Purple Heart recipient.  

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a March 2023 rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO), the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).

As an initial matter, on August 23, 2017, the President signed into law the Veterans Appeals Improvement and Modernization Act, Pub. L. No. 115-55 (codified as amended in scattered sections of 38 U.S.C.), 131 Stat. 1105 (2017), also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA). This law, which went into effect in February 2019, creates a new framework for Veterans dissatisfied with VA's decision on their claim to seek review. 

Following the March 2023 rating decision denying a request to reopen the claim for entitlement to service connection for facial neuropathy, the Veteran timely appealed to the Board and sought to have a hearing with a Veterans' Law Judge (VLJ). The Board is honoring his choice and, accordingly, this decision has been written consistent with the new AMA framework. The Board hearing was held on January 7, 2025.

Important for this decision, the Board's review of the record under the AMA is limited by statute and regulation. Under the hearing docket, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2023 AOJ decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or his representative at the hearing or within 90 days following the hearing. 38 C.F.R. § 20.302(a). If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal and prior to the Board hearing, or (2) more than 90 days following the hearing, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.302(a), 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of entitlement to service connection for facial neuropathy, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. 

§ 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

New and Relevant Evidence

A claimant may continuously pursue a claim or issue by filing a supplemental claim following notice of a decision by the AOJ or the Board. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2500(c). "If new and relevant evidence is presented or secured with respect to a supplemental claim, the Secretary shall readjudicate the claim taking into consideration all of the evidence of record." 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. "New evidence" is evidence not previously part of the actual record before agency adjudicators. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501(a)(1). "Relevant evidence" is information that tends to prove or disprove a matter at issue in a claim, including evidence that raises a theory of entitlement that was not previously addressed. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501(a)(2). If new and relevant evidence is not presented or secured, the AOJ will issue a decision finding that there was insufficient evidence to readjudicate the claim. Id.

1. Whether new and relevant evidence has been received to permit reopening the Veteran's claim for entitlement to service connection for facial neuropathy

The Board finds that readjudication of the claim for entitlement to service connection for facial neuropathy, also claimed as trigeminal neuralgia, is warranted. 

The Veteran filed an initial claim for entitlement to service connection for peripheral neuropathy and "Agent Orange disability issues" in August 2017. At that time, the evidence of record available prior to adjudication included service treatment records (STRs), military personnel records, and VA Medical Center (VAMC) records from the Atlanta VAMC spanning August 1999 through November 2017. The Veteran provided no further evidence pertaining to his claim. The AOJ denied the Veteran's claim for service connection for peripheral neuropathy and facial neuropathy in a November 2017 rating decision. The AOJ determined that the Veteran's facial neuropathy was neither incurred in nor caused by his service; additionally, it found that the Veteran's STRs did not contain complaints, treatment, or diagnoses of this condition. Notably, the AOJ also did not acknowledge a diagnosis of facial neuropathy; instead, it labeled the Veteran's condition as "atypical facial pain." The Veteran was provided notice of this decision and his appellate rights by letter dated November 24, 2017. While the Veteran submitted a Notice of Disagreement (NOD) as it relates to this issue, he did not perfect his appeal by filing a VA Form 9 following the issuance of a Statement of the Case (SOC). This decision, therefore, became final. 38 U.S.C. §§ 7104(b); 7252.

Thereafter, the Veteran filed a VA Form 21-526EZ Application for Disability Compensation and Related Compensation Benefits in March 2022, seeking to file a claim for entitlement to service connection for atypical trigeminal neuralgia. The AOJ sent the Veteran a letter dated June 3, 2022, instructing him that the issue of neuralgia had been previously denied and as such, his new claim needed to be filed on the proper form, i.e. not a VA Form 21-526EZ and instead, a VA Form 20-0995 Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim. A supplemental claim form was thereafter filed in December 2022. 

Evidence received since the November 2017 rating decision includes additional CAPRI VA treatment records, including those from VAMC Atlanta and West L.A. spanning August 1999 to December 2022, as well as the January 2025 hearing testimony. The record also includes a lay statement from the Veteran's wife that was associated with the file prior to the March 2023 rating decision; however, the AOJ seemingly did not consider it. The additional treatment records include a diagnosis of trigeminal neuralgia, though the AOJ dismissed its relevancy. The Board nonetheless finds that the information provided and evidence associated with the Veteran's claims file is new and relevant evidence sufficient to permit reopening his claim. In this respect, the records provide a potential additional diagnosis for the Veteran's condition. As such, readjudication of the claims is warranted.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to service connection for facial neuropathy, also claimed as trigeminal neuralgia, is remanded

The AOJ committed a pre-decisional duty to assist error by failing to obtain civilian treatment records that were identified by the Veteran. Shortly after he filed his May 2022 VA Form 21-526EZ, he provided a VA Form 21-4142 Authorization for Release of Information and identified several providers, including Southeastern Interventional Pain Association. However, the AOJ inexplicably returned his request as illegible, despite the handwriting being perfectly legible. 

Additionally, it is well documented throughout his CAPRI VA treatment records that he has seen numerous doctors for his facial neuropathy condition. It is similarly well-documented that he has a serious condition, though the exact diagnosis is unclear and to that end, a VA examination should have been ordered as well as an etiology opinion. Notably, the Veteran's condition cannot be presumptively service-connected based on his exposure to herbicide agents in Vietnam under 38 C.F.R. § 3.309(e); however, an opinion should nonetheless be rendered that considers whether his condition is etiologically related to his exposure to herbicide agents.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Ask the Veteran to complete another VA Form 21-4142 for any private treatment providers that have treated him for his facial neuropathy. Thereafter, obtain and associate with the claims folder any private treatment records identified.

2. Then, the Veteran should be afforded a VA examination performed by a neurologist or similarly qualified medical professional in order to determine the current nature and etiology of his facial neuropathy. The claims file must be made available to and be reviewed by the examiner.

The examiner should specify a diagnosis for the Veteran's facial neuropathy and provide an opinion as to whether it is a more nearly equal probability that this condition occurred in or is otherwise etiologically related to the Veteran's military service, to include his exposure to herbicide agents.

The examiner must provide all findings, along with a complete rationale for his or her opinion(s) in the examination report. If any of the above requested opinions cannot be made without resort to speculation, the examiner must state this and provide a rationale for such conclusion.

 

G. William Riggs

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	V.B. 

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.