Citation Nr: A25034230
Decision Date: 04/14/25	Archive Date: 04/14/25

DOCKET NO. 220323-229772
DATE: April 14, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 20 percent from July 31, 2015, for persistent depressive disorder (deducting the baseline level of severity of 30 percent) is denied.

Entitlement to a total disability rating based on individual unemployability (TDIU) from July 31, 2015, is granted.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. Throughout the entire appellate period, the Veteran's PTSD manifested in symptoms productive of occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity that did not amount to occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking or mood.

2. From July 31, 2015, reflecting the entire period on appeal, the Veteran met the schedular criteria for entitlement to a TDIU and the evidence is in approximate balance as to whether the Veteran's service-connected disabilities alone render him unable to obtain or maintain substantially gainful employment consistent with his education, work history, skills, and training.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to a rating in excess of 20 percent from July 31, 2015, for persistent depressive disorder (deducting the baseline level of severity of 30 percent) have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.310, 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.126, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9433.

The criteria for entitlement to a TDIU from July 31, 2015, but no earlier, due to service-connected disabilities have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5103A, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.340, 3.341, 4.16, 4.18.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army National Guard from January 1982 to April 1982 and in the Army from March 2003 to July 2004 with additional periods of reserve service in the Army National Guard.  

These matters come to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an October 2021 rating decision issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO), which was later reviewed in a December 2021 Higher-Level-Review (HLR) decision.

The Veteran appealed the decision in a March 2022 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), electing the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the October 2021 AOJ decision subject to HLR.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

Preliminary Matters

The Board notes, that the Veteran's attorney argued that the current appellate period should start back to when the Veteran's depressive disorder was first granted entitlement to service-connection in 2009 and even earlier. See May 2022 Informal Hearing Presentation (IHP). 

However, an in-depth review of the claims file reveals the Veteran formally withdrew his earlier Notice of Disagreement (NOD) and filed a new claim in 2014 thus rendering any earlier rating decisions final. In any case, after the new claim was filed in 2014, it was denied in an unappealed, final September 2014 rating decision. Thus, the Veteran's attorney's argument lacks any legal merit.

By way of background, the Veteran filed a claim for service connection in October 2009. It is worth noting in granting the claim in September 2010, the rating decision found, in pertinent part, that the evidence of record showed the Veteran's depressive disorder preexisted service and was aggravated by his service-connected bilateral foot disabilities. As a result, the RO determined that a pre-existing evaluation of 30 percent was warranted and reduced the Veteran's current depressive disorder severity under 38 C.F.R. § 4.22 to 0 percent. 

While the Veteran initially filed a Notice of Disagreement (NOD) in May 2011 disagreeing with this rating decision, his representative ultimately withdrew this appeal on the Veteran's behalf in March 2014. 

Thus, the Board finds the September 2010 rating decision is final, and the Board does not have the propriety of the initial rating, to include the baseline severity calculation, on appeal here. 

Indeed, thereafter, in April 2014, the Veteran filed an increased rating, which was also denied in a subsequent September 2014 rating decision, and also unappealed. The Veteran did not appeal the decision, and no new and material evidence was submitted within a year of the September 2014 rating decision, and, therefore, it is final.  38 C.F.R. §§ 3.109, 3.156(b).

To that end, the Board notes there are VA treatment records and Social Security Administration (SSA) medical records within the year of the September 2014 rating decision.  These records merely indicate treatment for depression, to include medication used, and confirmed diagnosis thereof. To that extent, the Board finds these records duplicative of the contents of the treatment records that were already before the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) at the time of the September 2014 rating decision used to support the rating assigned at that time. For these reasons, the Board finds the additional treatment records were not new and material as to the rating decision decided in September 2014 and does not affect the finality of that decision. Cf. 38 C.F.R. § 3.156(b).

Thus, the Board also finds the September 2014 unappealed rating decision is final here. Bond v. Shinseki, 659 F.3d 1362 (Fed. Cir. 2011); see also Buie v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 242, 251-52 (2010).    

As such, the earliest date in which the Board could construe this appellate period is July 31, 2015, reflecting the date of the Veteran's Intent-to-File, which was subsequently followed with a July 2016 VA Form 21-526EZ increased rating claim. Since then, the Veteran continuously pursued his increased rating claim by timely filing motions to reconsider, NODs, and finally in June 2020, by filing a supplemental claim opting his appeal into the AMA and ultimately an appeal to the Board.

To the extent the Veteran and/or his representative disagree with the factual findings within the final September 2010 or September 2014 rating decisions, he is not precluded from pursuing a claim seeking revision of either of those rating decisions under the theory of clear and unmistakable error. As for purposes of this appeal, however, the Board finds that neither of those rating decisions are properly on appeal here and, indeed, are final.

The Board also finds the issue of entitlement to a TDIU has been reasonably raised as part and parcel to the increased rating claim currently on appeal. See Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447 (2009). In this case, the Veteran has argued, and the record does otherwise reflect, that the disability at issue (depression), at least in part, renders him unemployable. Although he already was awarded TDIU from May 23, 2017, the grant does not resolve the entirety of the period on appeal and, therefore, the issue has been appropriately recharacterized above as the period prior to May 23, 2017, remains on appeal here. See Harper v. Wilkie, 30 Vet. App. 356, 360 (2018).

As a final matter, the Board acknowledges the Veteran's attorney's generalized objection as any duty-to-assist error. The May 2022 IHP indicates the Regional Office failed to request and/or obtain "updated" SSA records "throughout" the Veteran's appeal, which appears patently incorrect, as the file contains such records. Indeed, in January 2015, records from SSA indicate that the Veteran was denied disability benefits and there is no indication from the Veteran or from SSA that there would be new records. In fact, his attorney has specifically stated that the Veteran has never been in receipt of SSA benefits. Id at 9. Therefore, the Board finds no duty to assist error has occurred and it otherwise remains unascertainable as to the exact duty to assist error being alleged by the Veteran's attorney. The Board acknowledges its duty to sympathetically read a veterans' submissions regardless of representation. See Comer v. Peake, 522 F.3d 1362, 1369-70 (Fed. Cir. 2009). However, although the Board is not requiring legal sophistication, and has attempted to read and interpret the Veteran's and his attorney's statements sympathetically, such duty does not subsume a representative's obligation to assert the argument raised at least in a general sense to allow the Board and VA to comprehend what argument is being raised.  Accordingly, the Board finds no duty to assist error has occurred in this case with regards to the obtainment of potentially relevant SSA records. 

The Board has limited the discussion below to the relevant evidence required to support its finding of fact and conclusion of law, as well as to the specific contentions regarding the case as raised directly by the Veteran and those reasonably raised by the record.  See Scott v. McDonald, 789 F.3d 1375, 1381 (Fed. Cir. 2015); Robinson v. Peake, 21 Vet. App. 545, 552 (2008).

1. Entitlement to a rating in excess of 20 percent from July 31, 2015, for persistent depressive disorder (deducting the baseline level of severity of 30 percent), is denied.

The Veteran contends his depressive disorder (depression) is worse than currently rated. 

As discussed above, the Veteran filed a VA Form 21-0966 "Intent to File" on July 31, 2015, and subsequently filed a timely VA Form 21-526EZ on July 29, 2016, contending a new worsening of his service-connected depression. Since then, the Veteran continuously pursued his claim. As such, the period on appeal here, stems from said July 31, 2015, intention to file and timely filed claim, to include consideration of the one-year look back period (to the extent applicable). See 38 C.F.R. § 3.400(o)(2), Gaston v. Shinseki, 605 F.3d 979, 984 (Fed. Cir. 2010). 

The Board finds a disability rating in excess of 20 percent, i.e. 50 percent with a 30 percent baseline deduction for aggravation of a pre-existing condition, is not warranted at any time during the relevant period on appeal.

Disability ratings are determined by applying the criteria set forth in the VA Schedule for Rating Disabilities, found in 38 C.F.R., Part 4. The Rating Schedule is primarily a guide in the evaluation of disability resulting from all types of diseases and injuries encountered as a result of or incident to military service. 38 C.F.R. § 4.1. The ratings are intended to compensate, as far as can practicably be determined, the average impairment of earning capacity resulting from such diseases and injuries and their residual conditions in civilian occupations. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1.

Where there is a question as to which of two evaluations shall be applied, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria for that rating. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7. The basis of disability evaluations is the ability of the body as a whole, or of the psyche, or of a system or organ of the body to function under the ordinary conditions of daily life including employment. 38 C.F.R. § 4.10.

DC 9433 provides that persistent depressive disorder (dysthymia) i.e. depression, should be rated under the General Formula for Mental Disorders (General Formula). The Board must conduct a "holistic analysis" that considers all associated symptoms, regardless of whether they are listed as criteria. Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 10, 22 (2017); 38 C.F.R. § 4.130. The Board must determine whether unlisted symptoms are similar in severity, frequency, and duration to the listed symptoms associated with specific disability percentages. Then, the Board must determine whether the associated symptoms, both listed and unlisted, caused the level of impairment required for a higher disability rating. Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 114-118 (Fed. Cir. 2013).

A 50 percent rating is assigned when symptoms such as flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; or difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships cause occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.

A 70 percent rating is assigned when symptoms such as suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant speech; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a worklike setting); or inability to establish and maintain effective relationships cause occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood.

At the outset, the Board stresses as noted in the introduction, that the evidence considered by the Board is limited to that which was of record at the time of the October 2021 rating decision which was later subject to HLR and timely appealed. If the Veteran believes his condition has worsened in severity since these decisions on appeal, such a contention is outside the scope of this appeal and the Veteran is not precluded from filing a new increased rating claim.

Turning to the relevant evidence of record, the Veteran underwent a VA mental disorders examination in September 2014. At which time, the Veteran was diagnosed with unspecified depressive disorder. The examiner noted that the Veteran reported periodic depressed mood related to his service-connected foot pain and headaches. The Veteran reported current symptoms of sleep disruption but denied suicidal ideation. The examiner summarized the Veteran's level of impairment to reflect occupational and social impairment due to mild or transient symptoms which decrease work efficiency and ability to perform occupational tasks only during periods of significant stress, or symptoms controlled by medication.

Historically, it was noted that the Veteran currently lived alone but spends 3-4 days a week at his girlfriend's house and reported that their relationship is going well. He also reported having one friend who he sees about once a month. The Veteran reported not being currently employed, last working in January 2014 at a factory for two and half years but the job ended when the business closed.  Current treatment included the use of mirtazapine which the Veteran reported as overly sedating and having difficulty coping with the side effects. No relevant legal or behavioral history was reported. No drug use was reported, and only social drinking indicated. 

Symptoms noted by the examiner included depressed mood and chronic sleep impairment. Observationally, the examiner noted the Veteran was well groomed, oriented to all spheres and his thoughts were "goal directed". No signs of hallucinations or delusions were reported, and his affect was noted to be within normal limits. Mood was noted to be "somewhat irritable", and he expressed anger about his care at the VA. Lastly, the examiner reported that the Veteran was competent to manage his own finances and no other symptoms attributable to his mental disorder. 

Medical treatment records from the Social Security Administration (SSA) were received in January 2015. However, these records contained treatment dated from 2008 and earlier which is outside the relevant appeal period here and merely reference a history of depression, infrequent symptoms, and sometimes outright denials of depression. 

Throughout the appellate period, the Veteran sought and received treatment at various times for his depression through the VA. These records paint a fairly consistent disability picture in which the Veteran's appearance, hygiene, thought processes, speech, orientation, gait, memory, judgment, and insight were all noted to be normal, "adequate", or within normal limits. In addition, these records also document that the Veteran consistently denied experiencing any hallucinations, delusions, or homicidal/suicidal ideations. See e.g. August 2014, December 2014, July 2015, May 2016, and October 2016 VA Mental Health Outpatient Treatment Notes.  In contrast, these treatment records do document consistent reports of depression, anxiety, irritability, "up and down" mood, and sleep difficulty. Id. 

As outlined above, for the relevant appeal period, it seemed that the Veteran attended somewhat regular treatment sessions for his condition and the Board has considered the manifestations of his condition throughout the relevant appeal period even if not every relevant treatment record is outlined in detail above. See Newhouse v. Nicholson, 497 F.3d 1298, 1302 (Fed. Cir. 2007) (holding that the Board is not required to comment upon every piece of evidence contained in the record).

In August 2016, received by the VA in September 2016, the Veteran was afforded another VA mental disorders examination. At which time, the Veteran was diagnosed with moderate persistent depressive disorder. The examiner summarized the Veteran's level of impairment to reflect occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity. Historically, the examiner noted that the Veteran's girlfriend had attended the examination and confirmed the Veteran's symptoms. 

During examination, the Veteran reported having difficulty working due to the injuries he sustained while he was in the military. He reported working in machining and logistics at LMH Industries for two and half years before eventually being laid off due to the pain he experienced due to his injuries. He then reported working for Bend Heating for three years and was laid off for the same reason. No relevant legal or substance abuse issues were reported, and the Veteran indicated being sober from alcohol for two years. 

Symptoms noted by the examiner included depressed mood, chronic sleep impairment, disturbances of motivation and mood, and infrequent suicidal ideation without a plan or intent of committing suicide. Observationally, the examiner noted the Veteran was oriented to all spheres, was dressed casually, and had an affect congruent with his reported depressed mood. Specifically, his affect was reported to be "labile and ranged from anger when talking about VA, crying when talking about his inability to work due to his chronic pain, and laughing when joking with his girlfriend". Speech was noted to be normal with "fluent" thought processes, and his memory recall was noted to be intact. No other pertinent symptoms were reported, and the Veteran was noted to be competent to manage his own financial affairs. Lastly, the examiner remarked that the Veteran was not considered a current imminent risk of suicide, was not given the VA crisis line, and that his diagnosis of persistent depressive disorder is a correction of the prior diagnosis. 

The Veteran underwent another VA mental disorders examination in February 2018. At which time, the examiner diagnosed the Veteran with persistent depressive disorder. The examiner summarized the Veteran's level of impairment to reflect occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks, although generally functioning satisfactorily, with norma routine behavior, self-care, and conversation. Historically, the Veteran reported currently having a girlfriend of nine years, they live separately, and that his hobbies include fishing. He also reported having a few friends, one in particular, he enjoys spending time together in which they hunt, fish, and target practice. 

Symptoms noted by the examiner included depressed mood, anxiety, chronic sleep impairment, and disturbances of motivation and mood. Observationally, the examiner noted the Veteran was oriented to all spheres, he was "clean", and wore casual attire. The examiner also noted that he appeared to have "mild depressive and anxiety symptoms", he thought processes were goal-directed, and had rapid speech. The Veteran was also noted to have denied suicidal and homicidal ideations as well any psychotic behavior. The Veteran was reported to be competent to manage his own finances. Lastly, no change in the diagnosis was reported. 

In March 2018, the RO sought a functional impairment opinion from the VA examiner who conducted the February 2018 mental disorders examination. The RO asked the examiner whether the Veteran's persistent depressive disorder kept him from being able to gain and secure a substantially gainful occupation.  The VA examiner opined that no it does not. The examiner explained, that "the Veteran's persistent depressive disorder caused him to have occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inadaptability to perform occupational tasks, although generally functioning satisfactorily". 

VA treatment records document ongoing treatment for his service-connected depression. In January 2018, the Veteran reported dating a girl since 2009, living alone, and attending some college. He also reported last working regularly over five years ago in the heating/air condition business. A mental status examination conducted at that time noted that the Veteran was casually dressed, polite, pleasant, and well groomed. He was oriented to all spheres, had fair insight, and intact judgment. No suicidal or homicidal ideations, psychosis, or delusions were reported. Affect was noted to be congruent and reaction with a "frustrated" mood. Similar findings were reported in March 2018 during a mental health medication management consultation. In December 2019, the Veteran underwent a mental status examination during which the physician noted that the Veteran was polite, well groomed, oriented to all spheres, and had rapid speech but "non pressure". Mood was described as "better" with a congruent affect. No suicidal or homicidal ideations were reported, no hallucinations, and "themes of paranoia are no longer present". Thought processes were noted to be linear and goal directed. Lastly, the Veteran's judgment and insight were noted to be fair and intact respectively. 

Private mental health treatment records were submitted by the Veteran at various times beginning in January 2019 from a Dr. J.B. A November 2018 "assessment" documented the Veteran's diagnosis of major depressive disorder and noted current symptoms of anger problems, anxiety, depressed mood, difficulty concentrating, excessive sleeping, excessive worry, fatigue, feelings of helplessness, irritability, mood swings, negative self-talk, obsessive thoughts, racing thoughts, social anxiety, suicidal thoughts "at times with no intent or plan", and lastly tearful. A mental status examination by Dr. J.B. conducted at that time noted that the Veteran was well groomed, was cooperative, fully oriented to all spheres, and had "normal" mood and appropriate behavior. Thought processes were noted to be logical, speech was "normal", and both his short and long-term memory was noted to be "intact". Judgment and insight were noted to be "fair". Lastly, Dr. J.B. reported that the Veteran was at no risk of harming himself or to be violent. 

Similar if not identical findings were reported in July 2019, September 2019, December 2019, March 2020, June 2020, August 2020, July 2021 private "assessment" reports indicating the same symptoms and upon mental status examination, that the Veteran was oriented to all spheres, well groomed, had normal speech, intact memory, was cooperative, and had appropriate, albeit depressive, thought content. The Veteran was also documented to not be working, receiving VA disability benefits, and reporting that he would prefer to work "if he could find something that doesn't aggravate his medical issues". A history of working in the heating and cooling industry following his military service was also reported. Lastly, it was reported that the Veteran lives alone but visits his girlfriend frequently. Although not every detail and "assessment" made by Dr. J.B. has been noted herein, the Board has considered the manifestations of his condition throughout the relevant appeal period even if not every relevant treatment record is outlined in detail above. See Newhouse v. Nicholson, 497 F.3d 1298, 1302 (Fed. Cir. 2007) (holding that the Board is not required to comment upon every piece of evidence contained in the record).

VA treatment records further document ongoing treatment and complaints for mental health symptoms. January and March 2020 VA mental health treatment records noted the Veteran's reports of being anxious and irritable. He was noted to be alert and oriented to all spheres with a rapid speech but "non pressured". The Veteran was noted to have specifically denied any thoughts of suicide, homicidal ideation, delusions, or hallucinations. His thought processes were noted to be linear with fair insight, and intact judgment. In October 2021, the Veteran was noted to have a longstanding history of depression and anxiety and increased paranoia but denied visual and auditory hallucinations as well as difficulties with basic activities of daily living (ADLs). The Veteran also denied a history of suicide attempts and suicidal/homicidal ideations, plan, and intent. 

The Veteran underwent a final VA mental disorders examination in October 2021. At which time, the examiner diagnosed the Veteran with persistent depressive disorder and bipolar disorder. No differentiation of symptoms nor impairment between the two mental health disorders was reported to be possible. The examiner summarized the Veteran's level of impairment to reflect occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks, although generally functioning satisfactorily, with normal routine behavior, self-care, and conversation. The examiner noted that the Veteran reported being in a "rewarding and friendly" relationship with his girlfriend, has two close friends with whom he speaks with on a regular basis, and that he has no children. After service, the Veteran reported having difficulty working due to injuries/ailments sustained while in the military. He reported he worked in machining and logistics at LMH Industries. Veteran stated he worked at Bend Heating two separate times but had to quit the second time due to lower extremity pain and cramps. Lastly, the Veteran reported that he has not worked in 4-5 years and said that the main reason he cannot work now is due to his physical limitations. No legal issues or substance abuse issues were reported, in fact, the Veteran indicated he has been sober from alcohol for 4 years and denied the use of drugs. 

Symptoms noted by the examiner included depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, chronic sleep impairment, and disturbances of motivation and mood. Observationally, the examiner noted the Veteran was pleasant and cooperative during examination. He was noted to be casually dressed, in a "fair" mood, and his affect was indicated to be within normal limits. Thought processes were noted to be organized and relevant to various topics discussed. Speech was noted to be normal. The Veteran did not display any hypomanic behaviors or any evidence of a thought disorder. The Veteran did not report any suicidal ideation. Lastly, the examiner reported that the Veteran was competent to manage his own finances and remarked that he did not appear to struggle with hyper-energetic behaviors on a day-to-day basis based on his self-reports.

Upon review of the totality of the record from July 31, 2015, the Board finds that a rating in excess of 50 percent (subject to 30 percent reduction for a pre-existing condition) is not warranted for any time during the relevant appeal period. Taken as a whole, the Board finds that the evidence shows that, at worst, the Veteran's symptoms caused occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity. Such symptoms reflect a disability picture contemplated by the criteria for a 50 percent rating under DC 9433.

With respect to his active and apparent symptoms, the lay and medical evidence of record demonstrates that the Veteran consistently exhibited a depressed mood; anxiety; and chronic sleep impairment. In this regard, the Veteran has exhibited no obsessional rituals, constant panic or depression affecting his ability to function independently, impaired impulse control, spatial disorientation, neglect of personal appearance or hygiene, an inability to maintain relationships, persistent communication impairments, disorientation to his person, place or time, grossly inappropriate behavior, delusional or hallucinatory perceptions, or suicidal or homicidal ideation.

The Board does acknowledge that there is a single notation of suicidal ideation in the August 2016 VA examination report as well as passing reference to a history of suicidal thoughts "at times with no intent or plan", noted within private treatment records by Dr. J.B. As such, the Board has considered whether this notation alone would warrant an increased rating.  Cf. Bankhead, 29 Vet. App. at 18-19. In this case, however, the Board finds that the evidence as a whole does not support that the Veteran's disability is manifested by suicidal ideation or, wholistically, manifestations causing occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas.  That is, while suicidal ideation was noted in August 2016 by a VA examiner as well as passively by the private physician, Dr. J.B., no current plan, or intent of self-harm was ever indicated nor documented. Moreover, the remainder of the evidence of record both before and after these records shows numerous treatment records and examination reports where the Veteran denied suicidal ideation, intent, or plan.  Indeed, no other clinician noted a concern of the Veteran's intent to self-harm and the totality of the evidence demonstrates evidence to the contrary. Importantly, the Veteran has never asserted that his condition improved during the appellate period. See Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. at 442-43. 

VA examination reports and treatment records reflect that the Veteran's mental status examinations were largely unremarkable with normal judgment, memory, interactions, and speech. Additionally, the record reflects that the Veteran continued to be in a "rewarding and friendly", long-term relationship with his girlfriend of many years, currently owns his own home, has hobbies he enjoys, and has friends he reported enjoying speaking to regularly and at least one friend with whom he enjoys social activities. Although he has not been employed throughout the period on appeal, it appears this is primarily due to physical limitations and not his service-connected depression as the Veteran himself has repeatedly reported this fact to several medical providers and examiners. Importantly, this does not support or illustrate occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas and that such impairment has not been shown by the available evidence of record. While there were deviations in his moods and functioning, the persuasive weight of the evidence as a whole does not support a consistent or significant worsening or improvement of his mental health. Moreover, the mere presence of one or more symptoms, including suicidal ideation, does not automatically warrant a 70 percent disability rating as it depends upon the severity, frequency, or duration of symptoms that cause occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas. See Vazquez-Claudio, 713 F.3d at 118. 

The Board finds that the VA treatment records and examinations, conducted in the throughout the appeal period, in this case are probative and persuasive. Again, the Veteran was seen regularly, and his mental health assessed throughout the entire span of his appeal period. These treatment notes reflect in-person evaluations of the Veteran's behavior, with consideration of his lay statements as well as relevant medical and treatment history and provide professional assessments as to his needs going forward, as well as sufficiently detailed findings such that the Board can make a fully informed decision on the Veteran's claim. See Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 123 (2007) see also Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 301 (2008) (requiring a medical opinion to "contain not only clear conclusions with supporting data, but also a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two").

In sum, the Board finds that the most persuasive weight of the evidence supports the 20 percent rating currently assigned for the Veteran's PTSD, from July 31, 2015 (deducting the baseline level of severity of 30 percent). The Veteran's symptoms manifested in symptoms of a frequency, severity, and duration so as to result in, at most, occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity. Thus, the benefit of the doubt rule is not for application, and the appeal must be denied. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F. 4th 776 (Fed, Cir. 2021). In so denying his appeal, the Board further finds that the Veteran's disability is fully capable of evaluation under the rating schedule.

2. Entitlement to a total disability rating based on individual unemployability (TDIU) from July 31, 2015, but no earlier, is granted.

The Veteran contends that his service-connected disabilities, to specifically include his depressive disorder, have rendered him unable to obtain or maintain substantially gainful employment.

A total disability rating for compensation purposes may be assigned where the schedular rating is less than total and where it is found that the disabled person is unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation as a result of a service-connected disability ratable at 60 percent or more or as a result of two or more disabilities, provided at least one disability is ratable at 40 percent or more, and there is sufficient additional service-connected disability to bring the combined rating to 70 percent or more. 38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a). Consideration may be given to the Veteran's level of education, special training, and previous work experience in arriving at a conclusion, but not to his or her age or to the impairment caused by nonservice-connected disabilities. See 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.16, 4.19; see also Van Hoose v. Brown, 4 Vet. App. 361 (1993).

To meet the requirement of "one 60 percent disability" or "one 40 percent disability," the following will be considered as one disability: (1) disability of one or both lower extremities, including the bilateral factor, if applicable; (2) disabilities resulting from one common etiology; (3) disabilities affecting a single body system; (4) multiple injuries incurred in action; and (5) multiple disabilities incurred as a prisoner of war. Id.

Substantially gainful employment is defined as work which is more than marginal, and which permits the individual to earn a living wage. Moore v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 356 (1991). Marginal employment may also be held to exist, on a facts-found basis (including, but not limited to, employment in a protected environment such as a family business or sheltered workshop), when earned annual income exceeds the poverty threshold. 38 C.F.R. § 4.16.

The term "substantially gainful occupation" is not defined in the rating schedule. Rather, the Court in Ray v. Wilkie, found the phrase has two components: an economic one and a noneconomic one. 31 Vet. App. 58 (2019). In assessing the Veteran's ability to secure and follow a substantially gainful occupation, the Board is to consider the Veteran's history, education, skill, and training as well as physical abilities and mental abilities required by the occupation at issue. Id. Such specific physical ability factors include lifting, bending, sitting, standing, walking, climbing, grasping, typing, reaching, auditory, and visual. Id. Specific mental ability factors include memory, concentration, ability to adapt to change, handle workplace stress, getting along with coworkers, and demonstrating reliability and productivity. Id.

The central question is "whether the [V]eteran's service-connected disabilities alone are of sufficient severity to produce unemployability," not whether the Veteran could find employment. Hatlestad v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 524, 529 (1993).

In determining whether a Veteran is unemployable for VA purposes, consideration may be given to the Veteran's level of education, special training, and previous work experience, but not to age or any impairment caused by nonservice-connected disabilities. 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.341, 4.16, 4.19 (2016); Hersey v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 91 (1992); Faust v. West, 13 Vet. App. 342 (2000). A Veteran need not show 100 percent unemployability in order to be entitled to a TDIU. Roberson v. Principi, 251 F.3d 1378 (Fed. Cir. 2001).

As noted in the introduction above, this appeal stems from the July 31, 2015 "intent to file", which was subsequently followed with the Veteran's July 29, 2016, VA 21-526EZ claim seeking an increased rating for his depressive disorder and, therefore, the Board will consider the period on appeal from July 31, 2015. See Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447 (2009).  However, the Board again acknowledges that the Veteran is currently in receipt of a TDIU from May 23, 2017. Accordingly, the Board will consider whether the Veteran is entitlement to a TDIU from July 31, 2015, and prior to May 23, 2017, to cover the remaining period currently on appeal. See Harper v. Wilkie, 30 Vet. App. 356, 360 (2018).

Here, effective July 31, 2015, the Veteran was service connected for migraines at 50 percent; bilateral plantar fasciitis (previously rated separately as right and left foot plantar fasciitis) at 50 percent; persistent depressive disorder at 20 percent; tinnitus at 10 percent; bilateral achilles tendonitis with gastrocnemius muscle strain at 10 percent; and left ear hearing loss rated noncompensable (0 percent), for a combined evaluation of 70 percent from July 31, 2015. The Board also takes judicial notice that the Veteran was awarded a 100 percent evaluation for convalescence related to the Veteran's achilles surgery from August 3, 2016, to October 31, 2016, and was in receipt of special monthly compensation under 38 U.S.C. § 1114 (s) and 38 CFR § 3.350 (i) from August 3, 2016, to November 1, 2016.

Based on the foregoing, the Veteran meets the schedular criteria for entitlement to a TDIU throughout the period on appeal. 

Turning to the relevant evidence of record, the Veteran reported earning an associate degree and also apprenticing for heating ventilation and air condition (HVAC) earning his "journeyman's card". See January 2018 VA Form 21-8940.  During his years in the Army and Army National Guard, the Veteran's military occupational specialist (MOS) was combat engineer and cavalry scout. Post-service the Veteran reported working at Bend heating & Sheet Metal from January 2011 to January 2013 and LMH Industries from January 2013 to January 2015 performing duties as an HVAC technician. On his January 2018 VA Form 21-8940, he reported that his disabilities affected full-time employment in April 2014 and then becoming too disabled to work as of September 10, 2015, due to his service-connected depression, migraines, ankles, and feet conditions.  A March 2018 VA Form 21-4192 from Bend Heating & Sheet Metal, Inc. indicated the Veteran was last employed for them to install HVAC systems on May 6, 2016, earning only $600 for 4 days of work, before being laid off.  March 2018 correspondence from the RO, indicated that LMH Industries permanently closed.  An earlier VA Form 21-4192 from Bend Heating & Sheet Metal, Inc. dated from June 2009 indicates the Veteran last worked for them as a HVAC installer in April 2008 earning over $35,000 in the preceding 12 months.  The reason provided for termination of employment was noted to be "disabled".  Another VA Form 21-4192, this time from KVC Mechanical indicated that the Veteran worked for them as "furnace and A-C Installer" from July 2004 to May 2005. The reason for termination of his employment was noted to be that the Veteran "was no longer able to stand for long enough periods of time to do his job". 

Accordingly, the record supports the Veteran has been primarily unemployed throughout the period on appeal herein, with the exception of a brief period of partial employment in May 2016 for four days. From an economic perspective, the Veteran's job history and education background renders him suitable for work as an HVAC maintenance technician.

Concerning the noneconomic component, the Board wishes to incorporate by reference and for the sake of brevity, the examinations and other medical evidence of record noted above in regard to the Veteran's depressive disorder. The Board will note below the other medical evidence of record which discusses the Veteran's other service-connected conditions he has claimed as preventing gainful employment, to specifically include his migraines, ankle/achilles conditions, as well as he bilateral foot conditions. See January 2018 VA form 21-8940. 

Although technically occurring roughly three months before the current appellate period began, the Veteran underwent a couple of VA examinations in April 2015 which the Board will note below because in evaluating the severity of a particular disability, it is essential to consider its history. 38 C.F.R. § 4.1; Peyton v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 282 (1991); Schafrath v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 589 (1995).

The Veteran underwent a VA muscle injuries examination in April 2015. At which time, the Veteran was diagnosed with bilateral chronic achilles/gastrocnemius muscle strain. Upon examination, muscle strength was noted to be normal with no atrophy.  The regular use of bilateral ankle/foot braces for the Veteran's achilles tendon condition was reported.  Lastly, the examiner reported that no functional impact would result from the Veteran's achilles condition.

Also in April 2015, the Veteran was afforded a VA foot conditions examination. At which time, the Veteran was diagnosed with bilateral plantar fasciitis, metatarsalgia, and Morton's neuroma.  Historically, the Veteran reported onset of foot pain since 2003 while running during basic training. Since then, Veteran reported having bilateral burning in toes and has been diagnosed with bilateral neuromas. He also reported using arch supports for 6 years and that pain has been increasing.  Lastly, the Veteran reported that he has much more pain when standing or walking for long periods of time or having to bear weight on the balls of his feet, such as when climbing a ladder. Upon examination, the VA examiner reported that the Veteran's bilateral foot pain contributed to functional loss. Specifically, the examiner noted that the Veteran exhibited less movement than normal, pain upon weight bearing, and interference with standing bilaterally.   The examiner also reported that pain was associated with limitation of motion due to intensifying pain with prolonged standing or walking.  The regular use of an ankle/right foot brace was reported.  Lastly, the examiner reported that the Veteran's bilateral foot conditions affect the Veteran's ability to stand or walk for long periods of time and also decrease his ability to climb ladders.

The Veteran was afforded another VA foot conditions examination in March 2017.  At which time, the examiner diagnosed the Veteran with bilateral Morton's neuroma and plantar fasciitis. Historically, the Veteran was noted to have reported worsening bilateral foot pain since onset of condition in service and has had right ankle peroneal tendon repair in August 2016. Functionally, the Veteran reported that he cannot "perform work which requires him to be on his feet for long periods because of pain, can't drive occupationally because of pain when using foot pedals". Bilateral use of arch supports with relief of symptoms was noted. Pain was noted upon physical examination in both feet and during manipulation of the feet. In regard to Morton's neuroma, the Veteran was noted to have metatarsalgia bilaterally.   The Veteran's bilateral foot pain was also noted to contribute to functional loss. Specifically, the examiner reported there was less movement than normal and there was pain on movement and upon weight-bearing. The examiner reiterated the functional limitations reported by the Veteran to include the inability to perform work that requires him to be on his feet or drive for prolonged periods. The use of bilateral arch supports, built-up shoes, and orthotics with partial relief of symptoms was also noted.   Lastly, the examiner reported that the indicated metatarsalgia and peroneal nerve repair are new conditions which are directly due to related to the Veteran's service-connected bilateral plantar fasciitis. 

Also in March 2017, the Veteran was afforded a VA headaches examination. At which time, the Veteran was diagnosed with migraine headaches including migraine variants. Historically, the Veteran reported onset of headaches in 2005 that were triggered by sunlight, loud noise, and accompanied by nausea, vomiting, and photophobia. Since onset, he reported his symptoms have progressed indicating that he currently experiences migraines 3-4 times a week. Treatment included the use of nasal Imitrex without significant relief.  Upon examination, symptoms were noted to include constant head pain localized to one side of the head with nausea, sensitivity to light and sound, and changes in vision with "tracers". The typical duration of migraines was reported to be between 1-2 days and located on the right side of the Veteran's head.  The examiner also reported that the Veteran had characteristic prostrating attacks of migraine/non-migraine headache pain once every month and that very prostrating and prolong attacks productive of severe economic inadaptability were present. Functionally, the examiner reported that the Veteran's migraines cause him to frequently miss work and sometimes have to leave due to inability to focus or concentrate. Lastly, the examiner remarked that there was no change in the Veteran's diagnosis of migraine headaches however, the Veteran's symptoms have progressed. 

Based on the foregoing, the Board finds the evidence is in approximate balance as to whether the Veteran would be capable of substantial gainful employment given his service-connected disabilities.

In reviewing all the medical evidence, the Board considered the physical ability factors noted in Ray, to include lifting, bending, sitting, standing, walking, climbing, grasping, typing, reaching, auditory, and visual. See Ray, 31 Vet. App. at 58. The evidence indicates that the Veteran would have significant difficulty with standing, walking, climbing stairs/ladders, lifting objects, driving, and otherwise generally performing the physical tasks associated with working as an HVAC technician.

The Board also considered the mental ability factors noted in Ray, to include memory, concentration, ability to adapt to change, handle workplace stress, getting along with coworkers, and demonstrating reliability and productivity. See Ray, 31 Vet. App. at 58. As outlined above, the Veteran's service-connected disabilities produce constant head and foot pain which interferes with the Veteran's ability to focus and concentrate when working. Moreover, the Veteran's migraine headaches have been reported to result in very prostrating and prolonged attacks of headache symptoms productive of severe economic inadaptability requiring him to miss significant time from work. In addition, the Veteran's depressive disorder has consistently been reported to cause occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity. See e.g. August 2016 VA Mental Disorders Examination.

In short, the medical evidence of record indicates that the Veteran's physical and mental disabilities would likely preclude labor-intensive work, such as that associated with an HVAC technician, as well as sedentary work such as that associated with a technical support representative.

In Withers v. Wilkie, the Court noted that VA has not explicitly defined the meaning of "sedentary employment." Withers v. Wilkie, 30 Vet. App. 139 (2018). Until VA provides such a definition, "the meaning and relevance of the term will have to be discerned on a case-by-case basis from the medical and lay evidence presented and in light of each veteran's education, training, and work history." Id. at 149-150. Here, the Veteran's education, training, and work history demonstrated that he worked for many years solely as an HVAC equipment installer, which primarily involves physical activities such as standing, walking, and driving for long periods. No work history in a sedentary occupation has been presented, reported, or located. However, the Veteran reported earning an associate's degree as well as a journeyman's card for HVAC certification. The medical evidence of record, however, indicates the Veteran's service-connected disabilities preclude him from performing sedentary work as well. The Veteran is in constant pain, is depressed as a result of said pain, and his service-connected migraines and depressive disorder significantly interfere with his ability to focus and concentrate. Furthermore, the evidence of record shows the Veteran remained unemployed throughout the period on appeal even though he attempted to return to work in 2016, lasting only a few days before having to resign due to increased pain from his migraines and especially his feet. 

As such, the Board finds the Veteran is entitled to resolution of the benefit of the doubt. Accordingly, TDIU is granted for the period on appeal, from July 31, 2015.

 

 

SHEREEN M. MARCUS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Minnitte, Samuel F.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.