Citation Nr: A25034698
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 240408-432217
DATE: April 15, 2025

ORDER

The issue of entitlement to service connection for sinusitis is granted pursuant to the Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxics Act of 2022 (PACT Act).

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 70 percent for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for headaches is remanded.

Entitlement to a compensable rating for allergic rhinitis is remanded.

Entitlement to a compensable rating for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran's sinusitis is related to his active duty service in Bahrain and the United Arab Emirates.

2. Throughout the rating period on appeal, the severity, frequency, and duration of the Veteran's PTSD symptoms did not more closely approximate total occupational and social impairment.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for service connection for sinusitis have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1119, 1120, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.320.

2. The criteria for a disability rating in excess of 70 percent for PTSD have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.126, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from February 1996 to February 2002. 

The issues of entitlement to increased ratings for rhinitis and COPD were first considered in a March 2024 rating decision.  The issues of entitlement to service connection for sinusitis and for headaches, and the issue of entitlement to an increased rating for PTSD were considered in another rating decision issued later in March 2024.  These decisions constitute initial decisions; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies. 

In an April 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decisions on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decisions on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.  However, because the Board is remanding the claims of entitlement to service connection for headaches and entitlement to increased ratings for rhinitis and COPD, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

1. Entitlement to service connection for sinusitis is granted.

The Veteran asserts that he has a current diagnosis of sinusitis that is related to "environmental conditions" while serving in the Gulf War.  (7/31/2023, VA 21-526EZ, p. 13). 

Service connection may be granted for disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.  The three-element test for service connection requires evidence of: (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury.  Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166-67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

On August 10, 2022, the President of the United States signed into law the PACT Act.  The PACT Act provides, in pertinent part, that veterans who have qualifying service in Southwest Asia, to include Bahrain and the United Arab Emirates, on or after August 2, 1990, are presumed to have been exposed to environmental toxins.  38 U.S.C. § 1119.  Additionally, the PACT Act provides a list of certain diseases, to include chronic sinusitis, that are presumptively related to exposure to burn pits and other toxins.  38 U.S.C. § 1120.

The Board concludes that the Veteran has a current diagnosis of sinusitis that is related to his service in Bahrain and the United Arab Emirates.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107(b); Holton v. Shinseki, 557 F.3d 1363, 1366 (Fed. Cir. 2009); 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a).

In this regard, the Veteran submitted a letter from his non-VA primary care provider which confirms that he has a current diagnosis of chronic sinusitis.  (7/31/2023, Correspondence, p. 1).  As such, the first element of service connection is satisfied.

Regarding the in-service incurrence or aggravation element, the service personnel records confirm that the Veteran served in Bahrain and the United Arab Emirates during the period of June 1998 to June 1999.  (8/10/2023, DPRIS Response, p. 73).  As the Veteran served in Bahrain and United Arab Emirates after August 1990, he is a "covered veteran" as defined by 38 U.S.C. §§ 1119(c) and 1120(c).  As such, the Veteran is presumed to have been exposed to burn pits and other toxins.  38 U.S.C. § 1120.  The Board therefore finds that the second element of service connection is satisfied. 

As to whether the evidence of record establishes a causal relationship between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury, under the presumptive provisions of 38 U.S.C. § 1120, chronic sinusitis shall be considered to have been incurred in or aggravated during the Veteran's service in Bahrain and the United Arab Emirates.  38 U.S.C. § 1120(b)(12).  Accordingly, the final element of service connection is satisfied on this basis.  The evidence does not indicate relevant in-service complaints or findings and/or continuity of symptomatology since service and thus an award on a nonpresumptive basis is not warranted.           

Upon review of the record, the Board finds the evidence to at least be in equipoise as to whether the Veteran's claimed sinusitis is related to his service.  Accordingly, after resolving all doubt in favor of the Veteran, the Board finds that service connection for sinusitis is warranted.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

2. Entitlement to a rating in excess of 70 percent for PTSD.

The Veteran asserts that he is entitled to a rating in excess of 70 percent for PTSD.  

Under the General Formula for Mental Disorders (General Formula), the Board must conduct a "holistic analysis" that considers all associated symptoms, regardless of whether they are listed as criteria.  Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 10, 22 (2017); 38 C.F.R. § 4.130.  The Board must determine whether unlisted symptoms are similar in severity, frequency, and duration to the listed symptoms associated with specific disability percentages.  Then, the Board must determine whether the associated symptoms, both listed and unlisted, caused the level of impairment required for a higher disability rating.  Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 114-118 (Fed. Cir. 2013). 

A 70 percent rating is assigned when symptoms such as suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant speech; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a worklike setting); or inability to establish and maintain effective relationships cause occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood.

A 100 percent rating is assigned for total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; or memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation or own name.

The issue in this appeal is whether the Veteran's associated symptoms caused the level of impairment required for a disability rating of 100 percent.  The Board concludes that the Veteran's symptoms did not cause the level of impairment required for a disability rating of 100 percent.  

In this regard, the Veteran was afforded a VA PTSD examination in March 2024, wherein he was diagnosed with PTSD.  The examiner indicated that the Veteran's symptoms included depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks that occur weekly or less often, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, and difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances.  A mental status examination revealed that the Veteran was alert and fully oriented.  He was interactive and maintain adequate eye contact.  His thought processes were intact, with no history or current evidence of hallucinations or delusions.  His speech was normal in rate, rhythm, and volume.  His mood and affect appeared normal and congruent.  The examiner opined that the Veteran's symptoms resulted in occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas.  (3/27/2024, C&P Exam, p. 2, 7).     

When asked about his family and social history, the Veteran reported that he was currently going through a divorce but indicated that his relationships with his children are "good."  He also had group chats with some of his past crew members.  Regarding his occupational history, the Veteran reported that after service he "job hopped" every 3-4 years before entering sobriety.  He is currently a risk engineer with an insurance broker and has been in the position since June 2023.  He reported that he has some difficulty concentrating at work and difficulty being around people at times.  However, his current position allows him to work from home, which he described as a "great buffer" and a "bubble of protection."  He additionally indicated that he has difficulty adapting to stressful situations, which has resulted in him taking a less "high pressure" position.  (3/27/2024, C&P Exam, p. 3-4).     

The Board notes that the Veteran denied current thoughts, intent, or plans for suicide; however, the Veteran did report a history of suicidal ideations.  He reported that he last experienced suicidal ideations in 2020 prior to becoming sober.  As the Veteran has not experienced suicidal ideations since 2020 (approximately three years prior to when the AOJ received his initial claim of service connection for PTSD) the Board finds that the Veteran's current PTSD symptoms during the rating period on appeal do not include suicidal ideations.  (3/27/2024, C&P Exam, p. 8).         

Given these facts, the Board finds the severity, frequency, and duration of the Veteran's symptoms more closely approximate the symptoms contemplated by a 70 percent rating, which are less severe, less frequent, and shorter in duration than those contemplated by a 100 percent rating.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.126.  

The Board finds that a rating in excess of 70 percent is not warranted as the evidence does not demonstrate the level of impairment associated with a 100 percent rating.  In this regard, the Veteran's symptoms were either contemplated by or consistent with a 70 percent rating.  Further, while the Veteran's symptoms do cause some degree of occupational impairment, the evidence of record indicates that he was employed throughout the period on appeal.  (3/27/2024, C&P Exam, p. 4).  Accordingly, the Board finds that the evidence of record does not demonstrate total occupational impairment.  Additionally, while the Veteran reported that he was going through a divorce and his symptoms include difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationship, the evidence of record establishes that he was able to reconcile with his older children after becoming sober and he currently describes his relationship with his children as "good."  (3/27/2024, C&P Exam, p. 3, 7).  As such, the Board finds that the evidence of record does not demonstrate total social impairment.

In short, the evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that the severity, frequency, and duration of the Veteran's symptoms resulted in the level of impairment required for a 100 percent rating.  The criteria for a 100 percent or higher rating are not met and the appeal must be denied.

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to service connection for headaches is remanded.

The issue of entitlement to service connection for headaches is remanded to correct a duty to assist error that occurred prior to the March 2024 rating decision on appeal.  

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination for his claimed headaches in January 2024, wherein he was diagnosed with "headache, unspecified."  (1/23/2024, C&P Exam, p. 1).  In March 2024 a VA examiner proffered a medical opinion regarding whether the Veteran's claimed headaches are related to toxic exposure risk activities.  However, the AOJ did not obtain a VA medical opinion addressing whether the Veteran's claimed headaches are caused or aggravated by his service-connected allergic rhinitis.  While the Veteran did not explicitly raise the issue of whether his claimed headaches are caused or aggravated by his service-connected allergic rhinitis, the Board finds that the issue was reasonably raised by the record.  See 38 U.S.C. § 1151; Robinson v. Peake, 21 Vet. App. 545, 552 (2008).  In this regard, a January 2024 VA sinusitis and rhinitis examination indicates that his rhinitis symptoms include "sinus pressure headaches."  (1/23/2024, C&P Exam, p. 2). 

As no medical opinion addressing the relationship between the Veteran's claimed headaches and his service connected rhinitis was proffered prior to the March 2024 rating decision on appeal, the Board finds that a duty to assist error was committed.  As such, the claim must be remanded for further medical development. 

2. Entitlement to a compensable rating for allergic rhinitis.

The issue of entitlement to a compensable rating for allergic rhinitis is remanded to correct a duty to assist error that occurred prior to the March 2024 rating decision on appeal.  The AOJ obtained a January 2024 examination report prior to the rating decision on appeal.  However, this examination report did not adequately consider all of the Veteran's symptomology associated with allergic rhinitis.

In this regard, the examination report indicates that the Veteran's rhinitis symptoms did not include 50 percent obstruction of the nasal passage on both sides due to rhinitis, complete obstruction of either nasal passage, nasal polyps, or permanent hypertrophy of the nasal turbinates.  (1/23/2024, C&P Exam, p. 3-4).  However, the Veteran reported that he uses over the counter nasal sprays, Sudafed, and an Albuterol inhaler to treat his allergic rhinitis symptoms.  The examiner did not address whether the Veteran had taken these medications prior to the January 2024 examination and, if so, what impact the medication had on the Veteran's symptoms on the day of the examination.  As such, it is unclear if the examiner discounted the ameliorative effects of the Veteran's rhinitis medication in reporting his symptomology.  See Jones v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 56, 61 (2012) (when considering a disability rating, the Board must not consider the ameliorative effects of medication unless those effects are explicitly contemplated by the relevant rating criteria.).

As the January 2024 examiner did not discount the ameliorative effects of the Veteran's rhinitis medication in describing the severity of his symptomology, the Board finds that the January 2024 examination is inadequate.  As such, the Board finds that a duty to assist error was committed prior to the rating decision on appeal, and as such, the claim must be remanded for further development. 

3. Entitlement to a compensable rating for COPD is remanded.

The issue of entitlement to a compensable rating for COPD is remanded to correct a duty to assist error that occurred prior to the March 2024 rating decision on appeal.  The AOJ obtained a January 2024 examination report prior to the rating decision on appeal, which included the results of a pulmonary function test (PFT).  However, the examination report did not include results of diffusion capacity of the lung for carbon monoxide by the single breath method (DLCO).  

The Board acknowledges that in accordance with 38 C.F.R. § 4.96(d)(2), where a DLCO test is not of record, the claim should be evaluated based on alternative criteria as long as the examiner states why the test would not be useful or valid in a particular case.  When prompted to describe why the DLCO test was not conducted in the matter at hand, the January 2024 examiner indicated that the test is "not performed at [the] clinic," the examination was conducted at.  The examiner provided no further explanation, to include whether the DLCO test would not be useful or would be invalid in the Veteran's case.  

As a DLCO test was not conducted and there is no indication that the DLCO test would not be useful or would be invalid in the Veteran's case, the Board finds that the January 2024 examination is inadequate.  Accordingly, the Board finds that a duty to assist error was committed prior to the rating decision under review, and as such, the claim must be remanded for further development. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination for his claimed headaches.  The examiner must review the claims file and provide a response to the following:

Are the Veteran's claimed headaches at least as likely as not (likelihood at least approximately balanced or equal) related to service? 

Are the Veteran's claimed headaches at least as likely as not (likelihood at least approximately balanced or equal) proximately due to his service connected rhinitis? 

Are the Veteran's claimed headaches at least as likely as not (likelihood at least approximately balanced or equal) aggravated, i.e., made worse, by his service connected rhinitis?

If aggravation is found, the examiner should also state, to the extent possible, the baseline level of disability prior to aggravation.? This may be ascertained by the medical evidence of record and by the Veteran's statements as to the nature, severity, and frequency of his observable symptoms over time. 

2. Schedule the Veteran for an examination by an appropriate clinician to determine the current severity of his service-connected allergic rhinitis.  The examiner should provide a full description of the disability and report all signs and symptoms necessary for evaluating the Veteran's disability under the rating criteria.  

In so doing, the examiner MUST discount the ameliorative effects of the Veteran's rhinitis medication.

3. Schedule the Veteran for an examination by an appropriate clinician to determine the current severity of his service-connected COPD.  The examiner should provide a full description of the disability and report all signs and symptoms necessary for evaluating the Veteran's disability under the rating criteria.  

Should the examiner determine that a DLCO test is not warranted, the examiner must explain why the test is not warranted.  The examiner should specifically indicate whether the test would not be useful or if it would not be valid in the Veteran's case.  

 

 

Eric S. Leboff

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Glenn, Robert

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.