Citation Nr: A25034180
Decision Date: 04/14/25	Archive Date: 04/14/25

DOCKET NO. 210816-179469
DATE: April 14, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral ankles is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral elbows is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral feet is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral hearing loss is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral hips is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral knees is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral shoulders is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral wrists is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for diabetes mellitus is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for hypertension is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for migraine headaches is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) with depression and anxiety is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for tinnitus is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Navy from January 1983 to September 1991 and September 2001 to June 2002. 

These matters are before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a July 2021 rating decision of a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO). 

In the August 2021 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) (NOD), the Veteran selected the Direct Review by a Veterans Law Judge lane pursuant to the modernized review system.  38 C.F.R. § 19.2(d).  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding all of the claims, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

1. All remanded claims.

A review of VA treatment records currently in the claims file illustrates that there is an outstanding treatment record from a non-VA provider through VA's Community Care Network that needs to be obtained that may be relevant to the remanded claims.  A July 2, 2021 VA treatment record reflects that the Veteran received treatment at West Florida Hospital in the emergency department on July 2, 2021.  A July 15, 2021 VA treatment record reflects that VA faxed a request for the July 2, 2021 record.  However, the July 2, 2021 record from West Florida Hospital is not in the file.  As the evidence of the treatment at West Florida Hospital was of record prior to the July 2021 rating decision on appeal and its relevancy is unclear, it was a pre-decisional duty to assist error that the AOJ did not obtain the record of the July 2, 2021 treatment.  38 C.F.R. § 4.2.  Remand is required to correct the pre-decisional duty to assist error. 

2. Entitlement to service connection for bilateral shoulders is remanded.

Following a July 2021 VA examination, a VA examiner opined the Veteran's bilateral shoulder condition, diagnosed as bilateral acromioclavicular joint ostearthritis and left calcific tendonitis, is less likely than not incurred in or caused by his service.  In support of the opinion, the examiner noted that the Veteran was diagnosed with bilateral acromioclavicular joint ostearthritis and left calcific tendonitis in 2016, but there are no records of similar findings or diagnosis found in the medical records.  However, a review of the rationale illustrates that the opinion contains no discussion of whether the Veteran's current bilateral shoulder disability is related to the Veteran's service, irrespective of the gap in time between his service and the diagnoses.  Moreover, the rationale contains no discussion of the March 1990 service treatment record containing a notation of left shoulder pain.  As this evidence was of record prior to the July 2021 rating decision on appeal, it was a pre-decisional duty to assist error that the AOJ did not send the report back to the examiner for a new opinion or clarification of the opinion.  38 C.F.R. § 4.2.  Remand is required to correct the pre-decisional duty to assist error. 

3. Entitlement to service connection for hypertension is remanded.

Following a July 2021 VA examination, a VA examiner opined the Veteran's hypertension is less likely than not incurred in or caused by his service.  In support of the opinion, the examiner reasoned that, "random, non-repeated episodic elevated [blood pressure] readings do not constitute a diagnosis of hypertension or any medical condition."  However, a review of this rationale illustrates the examiner did not address any specifics of the Veteran's disability pattern.  As this evidence was of record prior to the July 2021 rating decision on appeal, it was a pre-decisional duty to assist error that the AOJ did not send the report back to the examiner for a new opinion or clarification of the opinion.  38 C.F.R. § 4.2.  Remand is required to correct the pre-decisional duty to assist error. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain a viewable copy of the July 2, 2021 emergency department record from West Florida Hospital in Pensacola, Florida as referenced in the CAPRI records associated with the claims file.  

If the July 2, 2021 emergency department record cannot be located in VA's system, ask the Veteran to submit a fully completed and signed VA Form 21-4142, Authorization and Consent to Release Information to VA, for the record.  

2. Any negative search result should be noted in the record and communicated to the Veteran in accordance with 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(e).

3. After completing the development requested in item 1, obtain a medical opinion from a qualified clinician for the Veteran's bilateral shoulder claim.  The electronic claims file must be made available to the clinician for review in connection with the request for an opinion.  If the reviewing clinician determines that an in-person examination is needed in order to answer the questions posed, then such should be scheduled.

After reviewing the claims file, the reviewing clinician should address the following:

Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's bilateral shoulder condition, diagnosed as bilateral acromioclavicular joint ostearthritis and left calcific tendonitis, began during his service (or within one year of service discharge) or is otherwise attributable to his military service?

The reviewing clinician is advised that the Veteran is competent to report his symptoms and history and that such reports must be acknowledged and considered in formulating any opinion.  The reviewing clinician must fully explain the rationale for any opinion, with citation to supporting clinical data/lay statements, as deemed appropriate.  If the reviewing clinician cannot provide the requested opinion without resorting to speculation, he or she should expressly indicate this and provide supporting rationale as to why an opinion cannot be made without resorting to speculation.

4. After completing the development requested in item 1, obtain a medical opinion from a qualified clinician for the Veteran's hypertension claim.  The electronic claims file must be made available to the clinician for review in connection with the request for an opinion.  If the reviewing clinician determines that an in-person examination is needed in order to answer the questions posed, then such should be scheduled.

After reviewing the claims file, the reviewing clinician should address the following:

Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's current hypertension began during his service (or within one year of service discharge) or is otherwise attributable to his military service?

The reviewing clinician is advised that the Veteran is competent to report his symptoms and history and that such reports must be acknowledged and considered in formulating any opinion.  The reviewing clinician must fully explain the rationale for any opinion, with citation to supporting clinical data/lay statements, as deemed appropriate.  If the reviewing clinician cannot provide the requested opinion without resorting to speculation, he or she should expressly indicate this and provide supporting rationale as to why an opinion cannot be made without resorting to speculation.

 

M. SORISIO

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	N. Breitbach, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.