Citation Nr: A25034122
Decision Date: 04/14/25	Archive Date: 04/14/25

DOCKET NO. 241003-477696
DATE: April 14, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 20 percent for the evaluation of diabetes mellitus, type II, with erectile dysfunction, is denied. 

Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 60 percent for evaluation of coronary artery disease (CAD) is denied. 

Entitlement to individual unemployability (TDIU) is denied. 

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran's diabetes mellitus, type II, is manifested by the need for an oral hypoglycemic agent and a restricted diet; a requirement for restricted physical activity has not been shown. 

2. The Veteran's CAD has not manifested as a workload of 3.0 METs or less resulting in heart failure symptoms.

3. The evidence is persuasively against a finding that the Veteran's service-connected disabilities result in any occupational impairment that would preclude the Veteran from maintaining substantially gainful employment. 

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for entitlement to a disability rating higher than 20 percent for diabetes mellitus, type II, have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.119, Diagnostic Code 7913.

2. The criteria for entitlement to a disability rating higher than 60 percent for CAD have not been met. 38U.S.C. §§1155, 5107; 38C.F.R. §§4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.100, 4.104, Diagnostic Code 7005.

3. The criteria for an award of TDIU have not been met. 38U.S.C. §1155; 38C.F.R. §§3.340, 3.341, 4.15, 4.16.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served in the United States Army from March 1968 to March 1971. 

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from a September 2024 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO). 

In the October 3, 2024, VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Hearing docket. A Board hearing was held on December 17, 2024.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the September 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or representative at the hearing or within 90 days following the hearing. 38 C.F.R. § 20.302(a). If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal and prior to the Board hearing, or (2) more than 90 days following the hearing, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.302(a), 20.801. 

The Board notes that in a February 21, 2025, post-hearing memorandum, the Veteran's representative references additional medical records and a private opinion from a Dr. Smith, who opines on the disability ratings for diabetes and CAD, as well as entitlement to TDIU. After a careful review of the file, the Board notes that Dr. Smith's opinion was submitted on December 13, 2024, after the rating decision on appeal, and prior to the December 17, 2024, Board hearing. Although the Veteran's representative referenced resubmitting it with a February 21, 2025, post-hearing brief, the opinion was not resubmitted. Therefore, as Dr. Smith's opinion was not submitted within the applicable evidence window, it cannot be considered by the Board. If the Veteran would like this evidence, or any other new evidence considered, he is encouraged to file a supplemental claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

Increased Ratings

Disability ratings are determined by applying the criteria set forth in VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities, which is based on the average impairment of earning capacity.  Individual disabilities are assigned separate diagnostic codes.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. Part IV.  If two evaluations are potentially applicable, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating; otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7.  When reasonable doubt arises as to the degree of disability, such doubt will be resolved in the Veteran's favor.  38 C.F.R. § 4.3.

Pertinent regulations do not require that all cases show all findings specified by the Rating Schedule, but that findings sufficiently characteristic to identify the disease and the resulting disability and above all, coordination of rating with impairment of function will be expected in all cases.  38 C.F.R. § 4.21.  Therefore, the Board has considered the potential application of various other provisions of the regulations governing VA benefits, whether or not they were raised by the Veteran, as well as the entire history of the veteran's disability in reaching its decision.  Schafrath v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 589, 595 (1991).

In deciding this appeal, the Board has considered whether separate ratings for different periods of time, based on the facts found, are warranted, a practice of assigning ratings referred to as "staging the ratings."  See Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119 (1999); Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2008).

1. Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 20 percent for the evaluation of diabetes mellitus, type II, with erectile dysfunction, is denied.

The Veteran seeks a disability rating higher than his current 20 percent for diabetes mellitus, type II, with erectile dysfunction. He maintains that his symptoms are more severe than those contemplated by the 20 percent rating criteria. After a careful review of the evidence, it is determined that the claim must be denied. The reasons follow. 

Diabetes mellitus, type II, is rated under Diagnostic Code 7913, which falls under the Schedule of Ratings for the Endocrine System, found in 38 C.F.R. §4.119. Under Diagnostic Code 7913, a 20 percent evaluation is assigned where diabetes requires insulin and restricted diet, or an oral hypoglycemic agent and a restricted diet. A 40 percent evaluation is assigned where diabetes requires insulin, a restricted diet, and regulation of activities (avoidance of strenuous occupational and recreational activities). 38 C.F.R. §4.119. The Board notes that "regulation of activities" is defined in the rating criteria for a 100 percent disability rating under Diagnostic Code 7913 as "avoidance of strenuous occupational and recreational activities." Id. 

Although not specified in the rating criteria, the Board finds that this definition also applies to the "regulation of activities" discussed in the 40 percent and 60 percent disability ratings under Diagnostic Code 7913. Additionally, the Board notes that medical evidence is required to show that occupational and recreational activities have been restricted. See Camacho v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 360, 363-64 (2007). 

Further, in light of the conjunctive "and" in the criteria for a 40 percent disability rating under Diagnostic Code 7913, all criteria must be met to establish entitlement to a 40 percent rating. See, e.g., Middleton v. Shinseki, 727 F.3d 1172 (Fed. Cir. 2013); Heuer v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 379, 385 (1995) (holding that criteria expressed in the conjunctive are connected by "and"); Malone v. Gober, 10 Vet. App. 539 (1997) (construing "and" as conjunctive in a statute); cf. Johnson v Brown, 7 Vet. App. 95, 97 (1994) (holding that "or" in the rating criteria shows that each is an independent basis for granting that rating).

In a January 2024 VA examination, the VA examiner noted that the Veteran had been diagnosed with diabetes mellitus, type II. The VA examiner stated that the condition was managed by a prescribed oral hypoglycemic agent and a restricted diet. The VA examiner stated that the Veteran does not require regulation of activities to manage his diabetes. The Veteran was noted as seeing his provider less than twice a month for episodes of ketoacidosis or hypoglycemia. It was also noted that the Veteran has not been hospitalized for ketoacidosis or hypoglycemia. The VA examiner stated that the Veteran has not had any progressive unintentional weight loss or loss of strength attributable to his diabetes.  

In a May 2024 VA examination, the VA examiner noted a diagnosis of diabetes mellitus, type II, with erectile dysfunction. The VA examiner stated that the Veteran's condition was managed by a prescribed oral hypoglycemic agent and a restricted diet. It was noted that the Veteran does not require regulation of activities to manage his diabetes. The VA examiner stated that the Veteran visits his provider less than two times per month for episodes of ketoacidosis or hypoglycemia. The Veteran had not been hospitalized for ketoacidosis or hypoglycemia. The VA examiner stated that the Veteran has not had any progressive unintended weight loss or loss of strength due to diabetes. 

At his December 2024 Board hearing, the Veteran stated that he has managed his diabetes by taking a daily pill for the past 30 years. The Veteran testified that he must watch what he eats. His diabetes has never caused him to become hospitalized. He meets with his doctor every three months and sometimes his medication is adjusted. He is restricted in his exercises because of his pacemaker, but does certain exercises for his diabetes, such as stretching and using a stationary bike. He noticed that he has strength loss, but he believes it has to do with his pacemaker. The Veteran attributes his eye problems to his diabetes, testifying that he developed cataracts and glaucoma, but a surgery was able to correct the left eye. The Veteran stated that his diabetes remains under control if he does what he is instructed to by his provider. 

For the Veteran to obtain the next highest rating of 40 percent, there must be evidence that the Veteran's diabetes requires insulin, a restricted diet, and regulation of activities (avoidance of strenuous occupational and recreational activities). There is no evidence in the record indicating that the Veteran is taking insulin. In a May 2023 CAPRI medical record, while the Veteran was hospitalized for his heart, he was prescribed insulin. He told the provider that he did not need insulin as he does not take it when at home. At the December 2024 Board hearing, the Veteran testified that he takes a pill to control his diabetes and has done so for the past 30 years. The Veteran did testify that he is on a restricted diet and must watch what he eats to control his diabetes. However, the Veteran's activities are not regulated due to his diabetes condition. While he testified that he is limited in his activities, he attributes this to his heart condition, not his diabetes. In fact, the Veteran does specific stretches and exercises on a stationary bike for his diabetes.

As the Veteran has not demonstrated the necessary criteria for a 40 percent rating, that hs is on insulin and his activities are regulated, the claim for an increased rating for diabetes mellitus, type II, must be denied.  

2. Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 60 percent for evaluation of CAD is denied.

The Veteran states that he is entitled to a disability rating in excess of 60 percent for CAD. After a careful review, the Board finds that the claim must be denied. The reasons follow. 

VA amended the rating criteria for arteriosclerotic heart disease (CAD) effective November 14, 2021. See 86 Fed. Reg. 54089 (Sep. 30, 2021). The amended regulation applies to all applications for benefits received by VA or that are pending before the agency of original jurisdiction on or after November 14, 2021. CAD is evaluated under the General Rating Formula for Diseases of the Heart (General Formula). Under the General Formula, a workload of 3.1 to 5.0 METs resulting in heart failure symptoms warrants a 60 percent evaluation. A workload of 3.0 METs or less resulting in heart failure symptoms is evaluated as 100 percent disabling. 38 C.F.R. § 4.104, Diagnostic Code 7055 (2022). 

Heart failure symptoms include, but are not limited to, breathlessness, fatigue, angina, dizziness, arrhythmia, palpitations, or syncope. See Note 3 following the General Formula rating criteria. 38 C.F.R. § 4.104.

Note (2) directs that one MET is the energy cost of standing quietly at rest and represents an oxygen uptake of 3.5 millimeters per kilogram of body weight per minute. When the level of METs at which dyspnea, fatigue, angina dizziness, or syncope develops is required for evaluation, and a laboratory determination of METs by exercise testing cannot be done for medical reasons, an estimation by a medical examiner of the level of activity (expressed in METS and supported by specific examples, such as slow stair climbing or shoveling snow) that results in dyspnea, fatigue, angina, dizziness, or syncope may be used. Id.

Note (3) directs that for purposes of the General Rating Formula for Diseases of the Heart, heart failure symptoms include, but are not limited to, breathlessness, fatigue, angina, dizziness, arrhythmia, palpitations, or syncope.

In May 2024, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination. The VA examiner noted that the Veteran was diagnosed with CAD and in 2023, had a pacemaker implanted for heartbeat regulation. The Veteran stated that his condition had worsened since onset, and that he currently suffers from fatigue. The VA examiner noted that continuous medication is needed to control hs heart condition. The Veteran was noted as currently taking Atorvastatin. Results of the interview-based METs test showed that the Veteran's METs were greater than 3 to 5. The VA examiner stated that the Veteran experiences breathlessness and fatigue. It was noted that the Veteran has not had congestive heart failure and that his left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) was 30%.

At his December 2024 Board hearing, the Veteran testified that when he went to a checkup for his diabetes, his pulse rate was so low that he was told that he would need a pacemaker. The Veteran reported that the pacemaker was put in approximately one year earlier and has been adjusted several times. The Veteran stated that he has a monitor on his nightstand and his providers can look at the monitor and regulate his pacemaker. He stated that he is not due for a recheck to check his pacemaker for another six months. The Veteran testified that because of his pacemaker, he gets easily fatigued and experiences shortness of breath. The Veteran stated that his doctors have placed a number of restrictions on his activities, including that he cannot lift more than 20 pounds over his head, that he should not use his stationary bike for more than 15 minutes at a time, and that he should not go on long runs. The Veteran testified that he does not walk more than a city block without a break. The Veteran is unable to mow his own lawn. He stated that the only heart-related medication that he is taking is one for his blood pressure. The Veteran stated that these symptoms have been ongoing for the past year. His doctors instructed him that he needs to avoid anything strenuous or stressful. He avoids driving in rush hour as he finds it too stressful. 

After reviewing all evidence of record, with specific attention to the documents discussed above, the Board finds that entitlement to a rating in excess of 60 percent has not been shown. The next highest disability rating is the maximum rating of 100 percent. Under DC 7005, to demonstrate entitlement to the 100 percent disability rating, the Veteran must have a workload of 3.0 METs or less resulting in heart failure symptoms. Here, none of these factors are suggestive of a 100 percent disability rating. 

The Veteran's May 2024 VA examination found that the Veteran had not had congestive heart failure but had symptoms of breathlessness and fatigue. The examiner indicated that the Veteran's METs were greater than 3 to 5. The Board acknowledges the Veteran's testimony and his reported symptoms of breathlessness and fatigue; however, the May 2024 examiner considered those symptoms in the assignment of METs at greater than 3 to 5.  While the Veteran testified about his current activity levels, the Board cannot make independent medical determinations, such as the assignment of a METs level.  See Colvin v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 171 (1991). Thus, while it appears that he testified to having several heart failure symptoms as defined under Note (3) of the General Rating Formula for Diseases of the Heart, the medical evidence does not show a METs level of 3 or less.

As the criteria for a 100 percent disability rating for CAD have not been satisfied, this claim must be denied. 

3. Entitlement to individual unemployability (TDIU) is denied.

The Veteran states that he is entitled to a TDIU based on inability to maintain substantially gainful employment due to his service-connected disabilities. The Board has carefully reviewed the evidence of record and finds that the evidence persuasively weighs against a finding that the Veteran has been precluded from securing or following substantially gainful employment for the duration of the period on appeal. The reasons follow.

A TDIU may be assigned, where the schedular rating is less than total, where a veteran is unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation as a result of service-connected disabilities. 38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a). To qualify for schedular consideration of a TDIU, if there is only one such disability, this disability shall be ratable at 60 percent or more, and, if there are two or more disabilities, there shall be at least one disability ratable at 40 percent or more and sufficient additional disability to bring the combined rating to 70 percent or more. Id. 

For the purposes of one 60 percent disability, or one 40 percent disability in combination, the following will be considered as one disability: (1) Disabilities of one or both upper extremities, one or both lower extremities, including the bilateral factor, if applicable; (2) disabilities resulting from common etiology or a single accident; (3) disabilities affecting a single body system, e.g., orthopedic, digestive, respiratory, cardiovascular-renal, neuropsychiatric; (4) multiple injuries incurred in action; or (5) multiple disabilities incurred as a prisoner of war. 38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a); see Moody v. Wilkie, 30 Vet. App. 329, 339 (2018) (combining disabilities as "one disability" to meet the rating threshold of § 4.16(a) requires the use of the combined rating table). 

The phrase "unable to secure and follow a substantially gainful occupation" contains both economic and noneconomic components. See Ray v. Wilkie, 31 Vet. App. 58, 73 (2019). The economic component refers to an occupation earning more than marginal income (outside of a protected environment) as determined by the U.S. Department of Commerce as the poverty threshold for one person. Id. The noneconomic component requires a determination as to a veteran's ability to secure and follow such employment. Id. Attention should be given to the veteran's history, education, skills, and training; whether the veteran has the physical ability (both exertional and nonexertional) to perform the types of activities required by the occupation at issue (e.g., lifting, bending, sitting, standing, walking, climbing, as well as auditory and visual limitations); and whether the veteran has the mental ability to perform the activities required by the occupation at issue (e.g., memory, concentration, ability to adapt to change, handle work place stress, get along with coworkers, and demonstrate reliability and productivity). Id.

An award of TDIU is an individualized determination, specific to a veteran's particular circumstances, e.g., their history, education, skills, and training. See Todd v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 79, 85 (2014). It does not require a showing of 100 percent unemployability. Roberson v. Principi, 251 F.3d 1378, 1385 (Fed. Cir. 2001). The ultimate question is whether the veteran is capable of performing the physical and mental acts required by employment, not whether they can find employment. Van Hoose v. Brown, 4 Vet. App. 361, 363 (1993). 

Relevantly, with respect to whether a veteran can perform sedentary employment, the Board must determine the meaning of sedentary work "from the particulars of the medical opinion in which it is used" and "sufficiently explain how it interpreted the examiner['s] use of the term." See Withers v. Wilkie, 30 Vet. App. 139, 147-49 (citing Pederson v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 276, 287). Until VA provides a definition for the term "sedentary employment," the meaning and relevance of the term must be discerned on a "case-by-case basis from the medical and lay evidence presented and in light of each veteran's education, training, and work history." Withers, 30 Vet. App. at 149-50. 

At the time of the September 2024 rating decision on appeal, the Veteran was service connected for coronary artery disease rated at 60 percent, diabetes mellitus, type II, with erectile dysfunction, rated at 20 percent, and hypertension rated at 0 percent. 

Based on the forgoing, the Veteran has one disability rated at 60 percent for scheduler TDIU, the Veteran's CAD. Further, the Veteran has at least one disability rated at 40 percent or more and sufficient additional disability to bring the combined rating to 70 percent or more. Therefore, the question for the Board is whether the Veteran's service-connected disabilities have rendered him unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation, in other words, incapable of performing the physical and mental acts required by the employment, regardless of whether the Veteran can find employment or not. Van Hoose v. Brown, 4 Vet. App. 361 (1993). For the following reasons, the Board finds that a TDIU is not warranted.

On April 30, 2024, the Veteran filed a VA Form 21-8940, Application tor Increased Compensation Based on Unemployability. On the TDIU application form, the Veteran indicated that his service-connected CAD and diabetes prevented him from securing or following any substantially gainful occupation. He did not submit any information on past employers or educational background. 

In a March 2011 VA examination for post-traumatic stress disorder, the Veteran noted that he had a college education and had been employed in the same intelligence position for 40 years. On his January 2024 VA examination for diabetes, the VA examiner noted that the Veteran's diabetes impacts his ability to work because sometimes tasks are difficult to complete due to fatigue. In a June 2024 VA examination for CAD, it was noted that the Veteran was a retired Imagery Analyst. The Veteran reported that he could not lift anything about his head that weighs more than 15 pounds. He stated that he can walk, but he cannot jog.  

At his December 2024 Board hearing, the Veteran testified that he last worked in 2011. He has worked in development until he retired in 2006, and then came back as a contractor, but was let go in 2011. The Veteran testified that he was performing satellite imagery work, for which he traveled quite a bit. He worked in this position for approximately 30 years, when he left to work as a contractor. In 2011, the Veteran testified that the current presidential administration eliminated contractor positions, which is why the Veteran left his position. The Veteran testified that now, because of his heart problems, this position would be too stressful as it was somewhat physical, and they worked demanding hours. In the beginning, he was not traveling too excessively, traveling between Virginia to Washington D.C., and to the Pentagon. Later in his career, he was required to also frequently travel to St. Louis. 

As to the Veteran's physical ability to perform substantially gainful employment, the Board acknowledges that the Veteran experiences fatigue connected to his service-connected disabilities that sometimes impact his ability to complete tasks. However, this has not resulted in significant functional limitations that would preclude all forms of substantially gainful employment. The Veteran has maintained independence in his activities of daily living. In the Veteran's June 2023 CAPRI medical records, the provider noted that the Veteran is able to perform all instrumental activities of daily living, including using the telephone, shopping, food preparation, housekeeping, laundry, travel, medication management, and handling his finances. Accordingly, the Board finds that the Veteran's limitations can be appropriately accommodated by restricting the Veteran to occupations at least at the "sedentary" exertional level. In a May 2024 VA examination for diabetes, the VA examiner stated that the Veteran's diabetes did not impact his ability to work and that he could complete sedentary work. In the Veteran's June 2024 CAD VA examination, the VA examiner noted that the Veteran could perform sedentary work.

The Veteran's training, skills and work history make him an appropriate candidate for a sedentary job. There are many sedentary positions open to individuals with an established work history, such as that of the Veteran, who had previously been in full-time employment. The Veteran worked as an Imagery Analyst with the federal government for over 30 years. He has a long-established work history. Although he noted that his prior position would be too stressful for him to maintain with the traveling and his heart condition, the Veteran could find private employment where his decades of experience transfer and that does not require travel. Many private sector employers now offer hybrid or fully remote opportunities. If those are not available to the Veteran, sedentary jobs in other fields, such as those in data entry and customer service, often require minimal training which is provided by the employer. 

The Department of Labor's Dictionary of Occupational Titles (DOT) defines sedentary work as exerting up to 10 pounds of force occasionally (i.e., up to one third of the time), and/or a negligible amount of force frequently (i.e., from 1/3 to 2/3 of the time) to lift, carry, push, pull, or otherwise move objects, including the human body. According to the DOT's definition, sedentary work involves sitting most of the time but may involve walking or standing for brief periods of time. Jobs are sedentary if walking and standing are required only occasionally, and all other sedentary criteria are met. The Board finds no prejudice to the Veteran in considering the definition for purposes of deciding this claim. The longitudinal record indicates that the Veteran is at least capable of sedentary work, as supported by his ongoing ability to perform activities of daily living, endeavors which generally exceed the physical restrictions of sedentary work. Accordingly, the weight of the evidence shows that the Veteran is physically capable of performing substantially gainful employment.

As to the Veteran's mental ability to perform substantially gainful employment, the Veteran has no service-connected mental health or cognitive disabilities. The Veteran was alert and cooperative at his December 2024 Board hearing, and able to participate and answer all questions asked of him. 

Based on the above assessment of the Veteran's physical and mental abilities with consideration of his education, training, skills, and work history, the Board finds that the Veteran is capable of work that would result in income at the level of substantially gainful employment. In a March 2011 VA examination, the Veteran reported both a college education and a longtime work history. Even if he were unable to find employment in the same field, there are many opportunities for which the Veteran would be qualified. For example, the evidence weighs against a finding that the Veteran's service-connected disabilities would preclude him from jobs that would require little exertional effort so as to not aggravate his physical disabilities. There are occupations that permit at-home work. The Veteran could work as a data entry clerk, being responsible for entering data into a computer system. These jobs typically do not require any extensive training or experience and can be done with limited impact on the Veteran's service-connected disabilities. 

While discussion of these potential occupations is not exhaustive, it does illustrate that there are occupations that the Veteran can perform, even accounting for his service-connected disabilities. This analysis weighs against a finding that the Veteran is unable to maintain substantially gainful employment during the appellate period. 

For the above reasons, the evidence is neither evenly balanced nor approximately so with regard to whether the Veteran has been precluded from securing or following all forms of a substantially gainful occupation consistent with his educational and vocational history due to his service-connected disabilities for the period on appeal. Rather, the evidence persuasively weighs against the Veteran's claim for a TDIU rating. The benefit of the doubt doctrine is, therefore, not for application. Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc) (only when the evidence persuasively favors one side or another is the benefit of the doubt doctrine not for application).

 

 

Amanda G. Alderman

Acting Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Fleming, Shelley M.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.