Citation Nr: A25034555
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 240222-420610
DATE: April 15, 2025

ORDER

The rating reduction from 40 percent to 20 percent for lumbosacral strain with degenerative arthritis was improper; the 40 percent evaluation is restored. 

Entitlement to an earlier effective date for lumbar radiculopathy left lower extremity is denied. 

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 20 percent for lumbar radiculopathy left lower extremity is denied.

Entitlement to an earlier effective date for lumbar radiculopathy right lower extremity is denied. 

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 20 percent for lumbar radiculopathy right lower extremity is denied.

Entitlement to total disability rating based on individual unemployability is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. At the time of the rating reduction from 40 percent to 20 percent for lumbosacral strain with degenerative arthritis, the 40 percent rating had been in effect for less than 5 years; the evidence does not disclose actual improvement in the Veteran's lumbosacral strain that is reasonably certain to be maintained under the ordinary conditions of life and work.

2. Bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy was not found by medical evidence until September 15, 2021, the effective date of grant for his bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy.

3. The Veteran's bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy is manifest by no more than moderate incomplete paralysis.

4. The Veteran's service-connected disabilities have not prevented him from securing and following substantially gainful employment.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The reduction in rating from 40 percent to 20 percent for lumbosacral strain with degenerative arthritis was improper and the 40 percent rating is restored ab initio. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5112; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.105(e), 3.344, 4.118, DC 5242.

2. The criteria for an earlier effective for the award of service connection for radiculopathy left lower extremity have not been met. 38 U.S.C. § 5110; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.155, 3.400.

3. The criteria for a disability rating in excess of 20 percent for lumbar radiculopathy left lower extremity have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8520. 

4. The criteria for an earlier effective for the award of service connection for radiculopathy right lower extremity have not been met. 38 U.S.C. § 5110; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.155, 3.400.

5. The criteria for a disability rating in excess of 20 percent for lumbar radiculopathy right lower extremity have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8520. 

6. The criteria for entitlement to a TDIU have not been met. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; C.F.R. § 4.16.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Navy from January 2007 to October 2018.

In a May 2022 rating decision, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) denied the above claims. The Veteran timely filed for higher-level review, and the decision was continued in a March 2023 rating decision. In the February 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the May 2022 AOJ decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

1. The rating reduction from 40 percent to 20 percent for lumbosacral strain with degenerative arthritis was improper; the 40 percent evaluation is restored. 

The Veteran, through his representative, contends that his 40 percent rating for service-connected back disability reduction was improper and should be restored. See February 2024 Notice of Disagreement. Specifically, he contends the AOJ did not perform the duty of performing a full and complete review of the Veteran's medical history to show actual improvement in the Veteran's ability to function under the ordinary conditions of life and work. Id. 

For a reduction of a disability rating to be proper, there are both procedural and substantive requirements that must be followed. Generally, the provisions of 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(e) and (i) require notice of a proposed rating reduction, a 60-day period to submit evidence, and a 30-day period to request a hearing.

However, the procedural requirements of 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(e) only apply if a rating reduction would result in a reduction or discontinuance of the compensation payments being made. In other words, if a rating reduction does not result in a reduction to the Veteran's combined rating, and thus no change in monthly compensation, the issuance of a rating decision proposing the reduction and providing a 60-day notice of such reduction is not required. See Stelzel v. Mansfield, 508 F.3d 1345, 1348 (Fed. Cir. 2007); Tatum v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 139, 143 (2010). 

Congress has provided that a Veteran's disability rating shall not be reduced unless an improvement in the disability is shown to have occurred. 38 U.S.C. § 1155. See also 38 C.F.R. § 3.344(c). Such an improvement must reflect an actual improvement in the Veteran's ability to function under the ordinary conditions of life and work. See Faust v. West, 13 Vet. App. 342, 349 (2000). When VA reduces a Veteran's disability rating without following the applicable regulations, the reduction is void ab initio. See Greyzck v. West, 12 Vet. App. 288, 292 (1999).

In considering the propriety of a reduction, the Board must focus on the evidence of record available to the AOJ at the time the reduction was effectuated, although post-reduction evidence may also be considered for the purpose of determining whether the disability has demonstrated actual improvement. See Dofflemyer v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 277, 281-82 (1992). If the VA examination justifying the rating reduction is inadequate, the reduction cannot be upheld. See Tucker v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 201, 203 (1992) (holding that the failure of the examiner in that case to review the claims file rendered the reduction decision improper) (citing to 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2).

Generally, an appeal regarding the reduction of a rating must address only the propriety of the reduction, and not whether the Veteran is entitled to a higher rating. See Dofflemyer, 2 Vet. App. at 279-80.

As an initial matter, the Board finds that the rating reduction at issue did not result in a reduction of the Veteran's combined rating, and thus did not result in a change in monthly compensation. Under these circumstances, compliance by the AOJ with the procedural safeguards under 38 C.F.R. § 3.105 was not required. See Stelzel, 508 F.3d at 1348; Tatum, 24 Vet. App. at 143.

Thus, the question before the Board is whether the Veteran's back disability showed actual improvement in his ability to function under the ordinary conditions of life and work, as required to warrant the rating reduction. The Board concludes that it did not. The Board finds that the evidence does not show that any demonstrated "improvement" in the Veteran's lumbosacral strain that reflected an actual improvement in the Veteran's ability to function under the ordinary conditions of life and work. 

The Board acknowledges the February 2022 VA examination report which documents, in contrast to the Veteran's examination in February 2019 and December 2021 VA examination, forward flexion is limited to 40 degrees during flare-ups. Such a finding is commensurate with a 20 percent rating for forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine greater than 30 degrees but less than 60 degrees under 38 C.F.R. § 4.118, DC 5242. However, the Board also observes the reported symptoms of flare-ups that were noted to be severe and incapacitating in nature. Furthermore, the Board notes the examination elicited a response from the Veteran that his condition had worsened since his last examination. The examiner indicated the examination was not being conducted during a flare-up. While the Veteran's range of motion (ROM) may have measured to 50 degrees forward flexion and an estimated 10-degree loss of ROM during flare-ups, the Veteran's measurement in December 2021 was 40 degrees forward flexion with 10 degrees estimated ROM loss during flare-ups. The Board finds that a 10-degree improvement in forward flexion at one examination does not account for an actual improvement in his life and work. 

Thus, while the results of the February 2022 examination report that the Veteran's forward flexion was 10 degrees better than the December 2021 VA examination, the reduction in the Veteran's disability rating of 40 percent to 20 percent was not warranted, as there was no demonstrated improvement of the Veteran's ability to function under the ordinary conditions of life and work. Accordingly, the 40 percent disability rating for the Veteran's lumbosacral strain under DC 5242 is restored.

2. Entitlement to an earlier effective date for lumbar radiculopathy left lower extremity. 

See section 5 below.

3. Entitlement to a rating in excess of 20 percent for lumbar radiculopathy left lower extremity.

See section 5 below.

4. Entitlement to an earlier effective date for lumbar radiculopathy right lower extremity. 

See section 5 below.

5. Entitlement to a rating in excess of 20 percent for lumbar radiculopathy right lower extremity.

The Veteran is seeking a higher rating for his bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy. See February 2024 Notice of Disagreement.  Additionally, the Veteran contends that he is entitled to an earlier effective date for his bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy. Id.

Paralysis of the sciatic nerve is evaluated in accordance with the criteria set forth in 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8520.  (Neuritis and neuralgia of that group are evaluated under Diagnostic Codes 8620 and 8720.).  Under these criteria, mild incomplete paralysis is rated as 10 percent disabling.  Moderate incomplete paralysis is rated as 20 percent disabling.  Moderately severe incomplete paralysis is rated as 40 percent disabling.  Severe incomplete paralysis, with marked muscular atrophy is rated as 60 percent disabling.  Complete paralysis, with the foot dangles and drops, no active movement possible of muscles below the knee, flexion of knee weakened or (very rarely) lost is rated as 80 percent disabling.  38 C.F.R § 4.124a.  

The words "mild," "moderate," and "severe" as used in the various Diagnostic Codes are not defined in the Rating Schedule.  Regulations provide that ratings for peripheral neurological disorders are to be assigned based on the relative impairment of motor function, trophic changes, or sensory disturbance.  38 C.F.R. § 4.120.  Consideration is also given for loss of reflexes, pain, and muscle atrophy.  See 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.123, 4.124.

VA's Adjudication Procedures Manual (M21-1) provides benchmarks for mild, moderate, moderately severe, and severe peripheral nerve conditions. Although the Board is not bound by the M21-1, the standards provided in the M21-1 are "relevant guidance promulgated for the purpose of facilitating the efficient and proper resolution of claims," which the Board must consider and address as part of its duty to provide a reasoned explanation for its decision. Healey v. McDonough, 33 Vet. App. 312 (2021); Overton v. Wilkie, 30 Vet. App. 257 (2018).

The Board finds these definitions to be instructive. Per the M21-1, "moderate" is described as the maximum evaluation reserved for the most significant cases of sensory-only impairment, in which symptoms will likely be described by the claimants and graded as significantly disabling, and in which a larger area in the nerve distribution may be affected. Other symptom combinations that may fall into the moderate category include the following: combinations of significant sensory changes and reflex or motor changes of a lower degree, or motor and/or reflex impairment such as weakness or diminished hyperactive reflexes (with or without sensory impairment) graded as medically moderate. M21-1, V.iii.12.A.2.c.

A "moderately severe" evaluation level includes motor and/or reflex impairment (for example, weakness or diminished or hyperactive reflexes) at a grade reflecting a high level of limitation or disability and may include atrophy.

To be described as "severe," it would be expected that there is motor and/or reflex impairment (for example, atrophy, weakness, or diminished or hyperactive reflexes) at a grade reflecting a very high level of limitation or disability. Trophic changes may be seen in severe longstanding neuropathy, and marked muscular atrophy is expected in cases involving the sciatic nerve. Id.

The term "incomplete paralysis" with peripheral nerve injuries indicates a degree of lost or impaired function substantially less than the type of picture for complete paralysis given with each nerve, whether due to varied level of the nerve lesion or to partial regeneration. When the involvement is wholly sensory, the rating is for the mild, or at most, the moderate degree. The disability ratings for the peripheral nerves are for unilateral involvement; when bilateral, the ratings combine with application of the bilateral factor. 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Note at "Diseases of the Peripheral Nerves." The Note to 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a establishes a maximum disability rating for conditions that are wholly sensory, as opposed to a minimum disability rating for conditions that are more than wholly sensory. See Miller v. Shulkin, 28 Vet. App. 376 (2017).

The effective date of an award of increased compensation shall be the earliest date as of which it is factually ascertainable that an increase in disability had occurred, but only if the claim for an increase is received within one year from such date. See 38 U.S.C.A. § 5110(b)(3); see also 38 C.F.R. § 3.400(o)(2). Where the increase in disability occurs more than one year prior to the date of claim, the effective date for an award of increased compensation will be the date of receipt of claim or the date entitlement arose, whichever is later. See 38 U.S.C.A. § 5110(a); see also 38 C.F.R. § 3.400(o)(1); Gaston v. Shinseki, 605 F.3d 979, 980 (Fed. Cir. 2010); Swain v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 219, 224 (2015) (holding that the effective date for an increased rating is predicated on when the increase in the disability can be ascertained).

In February 2019, the Veteran presented for a VA examination for his back disability claim. At the examination, the Veteran denied any radicular symptoms and reported he had minimal baseline pain in his back with occasional flare-ups impacting his range of motion (ROM). Muscle strength, reflex, and sensory examination was normal. There were no signs of muscle atrophy. Straight leg examination was negative and there was no finding of radiculopathy.

Radiculopathy is not shown by medical evidence until a September 2021 VA examination. The Veteran indicated he experienced intermittent numbness and tingling to his bilateral lower extremities. Muscle strength testing indicated active movement against some resistance in all areas of the right lower extremity and in the left ankle plantar flexion, ankle dorsiflexion, and great toe extension. There was no muscle atrophy. Reflexes were normal. Sensation was decreased in all areas on the right lower extremity and decreased in the left lower leg, ankle, foot and toes. Sensory testing was normal in the left upper anterior thigh and knee. Straight leg testing was negative. The examiner noted changes in strength and sensory were most likely due to spinal stenosis found at levels L4 to S1 as well as moderate degenerative arthritis from L3 to S1 and retrolisthesis at L4 causing nerve compression. No other neurologic evidence was found on examination. 

The Veteran presented for a February 2022 VA examination for his service-connected radiculopathy. Muscle strength testing was decreased to active movement against some resistance bilaterally in knee extension and hip flexion. Strength was normal in all other areas of testing. No muscle atrophy was noted. Reflex examination was noted to be hypoactive bilaterally in the knees and ankles. Sensory examination was normal and straight leg raising test was negative. The Veteran was noted to have moderate paresthesias and numbness in his right lower extremity and no radiculopathy in his left lower extremity. Nerve roots affected were noted to be the femoral nerve. No other neurologic abnormalities were noted. The Veteran was not noted to be in receipt of any assistive devices to help with ambulation. His gait was normal, and he was able to rise from a chair without difficulty and walk on his heels and toes without difficulty.  

Regarding impairment of motor functions, there is minimal evidence that the Veteran's radiculopathy is of a grade reflecting a high level of limitation or disability and may include atrophy. There has been no evidence of muscle atrophy. While the Board notes there is evidence of hypoactive reflexes in the February 2022 VA examination, the Veteran was still capable of walking without difficulty on his heels and toes. Additionally, the Veteran required no assistance of a device for ambulation during the appeal period. 

Based on the above, the Board finds that the disability is primarily manifest by moderate incomplete paralysis that does not reflect a high limitation of disability.  The Board also finds that the most probative evidence of record is against a finding that the disability is manifest by severe or incomplete paralysis as there is no evidence the Veteran's radiculopathy of the lower extremities resulted in a very high level of limitation or disability and there is no evidence of trophic changes or muscle atrophy.  The Board thus finds that the level of impairment is most analogous to moderate incomplete paralysis. Additionally, the Board finds entitlement to an earlier effective date is denied as the Veteran did not file a claim for radiculopathy or an increased rating for his service-connected back disability and the evidence does not show radiculopathy until the September 15, 2021, VA examination, the date of the award for service-connection of the bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy. 

In conclusion, the Board finds that the evidence of record persuasively weighs against the Veteran's claim for a rating in excess of 20 percent for bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy.  As the evidence of record persuasively weighs against a rating in excess of 20 percent, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

6. Entitlement to individual unemployability is denied.

The Veteran contends he is entitled to individual unemployability due to his service-connected disability picture. See February 2024 notice of disagreement; see also January 2022 VA 21-8940 Veteran's application for increased compensation based on unemployability. 

It is the established policy of the VA that all veterans who are unable to secure and follow a substantially gainful occupation by reason of service-connected disabilities shall be rated totally disabled. A total disability will be considered to exist when there is present any impairment of mind or body which is sufficient to render it impossible for the average person to follow a substantially gainful occupation. Entitlement to a TDIU is based on an individual's particular circumstances. 38 C.F.R. § 4.16; Todd v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 79, 85-86 (2014). Thus, in adjudicating a TDIU claim, VA must take into account the individual veteran's education, training, and work history, but not his or her age or the impairment caused by nonservice-connected disabilities. See 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.341, 4.16, 4.19; see also Todd, 27 Vet. App. at 85-86; Van Hoose v. Brown, 4 Vet. App. 361 (1993). The ultimate question of whether a veteran is capable of substantial gainful employment is an adjudicatory determination, not a medical one. See Geib v. Shinseki, 733 F.3d 1350, 1354 (Fed. Cir. 2013) ("applicable regulations place responsibility for the ultimate TDIU determination on the VA, not a medical examiner").

The phrase "unable to secure and follow a substantially gainful occupation" in section 4.16 has both an economic and a noneconomic component. Ray v. Wilkie, 31 Vet. App. 58, 73 (2019). The economic component means an occupation earning more than marginal income outside of a protected environment. Id. The noneconomic component concerns whether the veteran is able to "secure or follow" gainful employment. Id. In determining whether a veteran can secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation, the Board should consider the veteran's history, education, skill, and training; whether he or she "has the physical ability (both exertional and nonexertional) to perform the type of activities (e.g., sedentary, light, medium, heavy, or very heavy) required" to work in a substantially gainful occupation, and "whether the veteran has the mental ability to perform the activities required" to work in a substantially gainful occupation. Id.

The fact that a claimant is unemployed or has difficulty obtaining employment is not enough. Van Hoose v. Brown, 4 Vet. App. 361, 363 (1993). "A high rating in itself is recognition that the impairment makes it difficult to obtain and keep employment. The question is whether the veteran is capable of performing the physical and mental acts required by employment, not whether the veteran can find employment." Id.

With regard to the economic component, marginal employment shall not be considered substantially gainful employment, and generally shall be deemed to exist when a veteran's earned income does not exceed the amount established by the U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, as the poverty threshold for one person. Marginal employment may also be held to exist, on a facts-found basis (includes but is not limited to employment in a protected environment such as a family business or sheltered workshop), when earned annual income exceeds the poverty threshold. The phrase "employment in a protected environment," within the meaning of 38 C.F.R. § 4.16 means "employment in a lower-income position that, due to the veteran's service-connected disability or disabilities, is shielded in some respect from competition in the employment market." LaBruzza v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 111, 123-24 (2024). Consideration shall be given in all claims to the nature of the employment and the reason for termination. Ortiz-Valles v. McDonald, 28 Vet. App. 65, 69-70 (2016); 38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a).

A TDIU may be assigned where the schedular rating is less than total, when it is found that the disabled person is unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation as a result of a single service-connected disability ratable at 60 percent or more, or as a result of two or more service-connected disabilities, provided that one of those disabilities is ratable at 40 percent or more, and there is sufficient additional service-connected disabilities to bring the combined rating to 70 percent or more. 38 C.F.R. § 4.16 (a).  During the appeal period, the Veteran had service-connected disability compensation in effect for obstructive sleep apnea rated at 50 percent; lumbar radiculopathy of the left lower extremity rated at 20 percent; lumbar radiculopathy of the right lower extremity rated at 20 percent; lumbosacral strain with degenerative arthritis rated at 40 percent; right thumb strain rated at 10 percent; right achilles tendon rupture rated at 10 percent; left knee anterior cruciate ligament tear rated at 10 percent; and tinnitus rated at 10 percent. His overall combined disability rating is 80 percent from October 13, 2018, and 90 percent from September 15, 2021. Therefore, the Veteran meets the schedular criteria for a TDIU during the period on appeal.

However, the Board finds that the evidence of record weighs against a finding that the Veteran's service-connected disabilities impair his ability to obtain or maintain substantially gainful employment. 

In the Veteran's January 2022 application for increased compensation based on unemployability, he asserted that his OSA and lumbosacral strain prevent him from securing or following substantially gainful employment. He reported last working for the United States Navy in October 2018. He reported attending college between January 2019 and December 2021. 

At a February 2019 VA examination, the Veteran reported that back flare-ups make rotational movement very hard and even standing and walking can be bothersome. The examiner found that the Veteran was capable of performing light duty while taking caution to engage in proper movements and use of the back. He should be allowed to get up often to relieve any pressure of prolonged sitting and may limit lifting large amounts of weight. An OSA examination that same month found no functional impact or limitation due to his service-connected condition.

At a February 2020 VA examination for his knee, the Veteran reported that pain in his knee affected his ability to work out. No other functional impact was reported. 

VA treatment records show the Veteran reported for a mental health consult in June 2020. He reported being a full-time single father to his 4-year-old son. He reported leisure activities such as working out, specifically going to the high school track and running laps. The Veteran reported completing one semester of post-secondary education and expressed interest in future education. He reported that he had not prioritized employment but had been trying to start his own boxing gym and had interest in working in his community. 

In a September 2021 VA examination for his back condition, the Veteran reported progressed back pain. He noted the pain to be a 5 out of 10 and flare-ups can lead to debilitating pain of 8, to the point where he needs to lay down. He reported flare-ups can be precipitated by standing for more than 30 minutes, sitting for more than an hour, cold weather, lifting more than 50 pounds, bending over to pick something up, or merely waking up from sleep. The Veteran denied having sought treatment for his back condition. He reported a frequency of weekly to bi-weekly and lasting one day in duration. The examiner noted the Veteran was a full-time student who lost 0 to 1 week of time in the last 12 months due to his back disability. It was noted that the Veteran had difficulty sitting in front of his computer for long periods of time and takes frequent breaks every hour that can affect his productivity and take longer to complete modules. 

A January 2022 VA treatment note indicates the Veteran presented for a routine follow-up examination. He reported pain in his right knee and otherwise denied any acute symptoms.  The Veteran was currently enrolled with a college for business where he reported that he "enjoys it." 

At a February 2022 VA examination for his back disability, the Veteran indicated his back pain was getting worse. He reported that with the back spasms, lack of range of motion, and lack of mobility, his back feels like it locked up all the time and he has to spend time in bed for the condition makes his back stiff. The Veteran denied having sought any treatment regarding his back condition. He reported flare-ups occur weekly, last one day in duration, and are precipitated by overuse and physical stress. The Veteran indicated flare-ups happened after he spent hours studying for an examination or hosting a dinner in which he had to cook and prepare the food. Alleviating factors were noted to include walking for one hour.  He reported this resulted in a functional limitation of being unable to lift heavy objects, standing for a long duration of time, and difficulty with extended periods of sitting. The examiner observed the Veteran was able to rise from a chair without difficulty and walk on his heels and toes without difficulty. His gait was noted to be normal. Regarding functional impact, the examiner noted the Veteran lost 0 to 1 week of work time due to his back disability in the past 12 months. In a separate statement on unemployability, the examiner noted the Veteran was capable of light duty with the need for intermittent changes of position from sitting to standing due to back pain.

In a February 2022 VA examination for sleep apnea, the Veteran reported an improvement in his ability to stay awake since using a CPAP machine. He indicated the quality of sleep was still inconsistent and that he would occasionally remove the mask in his sleep. The Veteran reported if he had a bad week, he will not be able to get out of bed due to fatigue and be out for a day. He reported brain fog and mental fatigue related to amount and quality of sleep. The examiner found no functional impact due to the disability, but noted the Veteran should follow up with a primary care provider regarding symptoms of ineffective treatment interfering with his performance as a student. In a separate statement on individual unemployability regarding the Veteran's sleep apnea, the examiner found no noted restrictions for occupational tasks. He indicated the most recent compliance report in 2020 that indicated good control of the sleep apnea. If an updated compliance report contradicted this finding, the examiner noted a conclusion would be reconsidered and revised as appropriate. There is no evidence of an updated compliance report for sleep apnea being performed. 

In conclusion, the Board understands that the Veteran's disabilities have had a severe impact on his life. The ratings assigned for the Veteran's disabilities is a recognition that his impairments affected his earning capacity. However, in this case the evidence does not show that he was unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation due to his service-connected disabilities.

The Veteran's work history shows that he was a full-time dad after he left the service. He reported in June 2020 that he was not prioritizing employment, but had interest in employment, as well as starting his own boxing gym and business. Records also indicate the Veteran was still currently enrolled and pursuing a business degree at a local university. Additionally, assessments on the Veteran's service-connected disabilities do not show the Veteran is incapable of pursuing meaningful and gainful employment. In the February 2022 employment statements, the examiner opined that the Veteran's disability limited his ability to perform light duty work. Light duty work was defined as exerting up to 20 pounds of force occasionally and upwards of 10 pounds frequently. Light work was noted to be when it requires standing or walking to a significant degree or sitting most of the time, or when the job requires working at a production rate pace entailing constant pushing and/or pulling of materials. The only limitation noted by the examiner was the Veteran would need intermittent changes of positioning due to his back pain. The Board finds this rationale consistent with the Veteran's statements. 

In September 2021, the Veteran noted his flare-ups were precipitated by periods of physically exerting himself. He indicated standing for more than 30 minutes or sitting for extended periods of time and lifting more than 50 pounds can cause flare-ups. He noted decreased productivity due to frequent breaks in schoolwork, but there was no indication that the Veteran was unable to perform the sedentary work. In February 2022, the Veteran indicated the incapacitating episodes of flare-ups were also precipitated by "physical stress" and "overuse." His examples were that of spending hours studying for an examination or hosting a dinner party, in which he was required to cook and prepare the food, an activity that would require frequent standing. With respect to his sleep apnea, there is minimal indication that his condition severely affects his ability to maintain gainful employment. In February 2022, the Veteran stated his sleep had improved since being placed on a CPAP machine with his ability to stay awake for longer periods of time. The Board did consider the Veteran's statements that a bad week may result in a lack of productivity but does not find it results in an inability to maintain gainful employment. Therefore, the Board finds the Veteran has the educational training of his work as a student in business, the physical ability to perform jobs that involve light work or sedentary jobs, and has the mental ability to perform such activities, as shown by his ability as a full-time student in business. Ray, 31 Vet. App. at 73. 

The Board has considered the Veteran's contention that his physical limitations affect his ability to stand more than 30 minutes, sit for more than an hour, or bend to pick something up. However, considering the Veteran's previous statements, these tend to be due to periods of overstress or exertion. The Veteran has performed more than 3 years as a full-time student that would cause him to engage in sedentary and light work. His pursuit of a business degree would be applicable to at most light duty and sedentary positions. The Board has also considered the Veteran's argument that the physical limitations identified would be incompatible with sedentary work based on a Department of Labor definition adopted by Ray, 31 Vet. App. at 73-74. The Board disagrees. The Veteran was found to be capable of lifting up to 10 pounds of force by a trained medical professional in a February 2022 unemployability assessment, of which the Board places probative value. Furthermore, the flare-ups described by the Veteran were noted to occur one day every week to two weeks, of which one of many precipitating factors may involve bending over. 

The Board has also considered the Veteran's contention that his sleep apnea and back disability have affected his mental acumen to obtain gainful employment. The Veteran, through his representative cites specifically to the February 2022 VA examination where the Veteran noted sleep apnea affects his mental limitations. However, the Board notes the Veteran's representative cited to the Veteran's reports of symptoms at onset. The Board notes that the Veteran admitted to an improvement since his diagnosis. The Board has also considered the Veteran's argument that his back disability impacts his ability to sit in front of a computer for long periods of time and result in hourly breaks that prolong his productivity. The Board understands the physical limitation caused by his back disability may impact his ability to perform at a more effective pace than he may prefer, but there is no indication that the frequent breaks have completely impacted his ability at all to complete projects and modules. As a result, the Board does not find these limitations impact the Veteran's mental ability to perform activities of sedentary or light work. 

Based on the foregoing, the Board finds that the competent and credible evidence is neither evenly nor approximately balanced as to whether the Veteran was unemployable during the period on appeal. Therefore, the benefit of the doubt doctrine does not apply. 38 U.S.C. §5107(b), Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021). As the Veteran has not been found unemployable, entitlement to TDIU is denied. 

 

 

B. MULLINS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Jarman, Timothy

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.