Citation Nr: A25034029
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 240909-471971
DATE: April 11, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea, to include as secondary to service-connected disabilities of major depressive disorder, left thigh limitation of extension, left thigh limitation of flexion, left thigh strain and left hip disability is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

The Veterans obstructive sleep apnea was but-for caused by his service-connected disabilities of major depressive disorder, left thigh limitation of extension, left thigh limitation of flexion, left thigh strain and left hip disability.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea, to include as secondary to service-connected disabilities of major depressive disorder, left thigh limitation of extension, left thigh limitation of flexion, left thigh strain and left hip disability have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.310.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served in the Marine Corps from January 1997 to February 2006. 

This case is before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a November 2023 Regional Office (RO) rating decision.

In the VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) (NOD), the appellant elected the Direct Review option; therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301.

Service Connection

The law provides that service connection may be granted for disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active military service.  38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.304.  Service connection may be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).

Generally, establishing service connection requires medical or, in certain circumstances, lay evidence of (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a nexus between the claimed in-service disease or injury and the present disability.  See Davidson v. Shinseki, 581 F.3d 1313, 1316 (Fed. Cir. 2009); Hickson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 247, 253 (1999). 

Service connection may be granted for a disability that is... due to, or aggravated by, service-connected disease or injury. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.310. "The statute, [38 U.S.C. § 1110], plainly requires compensation when a service-connected disease or injury is a but-for cause of a present-day disability. This broad language applies to the natural progression of a condition not caused by a service-connected injury or disease, but that nonetheless would have been less severe were it not for the service-connected disability. Stated another way, § 1110 provides for compensation for a worsening of functionality-whether through an inability to treat or a more direct, etiological cause. Nothing in the statute limits § 1110 to onset or etiological causes of a worsening in functionality" Spicer v. McDonough, 61 F.4th 1360, 1364 (Fed. Cir. 2023).

1. Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea, to include as secondary to service-connected disabilities

The Veteran is seeking service connection for obstructive sleep apnea. Specifically, the Veteran asserts that his sleep apnea is a result of his service-connected major depressive disorder and musculoskeletal disabilities. 

The Veterans service treatment records were silent for diagnosis, treatment, or complaints of sleep apnea. The Veterans post-service treatment records documented that the Veteran was diagnosed with sleep apnea in 2020.

The Veteran is service connected for Major Depressive Disorder, left thigh limitation of flexion, left thigh limitation of extension, left thigh strain, left hip disability, degenerative arthritis of right wrist, hypertension and bilateral tinnitus.  

The Veteran submitted a private medical assessment in September 2023 for his obstructive sleep apnea. The private examiner opined that the Veterans sleep apnea was at least as likely as not secondary to, related to, and/or aggravated by the Veterans weight gain and obesity from service-related conditions. In support of this opinion, the private examiner noted that obesity/weight gain is the number one risk factor of developing obstructive sleep apnea and studies further show a relationship between mental health conditions, chronic pain, and chronic sleep impairment. Additionally, the private examiner noted that studies show that the medication prescribed to the Veteran for his conditions cause fluid retention which leads to postural fluid shifts at night, increasing tissue pressure and causing narrowing of the upper airway predisposing obstructive sleep apnea. The private examiner cited to multiple medical studies linking depression and weight gain, sleep disturbance and weight gain, and musculoskeletal conditions associated with weight gain. Further, the examiner stated that multiple studies have documented that obesity is known to predispose patient to obstructive sleep apnea. 

The Veteran underwent an examination in October 2023. The Veteran was diagnosed with OSA. The examiner opined that the claimed condition was less likely than not proximately due to or the result of Veteran's service-connected conditions including left thigh strain, left thigh limitation of flexion, left thigh limitation of extension, major depressive disorder, left hip femoral acetabular impingement syndrome with bursitis and tendinosis. The examiners rationale for this opinion was that OSA is due to mechanical obstruction of the posterior pharynx and none of the listed conditions cause mechanical obstruction of the posterior pharynx. The Board notes that the examiner did not further discuss whether the Veterans major depressive disorder was a contributing factor to the Veterans sleep apnea diagnosis. Specifically, he focused on the Veterans musculoskeletal disabilities as his rationale for the negative nexus opinion. 

In light of the positive and negative evidence of record, the Board finds that the evidence is at least in equipoise regarding whether the Veteran's sleep apnea was caused or aggravated by his service-connected major depressive disorder and musculoskeletal disorders. The Board resolves doubt in favor of the Veteran. 38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b).

Service connection for sleep apnea is granted.

 

 

Martin T. Mitchell

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Vample, Erica

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.