Citation Nr: A25034056
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 211019-192168
DATE: April 11, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for degenerative disc disease, lumbar spine with piriformis syndrome ("lumbar spine disability") is granted, on a direct basis.

Entitlement to service connection for a right hip strain is granted, on a direct basis.

Entitlement to service connection for a left hip strain is granted, on a direct basis.

Entitlement to service connection for a right knee strain is granted, on a direct basis.

Entitlement to service connection for sciatica, bilateral lower extremities, on a secondary, causation basis, is granted. 

Entitlement to service connection for bladder and bowel incontinence, to include cauda equina syndrome with neurogenic bowel, on a secondary, causation basis, is granted.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The evidence is at least evenly balanced as to whether the Veteran's lumbar spine disability had onset in service.

2. The evidence is at least evenly balanced as to whether the Veteran's right hip strain had onset in service.

3. The evidence is at least evenly balanced as to whether the Veteran's left hip strain had onset in service.

4. The evidence is at least evenly balanced as to whether the Veteran's right knee strain had onset in service.

5. The evidence is at least evenly balanced as to whether the Veteran's sciatica, bilateral lower extremities, was caused by the Veteran's service-connected lumbar spine disability.

6. The evidence is at least evenly balanced as to whether the Veteran's bladder and bowel incontinence was caused by the Veteran's service-connected lumbar spine disability.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. With reasonable doubt resolves in favor of the Veteran, the criteria for entitlement to service connection for a lumbar spine disability have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

2. With reasonable doubt resolves in favor of the Veteran, the criteria for entitlement to service connection for a right hip strain have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

3. With reasonable doubt resolves in favor of the Veteran, the criteria for entitlement to service connection for a left hip strain have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

4. With reasonable doubt resolves in favor of the Veteran, the criteria for entitlement to service connection for a right knee strain have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

5. With reasonable doubt resolved in favor of the Veteran, the criteria for service connection for sciatica, bilateral lower extremities, secondary to lumbar spine disability, on a causation basis, have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.310.

6. With reasonable doubt resolved in favor of the Veteran, the criteria for service connection for bladder and bowel incontinence, secondary to lumbar spine disability, on a causation basis, have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.310.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran had active duty service in the United States Air Force from January 2009 to January 2012.

These matters come before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from appeals of October 2020, January 2021, and August 2021 rating decisions of the Department of Veterans Affairs.  In the former rating decision, the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) implicitly (by readdressing claims on the merits) readjudicated the Veteran's claims for service connection for lumbar spine disability and sciatica, bilateral extremities, on the basis of receipt of new and relevant evidence, and then confirmed and continued denial.  The Board is bound by this favorable finding as to new and relevant evidence (see 38 C.F.R. §3.104(c)) and therefore proceeds to decide these claims on the merits.  As to the January 2021 rating decision, the AOJ denied the Veteran's claims for service connection for bladder and bowel incontinence on a secondary, causation basis.  Finally in this regard, pursuant to duty to assist errors identified through the process initiated by a January 2021 VA Form 20-0996 Request for Higher -Level Review (and identified in an April 2021 VA Form 20-0999, Higher-Level Review Return), the AOJ denied the Veteran's claims for right hip strain, left hip strain, and right knee strain in the August 2021 rating decision.

In her October 2021 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) (NOD), the Veteran elected the Hearing docket.  

Under the AMA hearing docket, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the respective AOJ decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or representative at the hearing or within 90 days following the hearing.  38 U.S.C. § 7113(b); 38 C.F.R. § 20.302(a).  

The Veteran testified at a Board hearing before the undersigned Veterans Law Judge on April 9, 2025.  A transcript has not yet been associated with the claims file, but one is not necessary because the benefits sought are being granted in full.  The Board notes that the case has been advanced on the docket.

If the Veteran wishes to have VA consider any evidence that was not considered, she may at any time, file a supplemental claim with the AOJ after receiving this decision and the additional evidence will be considered in connection with the supplemental claim.  38 U.S.C. §§ 5104C(a)(1)(B), (b); 5108; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.2501, 20.1105(a).  If filed within one year, this supplemental claim will preserve the date of the claim denied herein as the effective date of the grant of the benefit or benefits sought.  38 U.S.C. § 5104C(a)(2)(B); 38 C.F.R. § 3.2500(h)(1).

Service Connection; Applicable Law

Service connection will be granted if the evidence demonstrates that current disability resulted from an injury suffered or disease contracted in active military, naval, air, or space service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (a). Establishing service connection generally requires competent evidence of three things: (1) current disability; (2) in-service injury or disease; and (3) a relationship between the two.  Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F. 3d 1356, 1361 (Fed. Cir. 2018). Consistent with this framework, service connection is warranted for a disease first diagnosed after service when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).

Service connection is also warranted for disability that is proximately due to or the result of service-connected disease or injury.  38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a). As pertinent to the instant matters, the Court has held that "for a veteran to be service connected on a secondary basis under a causation theory, the primary disability need not be service connected, or even diagnosed, at the time the secondary condition is incurred."  Frost v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 131, 133 (2017).  Moreover, "there is no such temporal requirement inherent in § 3.310(a), even when the veteran claims that the primary condition caused the secondary condition."  Id.  Secondary service connection under 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a) is warranted where a non-service-connected disability would have been less severe but for a service-connected disability, either because there is an etiological link (to include worsening of functionality) between the two, or because the service-connected disability resulted in the inability to treat the non-service-connected disability.  Spicer v. McDonough, 61 F. 4th 1360, 1366 (Fed. Cir. 2023) ("but for" causation "applies to the natural progression of a condition not caused by a service-connected injury or disease, but that nonetheless would have been less severe were it not for the service-connected disability. Stated another way... compensation [is warranted] for a worsening of functionality-whether through an inability to treat or a more direct, etiological cause").  The Court has also held that the "'causation requirement in the phrase 'the result of' is 'broad,' in that it permits entitlement to VA benefits 'based on a multi-link causal chain.'"  Payne v. Wilkie, 31 Vet. App. 373, 384 (2019).  See also Spicer, 61 F. 4th at 1364 ("The but-for causation standard is not limited to a single cause and effect, but rather contemplates multi-causal links, including action and inaction"). 

Lumbar spine disability; Right hip strain; Left hip strain; Right knee strain

Both a battery of VA examination reports from 2018 and 2021 and a private medical report tendered at the Board hearing and incorporated into the record by reference reflects disclose diagnoses of degenerative disc disease, lumbar spine with piriformis syndrome; right hip strain; left strain; and right knee strain.  Therefore, the current disability requirements for these 3 disabilities have been met.

The Veteran is competent to testify as to a motor vehicle accident "wreck" (MVA) that occurred during active duty service (in December 2011) and its immediate discernable effects, namely discernable back pain and functional limitation with movement, discernable bilateral hip pain and functional limitation, and discernable right knee pain and functional limitations with movement.  Since the in-service genesis, the Veteran's multiple joint symptoms have been on-going, persistent through formal diagnoses (as noted above) and thereafter.  Specifically, the Veteran has conveyed that her joint symptoms have hampered movement, walking, and extended periods of sitting.  Stated more directly, since service the Veteran reports being hobbled by excruciating spine, bilateral hip, and right knee pain that is pervasive and inhibiting.  Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F. 3d 1372, 1377 (Fed. Cir. 2007) (a veteran is competent to testify regarding observations); Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F. 3d 1331, 1337 (holding lay evidence concerning continuity of symptoms after service, if credible, is ultimately competent, regardless of the lack of contemporaneous medical evidence).  The Veteran's long-standing accounts of on-going discernable symptoms (as to the lumbar spine, bilateral hips, and right knee) are plausible, internally consistent, and consistent with the places, types, and circumstances of service, and there is nothing of equal or greater probative weight in the evidence of record to contradict this account of his discernable and ongoing symptoms culminating in the above noted diagnoses.  See 38 U.S.C. § 1154(a); 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a) (each disabling condition for which a veteran seeks service connection must be considered based on factors including the basis of places, types, and circumstances of service as shown by service records).  Thus, the in-service disease or injury requirement has been met for the 3 disabilities and continuous symptoms since service have been shown.

As to the lumbar spine disability, VA received a private opinion from clinician S in October 2020. This private clinician provided a comprehensive assessment of the Veteran's medical history, to include the in-service MVA and the continuity of symptoms that led to the Veteran's current lumbar spine diagnosis.  The clinician found a high probability of association between the 2011 MVA and the Veteran's current lumbar spine disability. 

Upon the battery of VA examinations (focused on the lumbar spine, bilateral hips, and right knee), the clinicians, who rendered diagnoses and referenced the Veteran's credible lay accounts of the MVA (genesis) and on-going symptoms, rendered negative etiological opinions.  Collectively, as supporting rationales, these clinicians emphasized that the "respective silences" in the evidence of record post-service warranted more probative value than the Veteran's fulsome and credible lay accounts and testimony concerning the MVA and the discernable lumbar spine, bilateral hip, and right knee symptoms ever since.  Since these clinicians did not factor this credible lay evidence into the respective calculus of her/his negative etiological opinion, the Board finds that the opinions are inadequate.  Buchanan, 451 F. 3d at 1336, n. 1 (in the absence of contemporaneous medical evidence, "[l]ay statements [can present] sufficient evidence of the etiology of [the veteran's] disability such that [her claims] for service connection could be proven without contemporaneous medical evidence").

Bolstering the Veteran's credible testimony and clinician's S's positive opinion, a private medical opinion from clinician B was presented at the hearing and incorporated into the record by reference, thus entering the hearing docket as described above.  B indicated provided a thorough review of the evidence of record, a complete consideration of the Veteran's contention, and provided a reasoned opinion as to the Veteran's lumbar spine, bilateral hips, and right knee disabilities.  Referencing peer-reviewed literature, B highlighted that MVAs are well-known to be "causes" of lumbar spine disabilities.  Additionally, as the lumbar spine share connecting ligaments with the hips and knees, an injury to the lumbar spine radiates to the hip region and the right knee.  B noted that this point is made clear through the Veteran's complaints of back, bilateral hip, and right knee pain in her medical records associated with the 2011 MVA.  Thus, B rendered a positive etiological opinion for these 3 joint disabilities.  Especially when considered within the context of the Veteran's competent lay statements and testimony, the Board finds that B's positive etiological opinion warrants significant probative weight because B approached the disabilities holistically, through consideration of all of the extant evidence of record and referred to peer-reviewed literature to support her conclusion reached.  Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008) (most of the probative value of a medical opinion comes from its reasoning); Acevedo v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 286, 294 (2012) (medical reports must be read as a whole and in the context of the evidence of record).

For the foregoing reasons, the evidence is sufficient to decide the Veteran's service connection claims, as it is at least evenly balanced as to whether the Veteran's lumbar spine disability, right hip strain, left hip strain, and right knee strain had onset in service.  As the reasonable doubt created by this relative equipoise in the evidence must be resolved in favor of the Veteran, entitlement to service connection is warranted for these 4 disabilities.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F. 4th 776, 781-82 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc) (only when the evidence persuasively favors one side, or the other is the benefit of the doubt doctrine not for application).

Sciatica, bilateral lower extremities; Bladder and bowel incontinence

The Veteran contends that these disabilities were caused by her lumbar spine disability.  As discussed above, the Board grants service connection for the Veteran's lumbar spine disability.

In the same battery of examinations (2018 and 2021) and private medical report, clinicians rendered diagnoses of sciatica, bilateral lower extremities and cauda equina syndrome with neurogenic bowel.  Consequently, the current disability requirement for these two disabilities has been met.

During the Board hearing, the Veteran testified that the discomfort in her lower extremities and bladder and bowel incontinence began after the MVA, more specifically, after she injured her lumbar spine in active duty service.  Indeed, the Veteran is competent to report discernable symptoms, as to the date of inception and the ongoing nature ever since.  Jandreau, 492 F. 3d 1372, 1377; Buchanan, 451 F. 3d 1331, 1337.  The Board finds that the Veteran's testimony is facially plausible, is consistent with other accounts, consistent with other evidence submitted on behalf of the Veteran (Caluza v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 498, 511 (1995)) and therefore warrants substantial probative weight.

The VA clinicians who conducted the battery of examinations rendered negative etiological opinions.  While the 2018 clinicians rendered negative opinions as to direct service connection, the 2021 clinicians rendered negative opinions as to secondary causation.  In both instances, the clinicians did not consider the Veteran's lay accounts in any meaningful way in the calculi of their respective opinions.  While the 2018 opinions privileged the absences in the evidence of record, the 2021 clinicians focused on circumscribed etiologies of the Veteran's disabilities, namely impingement of the nerves at specific locations on the spinal column and "one massive herniated" disc in the lumbar region.  While the Board finds these opinions informative, especially as to references to medical databases, the Board finds that the clinicians focused exclusively upon the disease entities without sufficient consideration of the specific facts of the Veteran's medical history.  In light of the lack of consideration of lay evidence and lack of consideration of specific facts of the Veteran's MVA incurred in service and its significant complications, the Board finds that these VA examinations warrant diminished probative weight.  Nieves-Rodriguez, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 

Clinician B, as noted above, provided a fulsome opinion as to both the Veteran's sciatica, bilateral lower extremities and bladder and bowel incontinence, infused with the specific facts of the Veteran's medical history, peer-reviewed findings, and an anatomical analysis.  Underscoring her positive etiological opinion as to secondary causation, this expert reported that,                                                                                                                                                                                                                    

Medical literature supports the connection between lumbar degeneration in the in the progression of chronic back pain and radiculopathy [...] Any process that causes irritation of the spinal nerves can cause radicular symptoms [...] Furthermore, disc herniations and degenerative changes [such as those diagnosed in the case of the Veteran] that apply pressure to the nerve roots [...] affect the bowel and bladder function.  [in turn] nerve root involvement [causally] affects [the ability] to control the bowel and bladder function resulting in voiding or incontinence.

With this explanation, clinician B mapped a causative multi-link chain which shows how the Veteran's service-connected lumbar spine disability caused her sciatica, bilateral lower extremities and bladder and bowel incontinence.  References to peer-reviewed literature and studies on the thoracolumbar spine, bladder, bowel and neurogenic complications support this positive opinion as to secondary causation in a multi-link chain.  As is the case above, the Board assigns significant probative weight to this opinion because clinician B draws associations between the Veteran's disease entities and the specific facts of the Veteran's medical history, emanating from the MVA in service.  Again, augmented by the Veteran's competent, consistent, and credible lay statements and testimony, this opinion provides a well-reasoned basis to support that the Veteran's lumbar spine disability caused these disabilities through multiple processes involving nerve roots and different somatic systems.  Nieves-Rodriguez, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304; Acevedo, 25 Vet. App. 286, 294.

Considering the above, the evidence is at least evenly balanced as to whether the Veteran's service-connected lumbar spine disability caused her sciatica, bilateral lower extremities and bladder and bowel incontinence.  As the reasonable doubt created by this relative equipoise in the evidence of record must be resolved in the Veteran's favor, entitlement to service connection for these two disabilities is warranted.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch, 21 F. 4th 776, 781-82.

 

 

Jonathan Hager

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	B. J. Komins, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability.  38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.