Citation Nr: A25034914
Decision Date: 04/16/25	Archive Date: 04/16/25

DOCKET NO. 240830-470193
DATE: April 16, 2025

REMANDED

An initial compensable rating for sinusitis is remanded. 

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea (OSA), claimed as secondary to service-connected low back disability, is remanded. 

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from June 1994 to July 2014. The Veteran is a Persian Gulf veteran. See VA Memo (January 2023) (Kuwait October 2013 through April 2014). See also, 38 U.S.C. §1117; 38 C.F.R. §3.317(e). Further, the Veteran has qualifying service in the Southwest Asia theater of operations during the Persian Gulf War, and his exposure to burn pits and other toxins (BPOT) and exposure to fine particulate matter are presumed; these are considered toxic exposure risk activity (TERA). See VA Memo (December 2022); VA Memo (January 2023); see also 38 U.S.C. § 1117, 1119, 1120; Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxics (PACT) Act, Pub. L. No. 117-168 § 3373, 136 Stat. 1759 (2022).  

The rating decision on appeal was issued on September 20, 2023, and constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.  

In the August 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the September 20, 2023, agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of entitlement to an initial compensable rating for sinusitis and to service connection for OSA, claimed as secondary to low back disability, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

REASONS FOR REMAND

In remanding these matters, the Board makes no finding, implicit or otherwise, as to the credibility of the Veteran's assertions.  Neither the Veteran's credibility nor any lack thereof should be presumed in this remand.

1. Entitlement to an initial compensable rating for sinusitis is remanded.

A September 20, 2023, rating decision granted service connection for sinusitis and assigned an initial noncompensable rating, effective August 10, 2022. This appeal arises from the Veteran's, and his representative's, disagreement with the initial rating assigned. See VA Form 10182 Notice of Disagreement (August 2024) (the Veteran's representative argues that the Veteran is entitled to a higher rating of 10 percent based on Veteran's lay assertions regarding severity of symptoms).

The rating review period begins on August 10, 2022-the date of the grant of service connection; and ends on September 20, 2023-the date of the rating decision on appeal.

The issue of entitlement to an initial compensable rating for sinusitis is remanded to correct a duty to assist error that occurred prior to the September 20, 2023, rating decision.

VA has a duty to assist in making reasonable efforts to obtain records in the custody of a federal department or agency, including medical records from VA medical facilities. VA must make as many requests as necessary until the VA concludes the records sought do not exist or if further efforts to obtain those records would be futile. 38 C.F.R. § 3.159 (c)(2). If, after continued efforts, VA is reasonably certain the federal records do not exist or further efforts would be futile, VA will provide the claimant with oral or written notice of the fact. 38 C.F.R. §3.159 (e)(1). 

Here, VA treatment record, dated January 2021, reflects that the Veteran registered for treatment at the hospital at Lackland Air Force Base. See CAPRI at 2 (June 2023) (Veteran email correspondence stating "I just registered with the hospital at Lackland AFB and they pulled all my medications over there"). VA treatment note, dated November 2021, reflects that the Veteran declined to reschedule an appointment at the Audie L. Murphie Memorial Hospital because he will see his primary care physician on base. Id. at 1 (VA treatment note "PT DECLINED TO RESCHED, AS HE WILL BE SEEING A PCP ON BASE WITH TRICARE AS PER PATIENT"). However, the referenced VA treatment records are not associated with the claims file. The AOJ had a duty to obtain the outstanding VA treatment records and associate it with the claims file prior to issuing the decision on appeal. Sullivan v. McDonald, 815 F.3d 786 (Fed. Cir. 2016) ("38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c) expanded the VA's duty to assist to include obtaining VA medical records without consideration of their relevance."); Bell v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 611 (1992) (holding that documents which are generated by VA agents or employees are in constructive possession of VA, and as such, should be obtained and included in the record).

Therefore, remand is necessary to correct the duty to assist error on the part of the originating agency in satisfying its duties under 38 U.S.C. § 5103A, which occurred prior to the rating decision on appeal. See 38 C.F.R. § 20.802.

2. Entitlement to service connection for OSA, claimed as secondary to service-connected low back disability, is remanded. 

The Veteran, and his representative, contend that his OSA disability is secondary to his service-connected low back disability, to include obesity as an intermediate step. See VA 21-4138 Statement in Support of Claim (June 2023) (pain associated with service-connected low back condition precludes the Veteran's ability to sleep on side; make it difficult to fall and stay asleep; and preclude his ability to exercise that led to weight gain that led to his OSA); see also Third Party Correspondence (theories that the Veteran's service-connected disabilities have resulted in substantial weight gain; that his OSA is secondary to or aggravated by his obesity; and that it is at least as likely as not that without his weight gain his OSA would not have occurred).

The Veteran is service-connected for the following: irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) to include gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD); thoracolumbar strain with associated bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy; allergic rhinitis; left wrist sprain; and other noncompensable disabling conditions that are not musculoskeletal in nature. See Rating Decision-Codesheet (December 2024). 

Additionally, the Veteran contends that his OSA was initially manifested in service by symptom of snoring that woke him in the night with choking episodes along with trouble staying awake during the daytime. See C&P Exam (July 2023).

As a threshold matter, the AOJ has made the following favorable findings: (1) The Veteran's claimed primary disability of thoracolumbar strain is service-connected; (2) The Veteran has been diagnosed with OSA disability, as evidenced by the VA medical examination, July 18, 2023. See Rating Decision-Narrative (July 2015); C&P Exam (August 2023). The Board is bound by these favorable findings. See Rating Decision-Narrative (September 2023). 

The issue of entitlement to service connection for OSA is remanded to correct a duty to assist error that occurred prior to the rating decision on appeal. 

First, VA's duty to assist claimants includes obtaining records in the custody of a Federal department or agency and making reasonable efforts to obtain relevant records not in the custody of a Federal department or agency, to include records from private medical care providers, that are reasonably identified. See 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(1), (2). Here, the July 2023 VA-obtained Sleep Apnea Disability Benefits Questionnaire (DBQ) references a sleep study performed by Sleep Centers of Texas in 2023, that diagnosed OSA. See C&P Exam at 2 (August 2023). Thus, relevant outstanding non-VA treatment records were reasonably identified prior to the decision on appeal. However, the record does not contain these records, and the AOJ did not request that the Veteran provide these records, or authorize release to VA, prior to issuing the decision on appeal. 

Second, VA's duty to assist claimants in the development of their claims includes obtaining an examination and/or opinion when necessary to decide the claim. 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(d); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(4). Generally, a medical opinion should address the appropriate theories of entitlement. Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 123-24 (2007). Further, once an examination or opinion is obtained, VA must ensure that it is adequate. See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007) (when VA undertakes to provide a VA examination or obtain a VA opinion, it must ensure that it is adequate).

Here, no medical opinion addressing whether the Veteran's OSA is a medically unexplained chronic multi symptoms illness (MUCMI). In cases involving Persian Gulf veterans, when medical evidence of record does not provide a diagnosis or medical explanation for symptoms, VA is required to address whether such signs or symptoms allow for presumptive service connection under 38 C.F.R. §3.317, to include as a medically unexplained chronic multi symptoms illness (MUCMI). See Stewart v. Wilkie, 30 Vet. App. 383, 390 (2018). Prior to the rating decision on appeal, the AOJ did not obtain a medical opinion addressing whether the Veteran's OSA is a MUCMI although the record establishes that the Veteran has a current diagnosis for OSA and he is a Persian Gulf Veteran. Similarly, the AOJ did not obtain a medical opinion addressing the Veteran's theory that his snoring, choking, and daytime tiredness reflect that the onset of later diagnosed OSA. Stefl, 21 Vet. App. 120, 123-24 (2007).

Further, although the AOJ obtained a July 2023 medical opinion addressing secondary service connection, it is inadequate for adjudicative purposes. The opinion reflects that the Veteran's OSA is less likely than not "proximately due" to or result of his service-connected low back disability. The rationale was "There is not medical literature to support the claim that OSA is caused by thoracolumbar strain condition." See C&P Exam at 4 (August 2023). 

The Board finds that the medical opinion is inadequate because it reflects consideration of the more stringent standard of "proximate causation." See Spicer v. McDonough, 61 F. 4th 1360, 1366 (Fed. Cir. 2023) (Service connection is not limited to "single cause and effect" but also applies to conditions "that...would have been less severe were it not for the service-connected disability"). Also, although the opinion states a conclusion, it lacks supporting data and a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two. Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 301 (2008). Further, the opinion does not address the aggravation prong of secondary service connection. El-Amin v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 136, 140-41 (2013) (emphasizing that a specific inquiry directly addressing aggravation, separate from whether a service-connected disability caused the disability, is necessary when an examiner addresses secondary service connection).

Additionally, the medical opinion obtained does not reflect any meaningful consideration of the Veteran's theory that his OSA is caused or aggravated by  sleeping on his back (because he is unable to sleep on his side) as a result of service-connected back disability; and that his OSA is due to weight gain/obesity related to an inability to exercise caused by his service connected disability. See Robinson v. Peake, 21 Vet. App. 545, 552 (2009), aff'd sub nom. See Robinson v. Shinseki, 557 F.3d 1355 (Fed. Cir. 2009) (requiring VA to weigh all theories of entitlement raised either by the claimant or by the evidence of record as part of the non-adversarial administrative adjudication process); see also McKinney v. McDonald, 28 Vet. App. 15, 30-31 (2016) ("the VA examiner's failure to consider [a veteran's] testimony when formulating her opinion renders that opinion inadequate.").

Lastly, the Board finds that the July 2023 VA-obtained medical opinion addressing the Veteran's presumed exposures from his participation in a TERA is inadequate. The opinion reflects that:

The claimed condition diagnosed as sleep apnea was less likely than not (likelihood is less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activity(ies), after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran. Evidence reviewed supporting claim: 

The opinion noted the following links did not support a nexus: https://www.publichealth.va.gov/exposures/ and https://www.health.mil/Military-Health-Topics/Health-Readiness/Environmental-Exposures/. Then the opinion stated that: 

Furthermore veterans conditions of sleep is not a presumptive illness per the PACT ACT and has not been found to currently be linked to hazardous exposure while in the military.

Sleep Apnea is defined as a sleep disorder in which breathing repeatedly stops and starts. Risk factors for sleep apnea include obesity, respiratory issues, alcohol use, etc. this is not secondary to a hazardous exposure.

Per this information the claimed condition is less likely than not incurred in or caused by the claim during service.

See C&P Exam (August 2023).

The Board finds that this July 2023 TERA opinion is inadequate because it relies on medical literature but does not discuss the literature vis-à-vis any facts specific to the Veteran. See Bailey v. O'Rourke, 30 Vet. App. 54, 60 (2018).  Additionally, while the medical opinion contains a conclusion, it does not provide an analysis of supporting data that supports the conclusion reached. See Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 124 (2004) ("a medical opinion...must support its conclusion with analysis that the Board can consider and weigh against contrary opinions"); Nieves-Rodriguez, 22 Vet. App. 295, 301 (2008) ("medical examination report must contain not only clear conclusions with supporting data, but also a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two."). Further, while the opinion notes there are other risk factors for OSA, it does not address whether the Veteran has these risk factors for OSA and does not identify any risk factor listed as a clear etiology for the Veteran's OSA.

Absent competent evidence of a clear etiology for the Veteran's OSA, the AOJ had a duty to obtain adequate medical opinions addressing the cause of the Veteran's OSA. Barr, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007).

Therefore, remand is necessary to correct the duty to assist error on the part of the originating agency in satisfying its duties under 38 U.S.C. § 5103A, which occurred prior to the rating decision on appeal. See 38 C.F.R. § 20.802.

The Board acknowledges the Veteran-provided June 2023 favorable private medical opinion linking the Veteran's OSA to his service-connected disabilities with obesity as an intermediate step. The opinion states that:

As a licensed health care provider, it my professional opinion that it is at least as likely as not (a 50%/50% probability) that this veteran's obesity is due to their  service connected condition of a Lower Back Injury, and that obesity condition led to, caused, and/or aggravated the current Obstructive Sleep Apnea. 

The rationale was that:

The veteran has a known service connected disability condition(s) which can lead to and or cause pain, painful motion, sleep disturbances (related to pain and forced sleep positions related to disabilities), diminished motivation, and/or "comfort" overeating which can lead to diminished activity with less caloric expenditure, which leads to an/or promotes weight gain and obesity.

Additionally, the rational relied upon medical literature, which the clinician reports  "has documented that obesity is known to predispose patients to and directly cause Obstructive Sleep Apnea" and that it describes an association between OSA and obesity, and worsening of OSA condition. See Medical Treatment Record - Non-Government Facility (June 2023).

The Board finds the opinion inadequate for adjudicative purpose for the following reasons. First, Dr. Morcos used of the term "can," which suggest that the reasoning is less than certain and not necessarily at least as likely as not. Bloom v. West, 12 Vet. App. 185, 187 (1999) (use of term "could," without other rationale or supporting data, is speculative); Goss v. Brown, 9 Vet. App. 109, 114 (1996) (use of the phrase "could not rule out" was too speculative to establish medical nexus); Tirpak v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 609, 611 (1992) (medical opinions are speculative and of little or no probative value when physician makes equivocal findings such as "the veteran's death may or may not have been averted."). Second, Dr. Morcos' opinion indicates incongruently that the Veteran's OSA is both caused and aggravated by his service-connected back disability. It is well-established that causation and aggravation are independent concepts, which the opinion does not reflect. See Atencio v. O'Rourke, 20 Vet. App. 74, 90-91 (2018) (holding that a medical opinion was inadequate when it was unclear whether the examiner had clearly provided a rationale that dealt with causation and aggravation as independent concepts); see also El-Amin v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 136, 140-41 (2013) (emphasizing that a specific inquiry directly addressing aggravation, separate from whether a service-connected disability caused the disability, is necessary when an examiner addresses secondary service connection). Third, the opinion does not reflect consideration of the correct legal standard for establishing obesity as an intermediate step in secondary service connection to include whether the Veteran's obesity, rather than obesity generally, was a substantial factor in causing his OSA, and whether the Veteran's OSA would not have occurred but for obesity. See Walsh v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 300 (2020); VAOPGCPREC 1 2017 (Jan. 6, 2017).  Fourth, to the extent that the opinion references medical literature, it is not discussed vis-à-vis facts specific to the Veteran. See Bailey v. O'Rourke, 30 Vet. App. 54, 60 (2018) (reliance on the absence of medical literature supporting nexus without discussing the specific facts of the case renders an opinion inadequate). Notably, Dr. Morcos states that the literature shows an "association" and he infers that this is the same as causation without explanation, which ignores that associations can arise between variables in the presence and absence of causal relationships. For the above reasons, the opinion is inadequate to decide the matter.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain the Veteran's VA treatment records dated from January 2021 to September 2023 from Lackland Air Force Base in San Antonio, Texas. All attempts to obtain these records should be documented in the claims file. If the requested records are unavailable and further attempts to obtain them would be futile, then issue a Formal Finding of Unavailability and notify the Veteran, and his representative, in accordance with 38 C.F.R. §3.159(e). 

2. Ask the Veteran to complete VA Form 21-4142 for medical records, a sleep study, from Sleep Centers of Texas. Make two requests for the authorized records from all identified sources unless it is clear after the first request that a second request would be futile

3. Obtain an opinion from an appropriate clinician addressing the etiology of the Veteran's OSA. The phrase "at least as likely as not" means the likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal. 

The clinician should address the following:

Gulf War MUCMI

(a.) Is the etiology of the Veteran's OSA (1) inconclusive, (2) partially understood, or (3) fully understood? Explain. 

NOTE: This determination as to each must be based on the Veteran's specific case and cannot be based on the etiology of the disease or disability population as a whole. 

(b.) Is the pathophysiology of the Veteran's OSA (1) inconclusive, (2) partially understood, or (3) fully understood? Explain. 

NOTE: The determination as to each must be based on the Veteran's specific case and cannot be based on the pathophysiology of the disease or disability population as a whole. 

Direct Service Connection

If both the etiology and pathophysiology are partially understood or fully understood, then address the following: 

(c.) Whether the Veteran's OSA, at least as likely as not due to, had its onset in service. 

Consider the Veteran's theory that his symptoms of snoring that woke him in the night with choking episodes along with trouble staying awake during the daytime represent in-service manifestations of later diagnosed OSA. See C&P Exam (July 2023).

(d.) Is there a clear etiology that is more likely than not the cause of the Veteran's OSA? If yes, identify and explain.

Discuss the Veteran's specific risk factors for OSA (e.g., gender; age; family history; heart condition; elevated blood pressure; large tonsils; obesity) and whether they singly or jointly are more likely than not the cause of his OSA.

(e.) ONLY IF THERE IS NOT A CLEAR ETIOLOGY FOR OSA, then address whether the Veteran's OSA is at least as likely as not due to, or the result of, exposure to burn pits and other toxins and fine particulate matter (TERAs) while serving in Kuwait between October 2013 through April 2014. Explain. 

When providing this opinion, the clinician must consider: (1) the total potential exposure through all applicable deployments; and (2) the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran.

Secondary Service Connection

(f.) Causation Prong: ONLY IF THERE IS NOT A CLEAR ETIOLOGY FOR THIS VETERAN"S OSA address: Whether OSA is at least as likely as not caused by pain symptoms with poor sleep quality associated with the Veteran's service-connected back disability. Explain. 

(g.) Aggravation Prong: Whether OSA is at least as likely as not aggravated beyond natural progression by pain symptoms with poor sleep quality associated service-connected back disability. Explain.

Indirect Secondary Service Connection with Obesity as an "Intermediate Step" 

(h.) Is it at least as likely as not that the Veteran's service-connected disabilities caused or aggravated his obesity? Explain-provide a separate rationale for the causation and aggravation questions. 

(i.) If so, was the resulting obesity a substantial factor in causing or aggravating the Veteran's OSA? Explain. Provide a separate rationale for the causation and aggravation questions. 

(j.) If yes, but for the Veteran's obesity, would he have developed OSA? Explain. 

 

 

C.A. SKOW

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Kenney, K.A.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.