Citation Nr: A25034318
Decision Date: 04/14/25	Archive Date: 04/14/25

DOCKET NO. 250218-510458
DATE: April 14, 2025

ORDER

The propriety of severance of service connection for right eye retrobulbar neuritis with amaurosis from November 17, 1999, was improper; the benefit is restored, and the appeal is granted.

The propriety of the discontinuance of special monthly compensation (SMC) for blindness in both eyes from November 17, 1999, was improper; the benefit is restored, and the appeal is granted.

The propriety of the discontinuance of entitlement to eligibility to Dependents' Educational Assistance (DEA) under 38 U.S.C. Chapter 35 was improper; the benefit is restored, and the appeal is granted.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The weight of the evidence is against a finding of fraud on account of the Veteran, and the evidence demonstrates that the Veteran's disabilities are due to his visual conditions. 

2. The Veteran's right eye condition is of the nature that the Veteran will have varying levels of disability.

3. The restoration of the Veteran's evaluation related to his disabilities due to his visual disabilities restores the Veteran's eligibility for SMC under 38 U.S.C. § 1114(m) for blindness in both eyes. 

4. The restoration of the Veteran's evaluation related to his disabilities due to his visual disabilities restores the Veteran's eligibility to DEA benefits under 38 U.S.C. Chapter 35.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The severance of service connection for right eye retrobulbar neuritis with amaurosis was improper; restoration is warranted. 38 U.S.C. § 5112; 38 C.F.R. § 3.105.

2. The discontinuance for SMC under 38 U.S.C. § 1114(m) for blindness in both eyes was improper; restoration is warranted. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1114; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.105, 3.350.

3. The discontinuation of DEA benefits, pursuant to 38 U.S.C. Chapter 35 was improper; restoration is warranted. 38 U.S.C. §§ 3501, 3512; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.807, 21.3020, 21.3021.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from August 1962 to February 1963 and April 1967 to November 1968. 

The rating decision on appeal was issued in February 2025 and constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies. In the February 2025 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) (NOD), the Veteran elected the Direct Review option; therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. 

This appeal has been advanced on docket pursuant to 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.900(c). 38 U.S.C. §§ 7107(a)(2).

The Board notes that less than one year has elapsed since the mailing of notice of the February 2025 rating decision on appeal. Generally, the Board may not decide an appeal prior to the expiration of the one-year period. Williams v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 305 (2024). However, as the Board herein grants the benefits sought on appeal in full, there is no prejudice to the Veteran in proceeding. The Board also notes that the Veteran's claim has been advanced on the docket due to his age.

1. The propriety of severance of service connection for right eye retrobulbar neuritis with amaurosis from November 17, 1999

By way of history, in an April 1969 rating decision, the Veteran was granted service connection for a left eye condition due to residuals shell fragment wounds from November 1969. In a November 1999 rating decision, the Veteran was granted a 100 percent evaluation for left eye injury with amaurosis of the right eye, effective from November 17, 1999. Thereafter, in an October 2021 rating decision, the AOJ proposed to discontinue entitlement for service connection for right eye retrobulbar neuritis which was currently evaluated together with blindness of the left eye. The AOJ stated that the Veteran had a valid driver's license and motorcycle endorsement, and a medical opinion dated April 2019 found that there is no physiologic explanation for the extreme variation in visual acuity and visual field reported by the Veteran over the years from November 1999 to present. The AOJ found that there was medical evidence that the visual field testing and visual acuity from November 1999 to present were fraudulent, and therefore it was proposing to sever service connection for the right eye condition. 

The Veteran was afforded a personal hearing in March 2022. In a November 2022 rating decision, the AOJ severed service connection for the right eye condition from November 17, 1999, the date the Veteran was granted the 100 percent evaluation for left eye injury with amaurosis of the right eye.

Service connection will be severed only where evidence establishes that it is clearly and unmistakably erroneous (CUE) (the burden of proof being on the Government). 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(d). VA must assure both that due process has been observed in the process of severance and that CUE exists in the award of service connection.

When severance of service connection is considered warranted, a rating proposing severance will be prepared setting forth all material facts and reasons. The claimant will be notified at his or her latest address of record of the contemplated action and furnished detailed reasons therefor and will be given 60 days for the presentation of additional evidence to show that service connection should be maintained. Unless otherwise provided in paragraph (i) of this section, if additional evidence is not received within that period, final rating action will be taken, and the award will be reduced or discontinued, if in order, effective the last day of the month in which a 60-day period from the date of notice to the beneficiary of the final rating action expires. 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(d).

To establish that a grant of service connection was the product of CUE, VA must show that (1) either the correct facts as they were known at the time were not before the adjudicator, the adjudicator made an erroneous factual finding, or the statutory or regulatory provisions were incorrectly applied; (2) the alleged error was undebatable, not merely a disagreement as to how the facts were weighed or evaluated; and (3) the error manifestly changed the outcome of the prior decision. See Allen v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 54, 58-59 (2007); Stallworth v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 482, 487-88 (2006); cf. Bustos v. West, 179 F.3d 1378, 1380-81 (Fed. Cir. 1999); Damrel v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 242, 245 (1994); Russell v. Principi, 3 Vet. App. 310, 313-14, 319 (1992) (en banc). A clear and unmistakable error is one about which reasonable minds could not differ. See, e.g., 38 C.F.R. § 20.1403(a).

In most respects, the CUE standard for severing service connection under § 3.105(d) is equivalent to the CUE standard for reversing or revising a prior final decision under 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(a). See Baughman v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 563, 566 (1991). Section 3.105(d) places at least as high a burden of proof on the VA when it seeks to sever service connection as § 3.105(a) places upon an appellant seeking to have an unfavorable previous determination overturned. See id. However, the determination is not limited to the law and the record that existed at the time of the original decision. VA may consider medical evidence and diagnoses that postdate the original award of service connection to demonstrate that the diagnosis on which service connection was predicated is clearly erroneous. Stallworth, 20 Vet. App. at 488. The Secretary's burden is not to prove clear and unmistakable error in the original decision in the same manner a claimant would show CUE under sections 5109A or 7111. Id.

A decision that is reversed or amended based on CUE is revised to conform to the true state of the facts or the law that existed at the time of the original adjudication. Allen, 21 Vet. App. at 62 (internal quotations omitted).

Service connection for any disability which has been in effect for 10 or more years will not be severed except upon a showing that the original grant was based on fraud, or it is clearly shown from military records that the person concerned did not have the requisite service or character of discharge. The 10-year period will be computed from the effective date of the Department of Veterans Affairs finding of service connection to the effective date of the rating decision severing service connection, after compliance with § 3.105(d). 38 C.F.R. § 3.957.

A rating of total disability or permanent total disability which has been made for compensation, pension, or insurance purposes under laws administered by the Secretary, and which has been continuously in force for twenty or more years, shall not be reduced thereafter, except upon a showing that such rating was based on fraud. A disability which has been continuously rated at or above any evaluation for twenty or more years for compensation purposes under laws administered by the Secretary shall not thereafter be rated at less than such evaluation, except upon a showing that such rating was based on fraud. The 20-year period will be computed from the date determined by the Secretary as the date on which the status commenced for rating purposes. 38 U.S.C. § 110. 

Typically, when severance of service connection is considered warranted, a rating proposing severance will be prepared setting forth all material facts and reasons. The claimant will be notified at his or her latest address of record of the contemplated action and furnished detailed reasons therefor and will be given 60 days for the presentation of additional evidence to show that service connection should be maintained. Unless otherwise provided in paragraph (i) of this section, if additional evidence is not received within that period, final rating action will be taken, and the award will be reduced or discontinued, if in order, effective the last day of the month in which a 60-day period from the date of notice to the beneficiary of the final rating action expires. 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(d).

In addition, when fraud is found to have formed the basis for an award of service-connected benefits, regardless of the length of time a claimant has been in receipt of those benefits, severance of the award can be made upon a showing of fraud alone. Roberts v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 416, 428-29 (2010).

Fraud is defined in VA regulations as an intentional misrepresentation of fact, or the intentional failure to disclose pertinent facts, for the purpose of obtaining or retaining VA benefits, with knowledge that the misrepresentation or failure to disclose may result in the erroneous award or retention of such benefits. 38 U.S.C. § 501; 38 C.F.R. § 3.1(aa)(2).

As an initial matter, the Board must address whether the Veteran's service-connected evaluation is protected. To reiterate, controlling VA laws provide that evaluations in effect for 20 years or more are "protected" from such actions. 38 C.F.R. § 3.951. In this case, the rating for left eye injury with amaurosis of the right eye has been in effect since November 17, 1999. Therefore, the evaluation for this disability had been in effect for more than 20 years and the Veteran is afforded protection under 38 C.F.R. § 3.951. Regardless of the length of time a claimant has been in receipt of VA benefits, severance of the award can be made upon a showing of fraud alone. Roberts, 23 Vet. App. at 428-29 (2010). Thus, the Board must determine whether the awards of the evaluation was based on fraud.

Turning to the evidence of record, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination in August 1999. The Veteran reported that while stationed in the Republic of Vietnam in October 1967, he had lost all vision in his left eye, due to a booby trap exploding and shrapnel going into his left eye. The Veteran reported that in the past five months he had started losing vision in the right eye and cannot see at night. The examination stated that the right eye reveals a visual acuity of 20/50 with best correction, and this cannot be improved. The Veteran had traumatic blindness in his left eye. 

An October 1999 VA treatment record noted that the Veteran's right visual field appears extremely constricted.

A November 1999 statement from a VIST coordinator documented that the Veteran had a Goldman test condition at the eye clinic and that his visual filed in 5 degrees or less in the right eye and that he is blind in the left eye and visual fields cannot be done in that eye. 

The Veteran was seen in June 2000 at the VA optometry clinic. It was noted that he had acuity loss in both eyes that were severe. In the past three months, his vision fluctuates daily. He had retrobulbar optic neuritis. His photophobia and side vision were severe. 

The Veteran requested in an August 2014 VA treatment record that he not have "bright lights or drops" due to having a history of ocular migraines and that his visions will go to a pea-sized hole after he has drops and bright lights in his eyes. He stated that his remaining vision in the right eye is stable, although a minimal examination was performed with visual acuity check only. 

In December 2018, the AOJ obtained a medical opinion regarding his right eye condition. The examiner stated that based on today's examination, it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's mild-moderate, age-related cataract OD is responsible for his 20/50 best corrected visual acuity. Additionally, his age-related cataract and upper lid changes (dermatochalasis) are at least as likely as not responsible for his constricted Goldmann Visual Field OD. The examiner also stated that today's objective findings do not determine the etiology of the Veteran's past history of significantly decreased acuity OD (for example, light perception only and finger count at 5 feet). 

The examiner further stated that based on the available ocular examinations in the file, the Veteran's visual acuity in October 2002 and October 2003 was right eye light perception only and left eye no light perception. Using this information, one would have to conclude he could not drive a vehicle in June 2003 since his best visual acuity shortly before and after this dated was light perception only OD and no light perception OS. The examiner indicated that regarding the issuance of a Florida's driver's license in June 2003, one could conclude the following: the Veteran's acuity was not checked by the Florida DMV at this time, or the license was issued using Veteran information from July 1997.

The examiner concluded that based on the November 2018 VA examination, the Veteran's decreased vision OD is at least as likely as not related to his age-related cataract OD and his age-related upper lid dermatochalasis (loose/redundant lid skin). The examiner explained that this age-related lid change and cataract OD can cause a gradual decrease in vision OD without any future improvement unless surgically treated. It would not result in significant fluctuations in vision as noted in this case from 1999-2018. Past VA and private eye examinations in this Veteran's record have attributed his decreased vision to "stroke" and "vis. migraine." Per medical literature, "ophthalmic or ocular migraines" result in temporary visual disturbances lasting less than one hour and do not result in periods of persistent visual loss as noted in this Veteran's case. The examiner indicated that a "stroke" in reference to an eye refers to a loss of blood flow to the optic nerve and/or retina. In both, an acuity that at one time was light perception only OD would not subsequently be expected to recover to an acuity of 20/30, to then degrade to "count fingers at 5 feet," and then improve again to 0/50-20/70. Additionally, a "stroke/cerebral vascular accident" affecting the occipital lobe of the brain can result in vision loss, but this examiner would not expect such a documented, drastic improvement. The examiner stated that other than a 2010 examination by the Veteran's private eye doctor, no other information from past or current eye care specialists noted in available records reviewed and that these examinations may provide additional information to help explain this Veteran's particular case. 

The Veteran was examined for his eye conditions by the VA in October 2019. The examiner noted that the patient has lost all vision in the left eye from a grenade while serving in Vietnam in 1968. In the right eye, the Veteran has noticed tunnel vision in 1999. He has been diagnosed as having retrobulbar optic neuritis in 2000 based upon a loss of visual field with a normal appearing optic nerve. Since then, he has had episodes of good vision and visual field interspersed with episodes of poor vision and visual field in the right eye. The Veteran was diagnosed with right eye retrobulbar optic neuritis, right eye optic atrophy, left eye mature cataract, and visual field loss both eyes. The examiner indicated that at this time, he has no vision in the left eye and limited vision and visual field in the right eye confirmed by his clinical findings today of optic atrophy in the right eye. The optic atrophy in the right eye is a direct result of the retrobulbar optic neuritis. 

Upon examination, in the Veteran's left eye, he had vision limited to no more than light perception only and was unable to recognize test letters at 1 foot or closer. The Veteran had documented visual field defect, with complete loss of the visual field in the left eye. The examiner noted that the Veteran had a preoperative cataract in his left eye, but the loss of vision in the left eye is from a grenade wound which the Veteran suffered in Vietnam in 1968. Regarding the right eye, the examiner noted that the Veteran has optic neuropathy and that his decrease in visual acuity or other visual impairment is attributable to the retrobulbar optic neuritis resulting in optic atrophy in the right eye with loss of vision and visual field in the eye. The examiner stated that due to the loss of all vision in the left eye and the significant loss of vision and visual field in the right eye this patient cannot read or use a computer. He further stated that he cannot drive a car or operate heavy duty equipment resulting in the fact that he is not employable at this time. 

The examiner was asked to provide an opinion regarding conflicting evidence of the severity of the Veteran's right eye vision loss. The examiner stated that the Veteran was diagnosed with retrobulbar optic neuritis in 2000 at the VA Medical Center (VAMC) eye clinic on the basis of a significant loss of his peripheral vision in the right eye with a normal appearing optic nerve. The examiner explained that the history of this disease is that there were will periods of good vision and visual field complicated by episodes of loss of vision and visual field as has happened with this patient. He reasoned that his examination today showed that there was atrophy of the nerve in the right eye which is consistent with the original diagnosis of retrobulbar optic neuritis. The examiner also cited to an article in his opinion. 

An OIG Memorandum dated April 2019 was associated with the Veteran's claim folder in October 2021, in which a physician was to opine of the medical likelihood that the Veteran's vision could change from normal acuity and visual fields to profound loss of both, and then back to normal function. The physician, Dr. N.K., stated that first, there is no dispute about the loss of vision in the left eye. With regard to the right eye, it is her opinion that there is no physiologic explanation for the extreme variation in visual acuity and visual field reported by the Veteran over the years from November 1999 to the present. The Veteran was found to have a visual field of "less than 5 degrees" on the November 1999 examination. She stated that she knew of no way that this visual field could become normal at any future date. His reporting of "light perception only" vision in the right eye at the VAMC in October 2000 represents profound vision loss that could not get any better unless it is due to some correctable cause such as a dense cataract which he did not have. 

Dr. N.K. further stated that visual acuity and visual field testing are subjective tests, and they depend on truthful answers by the patient. The physician stated that during this entire interval between November 1999 and present, the Veteran's objective eye examination was reported as normal except for a minor cataract that should not have affected visual acuity and certainly would not affect his visual field. She further stated that during the same time interval that he was reporting profound visual loss in the right eye, his DMV examinations and examinations by private doctors were essentially normal. The Veteran continued to have a Florida Driver's License during that time and renewed it without difficulty. She concluded that it was her opinion that it is more likely than not that the Veteran was not accurately reporting his vision and visual fields in the right eye during the examinations that found the function of the right eye was profoundly impaired in either visual acuity or visual field. 

In November 2023, the Veteran's representative submitted a Disability Benefits Questionnaire (DBQ) and medical opinion from H.R., who is both a physician and attorney. He stated that he reviewed the Veteran's claim file to include the conflicting medical evidence from the November 2018 VA examiner's opinion, April 2019 report from Dr. N.K., and the October 2019 VA examiner's opinion. In reviewing all of the reports it is his medical opinion that the October 2019 VA examiner's opinion is the only report which provides a sound and reasonable interpretation of the medical evidence which actually addresses the confirmed diagnosis of optic neuritis which results in the Veteran's cyclic improvement and deterioration of right eye visual acuity. 

He stated that he found the November 2018 VA examiner's report to be inconclusive, Dr. N.K.'s entirely unreliable and unreasoned, and the October 2019 VA examiner's to be probative, reasoned, and accurate. He stated that it is accordingly his opinion that the Veteran's right eye condition could improve and deteriorate over the course of years, and he sees no medical indication that any of his examinations between 1999 and 2000 contained any misrepresentations. The physiology of his optic neuritis in the right eye is such that he will have periods of good and bad vision, at varying periods throughout his life, for indeterminable durations. Dr. H.R. discussed at length the inaccuracies and inconsistencies in Dr. N.K. and the November 2018 VA examiner's opinions. He provided rationale that included scientific and medical knowledge regarding the Veteran's right eye condition. He concluded that the Veteran did not misrepresent his condition and that it is more likely than not that his right eye optic neuritis was deteriorated to a severe level between 1999 and prior to 2007, began slow and gradual improvement sometime in 2010, and therefore, he did not at any point intentionally mispresent his eye condition based on the medical physiology of optic neuritis. The nature of the condition is such that his timeline is entirely in accordance with the physiology of the condition and in no way suggest that the Veteran did not accurately report his vision and visual fields during the 1999 and 2000 examinations, nor any subsequent examinations. 

Also in November 2023, the Veteran's attorney submitted a report from Dr. T.L., a diplomate of the American Board of Ophthalmology regarding the Veteran's right eye condition. The physician indicated he reviewed the Veteran's entire claim file and all available medical records. Dr. T.L. opined that it is more likely than not that the Veteran's visual acuity and visual field defects are consistent and reflective of the medical condition of the optic nerve at any given time; thus, the vision can fluctuate significantly over periods of time. He stated, put plainly, it is entirely plausible and possible that his vision in 1999 would be significantly worse than it improved to by 2019, when he examined, and it is entirely plausible and possible that he could be functionally "blind" for years at a time, followed by a gradual and significant improvement. Likewise, it is possible his vision reverts back to its previous levels at any point. The physician stated that his neuropsychological records prior to the 1999 examination suggest the vision problems having an onset then and progressing to the visual acuity and vision field loss in a naturally progressive manner. He stated that the reasoning for his pathophysiology of the medical conditions is such that fluctuation in visual function reflects the pathophysiological state of the optic nerve fibers. He cited to a study in which the researchers suggested that below a certain threshold of neuronal channel loss, linear neural loss created a nonlinear vision loss. He opined that it is more likely than not that his vision is restricted to levels previously expressed because his condition fluctuates with neuronal changes, and accordingly the visual acuity, i.e., this condition is physiologically one which will, as the October 2019 VA examiner stated and with which he agrees, result in periods of "good" and "poor" vision, as it were. 

Dr. T.L. stated that the October 2019 VA examiner expressed that "this Veteran was diagnosed with retrobulbar optic neuritis in 2000 at the VAMC eye clinic on the basis of a significant loss of his peripheral vision in the right eye with a normal appearing optic nerve. The history of this disease is that there will periods of good vision and visual field complicated by episodes of loss of vision and visual field as has happened with this patient. My examination today showed that there was atrophy of the optic nerve in the right eye which is consistent with the original diagnosis of retrobulbar optic neuritis." Dr. T.L. stated that he found this examiner's opinion to be more probative because he understands the changes that occur in the optic nerve and the resultant alterations in visual acuity resulting from abnormal optic nerve physiology in trauma. The physician specified that the October 2019 VA examiner's opinion is more probative because of his examination and reasoning which tracks with the physiology of the Veteran's condition. 

Conversely, Dr. T.L. found Dr. N.K.'s opinion to be less probative (or accurate) because she failed to consider the role that pathophysiological changes in the optic nerve play in visual acuity. There is no reason to believe that the Veteran is not giving accurate responses in vision and visual testing. He stated that additionally, at no point did Dr. N.K. reconcile the effects of the condition or discuss its pathophysiology. Her opinion was not well-reasoned or reliable in his opinion. Dr. T.L. concluded that he believes it is entirely medically possible that the Veteran's vision could have improved from 1999 through to a point in the future. He sees no medical record or based in the physiology of this condition that suggest he mispresented his vision at any point and that he believed this to be of the highest degree of medical probability. 

Also, in support of his claim, the Veteran's representative submitted many witness letters for the Veteran regarding his eye condition. One such letter was from P.M., the Vet Center Director at Sarasota who stated that the Veteran has been attending group and individual sessions at the Sarasota Vet Center for a significant period of time. P.M. noted that she recalled the Veteran attending sessions at the Vet Center for years with his service dog due to his visual impairment. 

A friend, C.K., attested that the Veteran had continuous counseling at the Vet Center and also required a second guide dog. 

The Veteran's friends J.K. and J.K. submitted statements that they knew the Veteran when he got both of his guide dogs and that it was very apparent to them that he was very dependent on his dogs and wife to assist with navigating in his surroundings given his increased blindness. They stated they never witnessed the Veteran driving any motor vehicles during this period and that they have a very clear memory that during this period he was considered to be, in essence, completely blind. J.K. and J.K. also stated that they heard from his wife that his vision in one eye had been partially restores but that there might be times of intermittent vision problems. 

The Veteran's sister-in-law, I.L. stated that she cannot remember a time since she met him when he was not considered legally blind of had vision problems. I.L. stated that the Veteran is dependent on her sister for driving and daily chores. He had two guide dogs and went everywhere together. 

There were many more letters submitted from the Veteran's family and friends regarding the Veteran and his eye condition. 

In January 2024, the Veteran's representative submitted an addendum to Dr. H.R.'s November 2023 statement. He wrote his addendum as there were points that he wanted to make expressly clear from his understanding and review of the records and circumstances of the case. Dr. H.R. pointed out that Dr. N.K. did not examine the Veteran and therefore did not get to see his pathologic optic disc and abnormal retina, but that he did. Furthermore, Dr. H.R. stated that Dr. N.K. did not visualize these circumstances which substantiate a restricted field of vision due to pathology, but he did, and he substantiates that finding. Dr. H.R. also indicated that Dr. N.K. did not inquire how or review in any way how motor vehicle testing is done, but he did. He specifically interviewed a person at the Motor Vehicle Bureau testing location at issue. They had no idea nor interest in how to evaluate a restricted field of vision, narrow vision, or tubular vision, which the Veteran has. If someone could read a single letter through a straw, they could pass. Dr. H.R. further stated that the VA medical records confirm on multiple occasions his examination findings as well as statement made in his previous opinion and cannot be ignored. He stated that it appears that based on his experience as a medical doctor, attorney and judge, the Dr. N.K.'s conclusion appears to be based on a predetermined course of action, i.e., she was hired solely to produce a result, not conduct an objective examination. He concluded that it is his professional medical and legal opinion that Dr. N.K.'s opinion is unreliable, potentially unethical, and entirely not a reflection of the truth of the Veteran's condition. 

In March 2024, the Board remanded the case to obtain records from the OIG for the investigation file related to the Veteran's benefits regarding severance of service connection for the right eye condition. The VA OIG Investigative Report was associated with the file in July 2024. The report stated an investigation was initiated in December 2017 for business owned by the Veteran. The investigation had also revealed that the Veteran received 100 percent VA disability compensation for blindness in his left eye and had five degrees of vision in his right eye since November 1999. Information from the Florida Department of Highway Safety and Motor Vehicles identified the Veteran's field of vision and peripheral visual field were normal with 20/200 vision in his left eye, 20/20 vision in his right eye, and 20/40 corrected for both. VA physician, Dr. N.K. reviewed the Veteran's vision records and determined that the Veteran had lied to VA about his vision. 

On these facts, the Board finds that the Veteran did not make any intentional misrepresentations of fact concerning the manifestations, symptoms, and severity of his right eye disability for the purpose of obtaining or retaining VA benefits, with knowledge that the misrepresentations may result in the erroneous award or retention of such benefits. The medical evidence discussed above demonstrate that the Veteran's right visual condition waxed and waned throughout the years as his retrobulbar optic neuritis is the type of condition that can lead to improved vision, with periods of severe vision loss. The Veteran's actions therefore do not warrant the characterization of fraud as defined for VA purposes. 38 C.F.R. § 3.1(aa)(2). 

The procedural history has been discussed earlier in this decision. The Board finds that all due process requirements were met in the severance of service connection for the right eye disability. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(d). Nevertheless, the Board finds that the severance of the right eye disability was improper because there is probative evidence, that is not clear and unmistakable, that the Veteran's condition continued to warrant service connection and there are no findings of fraud. 

As previously noted, and discussed, the Veteran's medical records document a long history of the Veteran visual difficulties in his right eye. The Veteran's type of right eye condition is such of the nature that it may appear that his conditions have improved, followed by periods in which the vision impairments return. Although there is evidence that reflects disagreement on this, namely the OIG Report that casts some doubt on the Veteran's visual acuity in his right eye, the findings of the OIG Report were not conclusive and appears to be based on a period of improvement for the Veteran's right eye symptoms. Furthermore, in the April 2019 report from Dr. N.K., requested by the OIG, the physician's opinion was inaccurate and did not address all of the medical evidence of record. 

Accordingly, the Board finds that the 100 percent evaluation for the Veteran's blindness left eye, residual SFW with right eye retrobulbar optic neuritis, from November 17, 1999, which is not shown to have been procured by fraud, is legally "protected" from reduction because the award is considered to have been in effect for more than 20 years. The appeal is granted, and the benefit is restored. 

2. The propriety of the discontinuance of special monthly compensation (SMC) for blindness in both eyes from November 17, 1999

The Veteran has been in receipt of SMC under 38 U.S.C. § 1114(m) as discussed above. By virtue of this Board decision restoring service connection for the right eye disability, the Veteran once again meets the criteria for the previous SMC level that was established. As such, the SMC level at the (m) rate is restored from the respective dates in which entitlement was established, November 17, 1999. 

3. The issue as to the propriety of the discontinuance of entitlement to eligibility to DEA under 38 U.S.C. Chapter 35 

The Veteran was also deemed to be entitled to benefits under 38 U.S.C. Chapter 35 from November 17, 1999, as he had a 100 percent rating that was permanent and total. The grant of eligibility for DEA, pursuant to 38 U.S.C. Chapter 35 was discontinued as the Veteran was no longer rated at a combined 100 percent rating. 

Since the Board has reinstated the Veteran's rating related to his eye disability and his ratings combine to a 100 percent rating, the grant of eligibility for DEA, pursuant to 38 U.S.C. Chapter 35, is restored from November 17, 1999. 

 

 

MARJORIE A. AUER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	E. Kim, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.