Citation Nr: A25034146
Decision Date: 04/14/25	Archive Date: 04/14/25

DOCKET NO. 241004-479746
DATE: April 14, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for inguinal hernia is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from August 2010 to August 2015.

Although the Veteran initially requested Higher-Level Review when submitting the June 2024 VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review, the Higher-Level Reviewer determined that there had been a duty to assist error and transferred the claim to the Supplemental Claim decision review option for additional development. 

In October 2024, the AOJ issued a rating decision that denied the claim.

In the October 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the October 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) supplemental claim decision on appeal. 38?C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted after the AOJ issued the supplemental claim decision on appeal, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300,?20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of service connection for inguinal hernia, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Lastly, the Board notes that the Veteran selected the Direct Review docket on his October 2024 NOD and requested a direct review of the October 3, 2024, rating decision.  Williams v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 305 (2024) (holding that the Board may not decide an appeal before the deadline for requesting a docket switch has elapsed); 38 C.F.R. § 20.202 (c)(2) (providing that claimants may switch dockets by completing and submitting a new Notice of Disagreement (NOD) within one year from the date the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) mails notice of the decision on appeal, or 60 days from when the Board receives the NOD, whichever is later; unless a claimant has already submitted evidence or testimony as described in 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.302 and 20.303).

In this case, the Veteran has not submitted any evidence or testimony since October 3, 2024; neither has the Board requested a waiver to proceed with the case. However, there is no prejudice in proceeding with the appeal without requesting a waiver, as the case must be remanded due to a pre-decisional duty to assist error. By seeking a waiver from the appellant, the Board would only be causing undue delay, with no additional benefit to the appellant. "A veteran's interest may be better served by prompt resolution of his claims rather than by further remands to cure procedural errors that, at the end of the day, may be irrelevant to final resolution and may indeed merely delay resolution." Scott v. McDonald, 789 F.3d 1375, 1381 (Fed. Cir. 2015) Given the undue delay that a request for a waiver would cause and the lack of prejudice to the appellant, the Board finds that proceeding with a remand of this claim is the appropriate course of action. 38 C.F.R. § 20.800 (c). U.S. Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims has distinguished a Board remand from a final Board decision on the basis that a Board remand does not contain an order granting or denying relief. Kirkpatrick v. Nicholson, 417 F.3d 1361, 1364 (Fed. Cir. 2005). Thus, remand orders are neither final nor adverse to a veteran.  Stiles v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 328 (2024). Moreover, as the Veteran elected the direct review docket, the Board finds that he is seeking the quickest possible resolution of his appeal.

1. Entitlement to service connection for inguinal hernia is remanded.

The Veteran seeks service connection for an inguinal hernia.  In September 2021, he stated that he complained about a hernia, which was documented while he was in the Navy. The Navy doctor ignored it and told him not to worry about it.  

In February 2024, he reported that he was required to lift heavy equipment.  He was checked vaguely for a hernia during his separation examination. After separation, VA doctors confirmed he had a hernia. He contends that the person who was actually supposed to check him never actually took a look at the bulge protruding around his pubic area. 

In a May 2024 correspondence, he reported that while working on equipment on active duty, he lifted an item that caused him to feel sudden discomfort in his groin.  He reported it and eventually saw a Navy doctor for his physical.  He was instructed to cough. He explains that because of his pubic hair or because he is a little bit overweight, the hernia was not noticeable. 

A September 2021 VA treatment record reflects that in conjunction with his worsening lower back pain, the Veteran reported that he was seen in the Navy by a clinician for assessment of his inguinal hernia. The provider notes, "L inguinal hernia, small, reducible".

An April 2024 VA pre-operative examination for left inguinal hernia repair with mesh notes that the Veteran has a 10-year reported history of left inguinal hernia.  The physician notes the Veteran's report that he lifted heavy equipment while in the military, likely when it started. The Veteran underwent surgery in April 2024 for an open left inguinal hernia repair with mesh.

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in July 2024.  He reported that as a Leidos field engineer, he had to walk the shipyard, lift computer equipment up to 50 lbs., and go up and down ladders onto ships.  The examiner diagnosed an inguinal hernia and opined that the claimed condition is less likely than not incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness.  The examiner provided the rationale in part that the first mention of hernia was at a VA visit on February 27, 2024.  However, as noted above, the September 2021 VA treating physician noted the Veteran's report of an inguinal hernia in service and diagnosed a small reducible left inguinal hernia. As such, the Board finds the July 2024 VA opinion is based on inaccurate factual premise. As a result, the opinion is not probative. Reonal v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 458, 461 (1993) (holding that a medical opinion based on an inaccurate or incomplete factual premise is not probative).  The failure to obtain an adequate opinion prior to the July 2024 rating decision on appeal is a pre-decisional duty to assist error requiring remand.

Lastly, The Board is cognizant of the Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxics Act of 2022 (PACT Act), which potentially provides an additional theory of entitlement under 38 U.S.C. § 1118 and 38 U.S.C. § 1117. The AOJ has conceded that the Veteran participated in TERA. See September 2023 and October 2024 VA Memoranda. The PACT Act requires a disability examination and medical opinion for certain non-presumptive conditions involving toxic exposure risk activity (TERA). For such claims, VA is required to provide a disability examination and obtain a medical opinion when the Veteran submits a claim for compensation, has evidence of a disability, has evidence of participation in a TERA, and such evidence is not sufficient to establish service connection for the disability.

A TERA examination is not required for disabilities resulting from physical trauma; mental disorders; disabilities that have not been shown to have any positive association with herbicide exposure; and disabilities that manifested during service or with a clear etiology that is not associated with toxic exposure. See VBA Letter 20-22-10 at 10-13, Processing Claims Involving the PACT Act, 87 Fed. Reg. 78,543 (Dec. 22, 2022). As discussed above, the Veteran reports that the inguinal hernia is due to heavy lifting in active service (physical trauma). Thus, a TERA examination and opinion are not warranted.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain an addendum opinion from an appropriate clinician regarding the etiology of the Veteran's inguinal hernia. Based on a review of the record, and a new examination, if deemed necessary, the examiner must address the following: 

(a.) Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's inguinal hernia and/or residuals of a left inguinal hernia repair are due to his military service?  The examiner must address the Veteran's lay contentions regarding his in-service heavy lifting of equipment and the onset of an inguinal hernia during service. 

A complete rationale must be provided for all opinions presented.  If the medical professional cannot provide an opinion without resorting to mere speculation, he or she shall provide a complete explanation for why an opinion cannot be rendered. In so doing, the medical professional shall explain whether the inability to provide a more definitive opinion is the result of a need for additional information, or that he or she has exhausted the limits of current medical knowledge in providing an answer to that particular question(s).

 

 

LAURA E. COLLINS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Asare, Ama K.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.