Citation Nr: A25034786
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 220713-257783
DATE: April 15, 2025

ORDER

Readjudication of the claim of service connection for type II diabetes mellitus is granted.

Entitlement to service connection for type II diabetes mellitus, due to herbicide agent exposure on a direct/facts-found basis, is granted.

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral diabetic peripheral neuropathy of the lower extremities, secondary to type II diabetes mellitus, on a causation basis, is granted.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. New evidence was received after a November 2017 rating decision that is relevant to the issue of entitlement to service connection for type II diabetes mellitus.

2. The Veteran was exposed to herbicide agents (including Agent Orange) in Thailand during the Vietnam War era.

3. The Veteran has been diagnosed with type II diabetes mellitus.

4. The Veteran's bilateral diabetic peripheral neuropathy of the lower extremities is caused by his type II diabetes mellitus.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1.  The criteria for readjudicating the claim of service connection for type II diabetes mellitus have been met. 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.156 (d), 3.2501(a)(1).

2. The criteria for service connection for type II diabetes mellitus are met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1116, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.307, 3.309.

3. The criteria for service connection for bilateral diabetic peripheral neuropathy of the lower extremities, secondary to type II diabetes mellitus, on a causation basis, are met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.310.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from August 1969 to August 1989, which includes service in Thailand.

These matters come before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from a June 2022 rating decision, in which the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) denied service connection for diabetes mellitus on the basis that new and relevant evidence had not been received.

In a July 13, 2022 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran appealed the June 2022 decision and elected the Board's Hearing docket. A Board hearing was held on April 9, 2025.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the June 2022 AOJ decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or his representative at the April 2025 hearing or within 90 days following the hearing. 38 C.F.R. § 20.302(a). If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the June 2022 decision on appeal and prior to the Board hearing, or (2) more than 90 days following the hearing, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.302(a), 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

A transcript of the April 2025 hearing has not yet been associated with the claims file. However, in light of the fact that the Board is awarding service connection for type II diabetes mellitus and bilateral diabetic peripheral neuropathy of the lower extremities (thus reflecting a full grant of the benefit sought) and the fact that there is no information in the hearing transcript that will affect the decision herein, the transcript is not necessary at this time. The Board notes that the case has been advanced on the docket. Moreover, during the hearing, the Veteran and his representative waived the full 90-day period following the hearing. Therefore, the Board may proceed to adjudicate the matters on appeal.

As for characterization of the issues on appeal, the reports of VA diabetes and neurological examinations dated in September 2021 indicate the Veteran has bilateral diabetic peripheral neuropathy of the lower extremities which is caused by his diabetes mellitus. As explained in more detail below, the Board is awarding service connection for diabetes mellitus. 38 C.F.R. § 3.155 (d)(2) requires that, when entitlement to secondary service connection is raised, a formal claim for secondary service connection need not be filed, rather, VA must consider those "complications" in connection with the claim on appeal. Bailey v. Wilkie, 33 Vet. App. 188 (2021). The Board's duty to address a reasonably raised theory of service connection arises when the evidence triggers VA's duty to provide a medical opinion. Healey v. McDonough, 33 Vet. App. 312, 319 (2021). In this case, the evidence would trigger VA's duty to provide a medical opinion as to whether the Veteran's bilateral diabetic peripheral neuropathy of the lower extremities is caused or aggravated by his diabetes mellitus. Therefore, the Board has expanded the appeal to include the separate issue of entitlement to service connection for bilateral diabetic peripheral neuropathy of the lower extremities, as secondary to type II diabetes mellitus.

I. Readjudication

Readjudication of the claim of service connection for type II diabetes mellitus 

VA will readjudicate a claim if new and relevant evidence is presented or secured. 38 C.F.R. § 3.156 (d)). "Relevant evidence" is evidence that tends to prove or disprove a matter in issue. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501 (a)(1).

The questions in this case are whether new evidence was received after the most recent denial of the Veteran's claim of service connection for diabetes mellitus in November 2017, and if so, whether that new evidence is relevant to his claim.

The Board finds that new evidence was received after the prior November 2017 rating decision that is relevant to the claim of service connection for diabetes mellitus. In the November 2017 decision, the Veteran's claim of service connection for diabetes mellitus was denied on the basis that the Veteran was not exposed to herbicide agents during service, his diabetes mellitus was not incurred in or caused by service, and his diabetes did not manifest to a compensable degree within one year of his separation from service. 

As for new and relevant evidence, a September 2021 statement from the Veteran (VA Form 21-4138) was associated with the claims file following the November 2017 decision. In this statement, the Veteran reported that he spent a significant amount of time near the base perimeter while serving at a Royal Thai Air Force Base during the Vietnam War. This evidence was not already of record and may prove or disprove the elements of the claim of service connection for diabetes mellitus. Thus, readjudication of the claim is warranted.

II. Service Connection

Service connection will be granted if the evidence demonstrates that current disability resulted from an injury suffered or disease contracted in active military, naval, air, or space service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (a). Establishing service connection generally requires competent evidence of three things: (1) current disability; (2) in-service injury or disease; and (3) a relationship between the two. Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356, 1361 (Fed. Cir. 2018). Consistent with this framework, service connection is warranted for a disease first diagnosed after service when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (d).

If a veteran was exposed to an herbicide agent during service, certain listed diseases, including type II diabetes mellitus, are presumptively service connected. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1116 (a)(1),(2), 1116A(a); 38 C.F.R. § 3.309 (e). In addition to exposure within the Republic of Vietnam, exposure to herbicide agents (including Agent Orange) has been noted to have occurred in various places outside of the Republic of Vietnam, including Thailand. VA Compensation Service has acknowledged that there is "some evidence that the herbicides used on the Thailand base perimeters may have been either tactical, procured from Vietnam, or a commercial variant of much greater strength and with characteristics of tactical herbicides." Parseeya-Picchione v. McDonald, 28 Vet. App. 171, 177 (2016) (quoting COMP. & PENSION SERV. BULL. (U.S. Dep't of Veterans Affairs, Washington, D.C.), May 2010, at 3). Prior to the enactment of the Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxins Act of 2022 (PACT Act), Pub. L. 117-168, VA's Adjudication Manual, M21-1, provided that VA "has determined that a special consideration of herbicide exposure on a factual basis should be extended to [v]eterans whose duties placed them on or near the perimeters of Thailand military bases." MANUAL, pt. VIII, subpt. i, ch. 1, § A.4.a, b (effective to Dec. 3, 2023), quoted in Kalass v. McDonough, No. 22-5088, 2024 U.S. App. Vet. Claims LEXIS 212, *4 (Feb. 15, 2024) (mem dec) (Meredith, J.). The Manual provided that VA should concede herbicide exposure "on a direct/facts-found basis" for Air Force veterans who served at Royal Thai Air Force Bases (RTAFBs) during the Vietnam era as security policemen, security patrol dog handlers, or members of the security police squadron, or who were "otherwise near the air base perimeter as shown by evidence of daily work duties, performance evaluation reports, or other credible evidence." Id. quoted in Kalass, at *5. See also Bethea v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 252, 254 (1992) (single judge decisions may be relied upon for any persuasiveness or reasoning they contain). Although the Board is not bound by the Adjudication Manual, it must consider and discuss its provisions when relevant to the case before it. Healey, 33 Vet. App. at 321 (the Board must "consider adequately and address relevant guidance promulgated for the purpose of facilitating the efficient and proper resolution of claims"); Overton v. Wilkie, 30 Vet. App. 257, 264 (2018) (the Board "is required to discuss any relevant provisions contained in the M21-1 as part of its duty to provide adequate reasons or bases"); Wilson v. McDonough, 35 Vet. App. 75, 80 (2021) ("Taken together, Overton and Healey establish that the Board can neither merely invoke nor ignore a relevant guidance provision to support its decision, but must provide an independent rationale relating its decision to the relevant guidance document").

Service connection is also warranted for disability that is caused by service-connected disease or injury. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310 (a). 

1. Entitlement to service connection for type II diabetes mellitus

The Veteran contends that he was exposed to herbicide agents (including Agent Orange) while serving in Thailand during the Vietnam War era, and that he has diabetes mellitus which is related to his exposure. The Board finds, for the following reasons, that the Veteran was exposed to herbicide agents (including Agent Orange) during service and that he has a current diagnosis of type II diabetes mellitus that is presumptively service-connected.

Medical records, including the September 2021 VA diabetes examination report, indicate that the Veteran has been diagnosed as having type II diabetes mellitus. Therefore, current diabetes mellitus is demonstrated.

The Veteran has reported that he was exposed to herbicide agents (including Agent Orange) while serving in Thailand during the Vietnam War era. Specifically, he has reported that he served at a RTAFB from approximately November 1971 to November 1972, and that he spent time near the base perimeter while performing his duties as a day and night service call specialist. He provided supervision and guidance for emergency and standby crews for concrete and pavement and repair of flight lines and the security perimeter fence. His job required numerous hours working on the flight line (which was on the base perimeter), repairing perimeter fencing, and cutting grass along both sides of the fence. His service personnel records confirm that his military occupational specialty during the period of service from August 1969 to December 1972 was a pavement maintenance specialist and that he served as a day and night service call specialist at Udorn RTAFB in 1971 and 1972.

The Veteran is competent to report serving along the base perimeter during his service in Thailand during the Vietnam War era. Also, his statements regarding his service along the base perimeter in Thailand are internally consistent, consistent with the other evidence of record, and consistent with the places, types, and circumstances of his service. Moreover, the Board must consider the Veteran's statements along with the other evidence of record in determining whether he served along the base perimeter in Thailand. Parseeya-Picchione, 28 Vet. App. at 176 (the Board must consider lay, historical, and archival evidence, in addition to service records, in determining whether there was service in Vietnam or exposure to herbicide agents elsewhere). 

In light of the above, the Board finds that the evidence indicates that the Veteran served near the perimeter of Udorn RTAFB in Thailand during the Vietnam War era. Cf. Stover v. McDonough, 35 Vet. App. 394, 396 (2022) ("the Board erred by failing to explain what it understood "near the perimeter[]" to mean when it denied appellant's claim in large measure because appellant had not established that his duties regularly placed him "near the perimeter[]" of the Takhli RTAFB"). Consequently, the Board finds that the Veteran was exposed to herbicide agents in service. As the Veteran has current type II diabetes mellitus and was exposed to herbicide agents, service connection for type II diabetes mellitus is warranted on a presumptive basis.

The Board notes that there are special effective date rules with regard to benefits granted pursuant to the PACT Act. However, the grant of service connection in this case is not based on the PACT Act, but rather based on the law, regulations, and the Manual provisions as they existed prior to the PACT Act. See Kalass, at *16 (remanding for the Board to address "whether the PACT Act applies in this case and, if so, whether the appellant should be presumed to have been exposed to herbicides based on service in Thailand, whether he is entitled to presumptive service connection for his claimed conditions, or what the effective date should be for an award of presumptive service connection,... whether the Thailand provision in the previous version of the Manual should be applied to a period prior to enactment of the PACT Act and, if so, whether it would be for purposes of assessing entitlement to service connection (albeit potentially under a different theory) or in assigning an effective date for the award of service connection") (emphasis in original).

2. Entitlement to service connection for bilateral diabetic peripheral neuropathy of the lower extremities, secondary to type II diabetes mellitus

The Board finds, for the following reasons, that the Veteran experiences current bilateral diabetic peripheral neuropathy of the lower extremities which is caused by his now service-connected diabetes mellitus.

The September 2021 VA neurological examination report indicates that the Veteran has been diagnosed as having bilateral diabetic peripheral neuropathy of the lower extremities. Also, the September 2021 VA diabetes examination report reflects that the Veteran's diabetic peripheral neuropathy was a recognized complication of diabetes mellitus.

There is no clear and direct opinion that the Veteran's current bilateral diabetic peripheral neuropathy of the lower extremities is caused by his now service-connected diabetes mellitus. While the Board could remand the issue of entitlement to service connection for bilateral diabetic peripheral neuropathy of the lower extremities to obtain a medical opinion in this regard, a request for an opinion could be construed as obtaining additional evidence for the sole purpose of denying the claim, which is impermissible. 38 C.F.R. § 3.304 (c) ("The development of evidence in connection with claims for service connection will be accomplished when deemed necessary but it should not be undertaken when evidence present is sufficient for this determination"); Andrews v. McDonough, 34 Vet. App. 216 (2021) ("Remand is inappropriate where the predominant purpose is not to allow the Board to make a fully informed decision unencumbered by error but to allow VA to obtain more evidence so that it can properly deny the claim").

In light of the diagnosis and findings described above, the evidence is sufficient to decide the claim as the evidence in essence supports the conclusion that the Veteran's current bilateral diabetic peripheral neuropathy of the lower extremities is caused by his now service-connected diabetes mellitus. There is no medical opinion contrary to this conclusion. Therefore, service connection for bilateral diabetic peripheral neuropathy of the lower extremities, secondary to service-connected type II diabetes mellitus, on a causation basis, is warranted. 38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

 

 

Jonathan Hager

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	B. Elwood, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.