Citation Nr: A25034825
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 240530-443263
DATE: April 15, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric condition, to include anxiety is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for compensation purposes for a mouth condition (also claimed as dental and oral) is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a headache condition, to include migraines, is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for hearing loss, left ear is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for hearing loss, right ear is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for ringing in ears (tinnitus) is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for an eye (vision) condition is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for knee condition, left is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for knee condition, right is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection solely for establishing eligibility for VA outpatient dental treatment for a mouth condition (also claimed as dental and oral,) to include pulpitis, is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The probative evidence of record does not show that the Veteran has an acquired psychiatric condition that is related to his active-duty service.

2. The probative evidence of record does not show that the Veteran has problems of the maxilla, mandible, or temporomandibular articulation, loss of whole or part of the ramus, loss of the condyloid process or coronoid process, loss of the hard palate, or loss of teeth due to loss of substance of the body of the maxilla or mandible due to trauma or disease such as osteomyelitis rather than as a result of periodontal disease.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric condition, to include anxiety have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1112, 1113, 1137, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.307, 3.309. 

2. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for compensation purposes for a mouth condition (also claimed as dental and oral,) have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.381, 4.150.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the Marine Corps from February 1993 to February 1997.

In May 2024, the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) received a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request:  Board Appeal electing the Direct Review docket to review a March 2024 rating decision issued by an Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA). Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the AOJ March 2024 AOJ decision on appeal. 38?C.F.R. § 20.301.

Service Connection

Service connection is warranted where the evidence of record establishes that a particular injury or disease resulting in disability was incurred in the line of duty in the active military service or, if pre-existing such service, was aggravated thereby. 38 U.S.C. § 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (a). Establishing service connection generally requires (1) evidence of a current disability; (2) evidence of in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) evidence of a nexus between the claimed in-service disease or injury and the present disability. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F. 3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004); see also Caluza v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 498, 506 (1995), aff'd per curiam, 78 F. 3d 604 (Fed. Cir. 1996) (table); 38 C.F.R. § § 3.303. Service connection may also be granted for any disease diagnosed after the military discharge, when all the evidence, including that pertinent to the period of military service, establishes that the disease was incurred during the active military service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1113 (b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303 (d).

Service connection may be established on a secondary basis for a disability which is proximately due to or the result of service-connected disease or injury. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.310. In order to prevail on the theory of secondary service connection, there must be evidence of a current disability; evidence of a service-connected disability; and evidence establishing a connection between the service-connected disability and the current disability. See Wallin v. West, 11 Vet. App. 509, 512 (1998).

VA has an obligation to obtain medical opinions for any service connection claim which cannot be granted where there is evidence of a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA) and of a disability. 38 U.S.C. § 1168 However, VA has identified several exceptions to this general obligation where there is no indication of an association between the disability and the TERA. See 38 U.S.C. § 1168(b). Specifically, a TERA opinion is not required for disabilities resulting from physical trauma; mental disorders; disabilities that have not been shown to have any positive association with herbicide exposure; and disabilities that manifested during service or with a clear etiology that is not associated with toxic exposure. See VBA Letter 20-22-10 at 10-13, Processing Claims Involving the PACT Act, 87 Fed. Reg. 78,543 (Dec. 22, 2022).

The Board must assess the credibility and weight of all the evidence, including the medical evidence, to determine its probative value, accounting for the evidence which it finds to be persuasive or unpersuasive, and providing reasons for rejecting any evidence favorable to the claimant. See Masors v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 181 (1992). Equal weight is not accorded to each piece of evidence contained in the record; every item of evidence does not have the same probative value.

VA must consider the competency of the lay evidence and cannot outright reject such evidence on the basis that such evidence can never establish a medical diagnosis or nexus. However, this does not mean that lay evidence is necessarily always sufficient to identify a medical diagnosis, but rather only that it is sufficient in those cases where the lay person is competent and does not otherwise require specialized medical training and expertise to do so; i.e., the Board must determine whether the claimed disability is a type of disability for which a layperson is competent to provide etiology or nexus evidence. See Davidson v. Shinseki, 581 F.3d 1313, 1316 (Fed. Cir. 2009).

When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, the Secretary shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b). This benefit-of-the-doubt rule applies if the competing evidence is nearly equal but does not apply when the evidence persuasively favors one side or the other. See Lynch v. McDonough, 999 F.3d 1391 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

1. Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric condition, to include anxiety.

The Veteran contends that he has an acquired psychiatric condition, described as anxiety, that is related to his active-duty service. In the alternative, the Veteran contends that he has an acquired psychiatric condition that is due to or aggravated by another condition for which service connection has already been established, or for which service connection is claimed. See September 2023 VA 21-526 EZ, Fully Developed Claim (Compensation).

On his VA 21-526EZ, the Veteran described his claimed disability as follows:

"Mostly caused from the ringing in my ears and the scars all over my left leg. The scars look really bad when I get a tan so I usually wear long shorts and a shirt to keep people from seeing them and asking about them." Id at 13.

This statement is the only description the Veteran has provided of his claimed disability and its functional impact.

The Board has reviewed the Veteran's service treatment records and can find no reference to any complaints, treatment, or diagnosis of any acquired psychiatric condition or symptoms thereof. See generally December 2020 STR - Medical. The Veteran has no VA treatment records to review. See September 2023 CAPRI. The Veteran provided no private treatment records, nor any indication that he has ever received private treatment for his claimed acquired psychiatric condition. Thus, the only evidence available is the Veteran's brief statement on his application for compensation.

The Board notes that the Veteran has not been afforded a VA examination of his claimed acquired psychiatric condition, and that the Veteran participated in a conceded TERA due to occupational exposure to fuels, oils, lubricants, and solvents. See September 2023 other. However, as explained above, a TERA examination and opinion is not indicated for the Veteran's claimed anxiety condition because it is a mental disorder, for which an exception to the requirement for a TERA examination applies. See supra (discussing TERA examination requirement and exceptions).

In determining whether the general duty to assist requires that a normal VA medical examination be provided, or medical opinion obtained with respect to a veteran's claim for benefits, there are four factors for consideration. These four factors are: (1) whether there is competent evidence of a current disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability; (2) whether there is evidence establishing that an event, injury, or disease occurred in service, or evidence establishing certain diseases manifesting during an applicable presumption period; (3) whether there is an indication that the disability or symptoms may be associated with service or with another service-connected disability; and (4) whether there otherwise is sufficient competent medical evidence of record to make a decision on the claim. 38 U.S.C. § 5103A (d) and 38 C.F.R. § 3.159 (c)(4). The third factor, in particular, is a low threshold. See McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006).

Here, the Board finds factor (1) unsatisfied. The Board notes that the only evidence of an anxiety condition is the Veteran's description of symptoms that manifest as discomfort with the appearance of his left leg, and that he "usually" opts to wear long shorts and a shirt for this reason. The Board finds that without more, this description does not suggest a disability within the meaning of VA regulation, even when read liberally for the benefit of the Veteran. 38 C.F.R. § 4.1, 4.3, 4.10. The Board further finds factor (2) unsatisfied because there is no evidence establishing any in-service incurrence of any acquired psychiatric condition or mental illness. Because the Board has not found (1) or (2) satisfied, the Board finds that (3) cannot be satisfied. Although the threshold set forth in McLendon is low, it is still a threshold, and here it has not been reached. With respect to (4), the Board thus finds that the Veteran's claim can be properly adjudicated with the available evidence. Accordingly, the Board finds that no duty to assist error occurred in failing to afford the Veteran a VA examination of his claimed acquired psychiatric condition. See McLendon, supra. 

The Board acknowledges the Veteran's statement. While the Veteran believes he has a current diagnosis of an anxiety condition, he is not competent to provide a diagnosis in this case. The issue is medically complex, as it requires specialized medical education and the ability to interpret complicated medical and psychological evaluations. See Davidson, supra. There is no evidence in the record that the Veteran possesses the medical training and experience to offer such a diagnosis. Consequently, the Board gives the Veteran's opinion no probative weight. Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377, 1377 n.4 (Fed. Cir. 2007).

Based on the above, the Board finds the Veteran does not have a current diagnosis of an acquired psychiatric condition and has not had one at any time during the pendency of the claim or recent to the filing of the claim. Romanowsky v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 289, 294 (2013); McClain v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 319, 321 (2007). Accordingly, the present disability element is not satisfied, and the Board need not proceed to the elements of in-service incurrence or nexus. See Shedden, supra. The Board has considered the Veteran's suggestion of anxiety secondary to tinnitus or his service-connected scars. However, the absence of the present disability element is equally problematic to such a claim. See Wallin, supra.

Accordingly, the Veteran's claim for entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric condition, to include anxiety, is denied. In reaching these conclusions, the Board has considered the applicability of the benefit of the doubt doctrine. However, as the weight of the evidence is against the Veteran's claim, that doctrine is not applicable in the instant appeal. See 38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b); Ortiz v. Principi, 274 F.3d 1361, 1364 (Fed. Cir. 2001); Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49, 55-57 (1990).

2. Entitlement to service connection for compensation purposes a mouth condition (also claimed as dental and oral).

The Veteran contends that he has a compensable mouth or dental condition that is related to his active-duty service.

A.	Additional Legal Criteria

Dental and oral disorders are treated differently than other medical disorders in the VA benefits system. 38 U.S.C. § 1712; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.381, 17.161. As provided by VA regulations, treatable carious teeth, replaceable missing teeth, dental or alveolar abscesses and periodontal disease are not considered disabling conditions and may be considered service connected solely for establishing eligibility for VA outpatient dental treatment. 38 C.F.R. § 3.381 (a).

Under current VA regulations, compensation is only available for certain types of dental and oral conditions listed under 38 C.F.R. § 4.150. These conditions include various problems of the maxilla, mandible, or temporomandibular articulation, loss of whole or part of the ramus, loss of the condyloid process or coronoid process, loss of the hard palate, or loss of teeth due to loss of substance of the body of the maxilla or mandible due to trauma or disease such as osteomyelitis rather than as a result of periodontal disease. Therefore, in the absence of a claim for any of these disabilities, or evidence that the Veteran has such disabilities, service connection for compensation purposes for a dental disability or condition is not warranted.

B.	Facts and Analysis

On his VA 21-526EZ, the Veteran described his claimed disability as follows:

"[Ever] since my second year active duty the inside of my mouth has been tender and easily gets hurt with chips or eating anything hard. the roof of my mouth, gums and cheeks all peel often." Id at 14.

This statement is the only description the Veteran has provided of his claimed disability and its functional impact. The Board finds that this description does not suggest any of the conditions specifically listed in 38 C.F.R. § 4.150, nor does it describe functional impairment generally rising to the level of compensable disability within the meaning of VA regulations. 38 C.F.R. § 4.1, 4.3, 4.10.

The Board has reviewed the Veteran's STR, including his dental STR. See February 1997 STR - Dental. The Veteran's dental STR show treatment for a painful tooth, a root canal, endodontic treatment, and other typical dental procedures but none of the conditions listed in 38 C.F.R. § 4.150. No chronic conditions were noted in the Veteran's dental STR. A root canal is mentioned on the Veteran's separation physical exam, but as noted above, this is not a condition for which service connection for compensation purposes is available. 38 C.F.R. § 4.150.

The Veteran has no VA treatment records to review. See September 2023 CAPRI. The Veteran provided no private treatment records.

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination of his claimed oral or dental condition. See January 2024 C&P Exam. The examiner reviewed the claims file and examined the Veteran. Id at 1. The examiner diagnosed the Veteran with pulpitis, with onset in 1993. Id at 2. No compensable conditions were noted. The Veteran described tooth pain and infection, for which he was treated in service. Id at 10. The Veteran stated that the pain returned after service, and he was treated by a private dentist. Id at 10. The examiner noted that the Veteran's symptoms consist only of being bothered by "certain foods." Id at 3. No other functional loss is noted. The Board notes that this description is consistent with the Veteran's brief description on his VA 21-526EZ. See supra (Veteran stated that foods such as chips can hurt his mouth). The examiner opined that the Veteran's pulpitis was at least as likely as not incurred in service. The Board finds this examination adequate for rating purposes and assigns it high probative weight, noting that it is supported by the Veteran's service treatment records and lay statement. See Nieves-Rodriguez, 22 Vet. App. At 304 (2008) ("It is the factually accurate, fully articulated, sound reasoning for the conclusion ... that contributes probative value to a medical opinion.")

The Board notes that pulpitis is not an oral or dental condition for which service connection for compensation purposes is available. 38 C.F.R. § 4.150. As such, service connection for compensation purposes is not available. Service connection solely for the purpose of establishing entitlement to VA dental treatment will be discussed elsewhere in this decision. See infra, Reasons for Remand Issue (8).

The Board has considered whether the suggestion of private treatment after service necessitates remanding the matter to afford the Veteran the opportunity to identify the private provider for the purpose of obtaining private records. However, because none of the medical or lay evidence of record suggests a compensable condition under 38 C.F.R. § 4.150, the Board finds it unlikely that any such records that might exist would substantiate the Veteran's claim for entitlement to service connection for compensation purposes. Accordingly, it was not a duty-to-assist error for the AOJ to make no attempt to obtain these records, and remand is not necessary to make such an attempt. 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(a)(2); Golz v. Shinseki, 590 F.3d 1317, 1323 (Fed. Cir. 2010).

Based on the foregoing, the Board finds that the weight of the competent and probative evidence does not support entitlement to service connection for compensation purposes for a mouth condition. Accordingly, the Veteran's claim for entitlement to service connection for compensation purposes for a mouth condition is denied. In reaching these conclusions, the Board has considered the applicability of the benefit of the doubt doctrine. However, as the weight of the evidence is against the Veteran's claim, that doctrine is not applicable in the instant appeal. See 38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b); Ortiz v. Principi, 274 F.3d 1361, 1364 (Fed. Cir. 2001); Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49, 55-57 (1990).

REASONS FOR REMAND

One of the effects of the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA) is to narrow the set of circumstances in which the Board must remand appeals to the AOJ for further development instead of immediately deciding them directly. Nevertheless, even under the AMA, the Board still has the duty to remand issues when necessary to correct a pre-decisional duty-to-assist error. See Pub L. No. 115-55 section (2)(d); 38 C.F.R. § 20.802 (a). Unfortunately, many such errors occurred in the development of the Veteran's remaining claims, as discussed individually, below.

1. Entitlement to service connection for a headache condition, to include migraines, is remanded.

The Veteran's primary contention, though brief, is that he has a headache condition that began in service and has been continuous ever since. See September 2023 VA 21-526 EZ, Fully Developed Claim (Compensation) at 13. The Veteran argues that this condition may be due to or aggravated by his claimed hearing loss and tinnitus conditions. See March 2024 VA Form 10182 Notice of Disagreement at 1-2.

On his VA 21-526EZ, the Veteran stated as follows: "I have had terrible headaches since being in the Marines, so bad at times my nose will bleed." See September 2023 VA 21-526 EZ, Fully Developed Claim (Compensation) at 13. The Veteran is competent to describe symptoms that he experienced in service or at any time after service when the symptoms he perceived, that is, experienced, were directly through the senses. 38 C.F.R. § 3.159 (competent lay evidence means any evidence not requiring that the proponent have specialized education, training, or experience; lay evidence is competent if it is provided by a person who has knowledge of facts or circumstances and conveys matters that can be observed and described by a lay person); Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 469-71 (1994) (lay testimony is competent as to symptoms of an injury or illness, which are within the realm of one's personal knowledge; personal knowledge is that which comes to the witness through the use of the senses; lay testimony is competent only so long as it is within the knowledge and personal observations of the witness, but lay testimony is not competent to prove a particular injury or illness); see also Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 308 (2007) (lay testimony is competent to establish the presence of observable symptomatology, where the determination is not medical in nature and is capable of lay observation). Pain is a symptom the Veteran is competent to report because it is one the Veteran has personal knowledge of.

Correctly observing that the Veteran participated in a TERA, the AOJ afforded the Veteran a VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of his claimed headache condition and any relationship it might have to his TERA. See March 2024 C&P Exam. The examiner diagnosed the Veteran with migraine headaches. Id at 1. The examiner noted the Veteran's primary contention, which is that his headaches began in service and have been continuous since then. Id at 2. The examiner also noted the Veteran's exposure to loud equipment and machinery, which is consistent with the Veteran's argument that his headache condition may be related to his claimed hearing loss and tinnitus conditions. Id. However, the examiner only opined with respect to TERA, stating that the Veteran's headache condition was less likely than not caused by the indicated TERA. Id at 3. The examiner explained that "[the] Veteran was not deployed overseas."

The Board finds this examination inadequate for several reasons. First, 38 U.S.C. § 1168 states that a toxic exposed Veteran must be provided with an examination that considers (A) the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran, and (B) the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran. 38 U.S.C. § 1168 (a)(2)(A)-(B). In this case, the conceded TERA did not occur during a deployment, but rather consisted of "[...] exposure to [f]uels, oils, lubricants, solvent," as part of the Veteran's overall duties and military occupational specialty. See September 2023 other at 2. Accordingly, the Board finds the March 2024 examiner's opinion inadequate because it does not consider the effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran; or, in fact, any of the Veteran's conceded TERA, but rather considers the absence of a TERA the Veteran never claimed and that the record does not show.

The Board further finds the March 2024 examiner's opinion inadequate because it lacks an opinion regarding direct service connection, where the Veteran clearly contended from initiation of his claim that his headaches were directly incurred in service. Finally, the Board finds that secondary service connection was reasonably raised by the record during the Veteran's VA examination and later expressly raised as additional argument supplied on the Veteran's Notice of Disagreement, but no secondary service connection opinion is of record in this case. Robinson v. Peake, 21 Vet.App. 545, 554 (2008) ("[t]he Board commits error only in failing to discuss a theory of entitlement that was raised either by the appellant or by the evidence of record,") aff'd sub nom. Robinson v. Shinseki, 557 F.3d 1355 (Fed. Cir. 2009). The Board finds that the evidence of record is sufficient to entitle the Veteran to adequate VA examinations to address all of his theories of entitlement, including direct and secondary service connection as well as service connection due to TERA. See McLendon, supra.

Put more simply, the examiner addressed an inquiry that was not relevant, and failed to address the inquires that are relevant in this case. Thus, the AOJ's reliance on this examination constituted a pre-decisional duty to assist error. Remand is required to afford the Veteran (1) an adequate TERA opinion, (2) an adequate direct service connection opinion, and (3) an adequate secondary/aggravation opinion for his migraine headache condition. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802 (a).

2. Entitlement to service connection for hearing loss, left ear is remanded.

3. Entitlement to service connection for hearing loss, right ear is remanded.

4. Entitlement to service connection for ringing in ears (tinnitus) is remanded.

The Veteran contends that his left and right (bilateral) hearing loss and tinnitus are related to his active-duty service. Specifically, the Veteran contends that his tinnitus symptoms began during service and have been continuous since then. See September 2023 VA 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim (Compensation) at 13. The Veteran further contends that his bilateral hearing loss symptoms also began during active-duty service or within a year of discharge from service and have been continuous ever since, and that these symptoms may be related to his tinnitus. Id. The Veteran is competent to report the symptoms he has experienced. 38 C.F.R. § 3.159; See Layno, supra.

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination of his hearing loss and tinnitus in January 2024. See January 2024 C&P Exam. The examiner reviewed the claims file and examined the Veteran. Id at 1. The examiner diagnosed the Veteran with tinnitus and bilateral hearing loss. Id at 3, 6. The examiner opined that the Veteran's left and right ear hearing loss disabilities are not at least as likely as not caused by or a result of an event from the Veteran's military service. Id at 4. The examiner provided the same rationale for her opinion regarding each ear. Specifically, she stated that the Veteran's STR show no permanent threshold shifts between entrance and separation. Id. at 4. The examiner offered no other rationale and did not discuss the Veteran's report of the onset of symptoms in service or his report of continuity since then.

The Board notes that hearing acuity within normal limits on separation does not preclude service connection for a current hearing loss disability. See Hensley v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 155 (1993); Ledford v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 87, 89 (1992). In this case, the Board finds the examiner's exclusive reliance on the absence of in-service threshold shift conclusory and her opinion inadequate for rating purposes. Id; see also Dalton v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 23 (2007) (noting that an examination was found inadequate where the examiner did not comment on the Veteran's report of in-service injury and relied on the lack of evidence in the service treatment records to provide a negative opinion); Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F. 3d 1331, 1336-37 (2006) (holding that the lack of contemporaneous medical records does not, in and of itself, render lay evidence not credible). Thus, the AOJ's reliance on this examination constituted a pre-decisional duty to assist error. The Board finds that the issues of entitlement to service connection for left and right ear hearing loss (bilateral hearing loss) must be remanded to correct this duty to assist error by affording the Veteran an adequate medical opinion. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802 (a).

With respect to tinnitus, the examiner opined that the Veteran's tinnitus is most likely associated with his hearing loss. See January 2024 C&P Exam at 6. The examiner opined that the Veteran's tinnitus is less likely than not caused by the Veteran's in-service exposure to hazardous levels of noise. Id. The examiner explained that there are no service treatment records mentioning tinnitus or hearing loss. Id. The Board finds the January 2024 tinnitus opinion inadequate for the same reasons that the hearing loss opinions were inadequate. See Dalton, supra; Buchanan, supra. Tinnitus must also be remanded to correct this duty to assist error by affording the Veteran an adequate medical opinion. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802 (a).

5. Entitlement to service connection for an eye (vision) condition is remanded.

The Veteran contends that he has an eye or vision condition that is related to his active-duty service. Specifically, the Veteran contends that since his service, his eyes have often felt "scratched and hurt." See September 2023 VA 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim (Compensation). The Veteran is competent to report the symptoms he has experienced. 38 C.F.R. § 3.159; see Layno, supra.

The Veteran's STR contain several entries concerning eye conditions. Specifically, the Veteran's separation physical exam contains a complaint of recurrent iritis, which was noted by the physician at discharge. See December 2020 STR - Medical at 54.

The Veteran currently complains of eye discomfort. However, the Veteran did not submit any medical records showing a current diagnosis of iritis or another eye condition. It is thus unclear whether the condition the Veteran describes presently is the same (or a related) condition with which he was diagnosed in service and that was noted on discharge. The Board finds that such a determination is of a medical nature, and the Board may not substitute its own judgment where a medical opinion is required. See Colvin v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 171 (1991).

To date, the Veteran has not been afforded a VA examination of his claimed eye (vision) condition.

Although the evidence is not sufficient to grant the Veteran's claim, the Board finds that the existence of eye complaints in the Veteran's STR and his competent report of current eye difficulty, together with an absence of any medical evidence of an intervening illness or injury, are sufficient to reach the low threshold set forth in McLendon to entitle the Veteran to a VA examination of his claimed eye or vision disability. See McLendon, supra. The Board further finds that a duty-to-assist error occurred in not affording the Veteran such an examination. The matter must therefore be remanded to afford the Veteran an adequate VA examination of his eye or vision condition. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802 (a).

Additionally, remand is required to obtain a medical examination and opinion pursuant to the Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxins Act of 2022 (PACT Act). See 38 U.S.C. § 1168. The PACT Act requires that, when a veteran whose active service subjected the veteran to participation in a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA) files a claim to service connect a disability and there is evidence of such disability, VA must provide the veteran with a VA examination and obtain a medical opinion addressing the possibility of a nexus between the claimed disability and the TERA. See 38 U.S.C. § 1168(a)(1). 

As noted above, a September 2023 TERA memorandum or indicates that the Veteran participated in a TERA during service due to occupational exposure to fuels, oils, lubricants, and solvents. See September 2023 other. In addition, the Board finds that the Veteran's current lay reporting of symptoms together with his complaints of eye trouble in service suggest the presence of a disability sufficiently to trigger VA's duty to assist by affording the Veteran a VA examination. See McLendon, supra.

To the extent any current disability can be diagnosed, the PACT Act further requires that in addition to the opinion noted above, an opinion regarding nexus between the Veteran's eye trouble and his conceded TERA be provided pursuant to 38 U.S.C. § 1168(a)(1).

6. Entitlement to service connection for knee condition, left, is remanded.

7. Entitlement to service connection for knee condition, right, is remanded.

The Veteran contends that he has a bilateral knee condition that is related to his active-duty service. Specifically, the Veteran contends that while serving on active-duty, he jumped off of a bank and injured both knees. See September 2023 VA 21-526EZ.

Review of the Veteran's STR shows that at the time of the Veteran's discharge from active duty, the Veteran reported periodic bilateral knee pain. See December 2020 STR - Medical at 53. A defect noted as "Patella" also appears on the separation physical exam. Id at 54. However, the nature and effect of the patella defect is unclear.

To date, the Veteran has not been afforded a VA examination of his claimed bilateral knee condition.

Because the doctor's diagnosis at the time of the Veteran's separation physical is unclear and because the Veteran submitted no current medical records in support of his claim, it is unclear whether the symptoms noted at the time of discharge are the same symptoms the Veteran now claims. The Board finds that such a determination is of a medical nature, and the Board may not substitute its own judgment where a medical opinion is required. See Colvin v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 171 (1991).

Although the evidence is not sufficient to grant the Veteran's claim, the Board finds that it is sufficient to reach the low threshold set forth in McLendon to entitle the Veteran to a VA examination of his claimed left and right knee disabilities. See McLendon, supra. The Board further finds that a duty-to-assist error occurred in not affording the Veteran such an examination. The matter must therefore be remanded to afford the Veteran an adequate VA examination of (1) his left knee and (2) his right knee conditions. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802 (a).

As noted above, the Veteran has participation in a TERA. Although VA has an obligation to obtain medical opinions for any service connection claim which cannot be granted where there is evidence of a TERA and of a disability, as explained above, a TERA examination and opinion is not indicated because the claimed condition is a result of physical trauma, for which an exception to the requirement for a TERA examination applies. See supra (discussing TERA examination requirements and exceptions). Thus, on remand, a TERA opinion need not be among the opinions afforded to the Veteran.

8. Entitlement to service connection solely for establishing eligibility for VA outpatient dental treatment for a mouth condition (also claimed as dental and oral,) to include pulpitis, is remanded.

The Veteran's claim of entitlement to service connection for a mouth (claimed as dental and oral) disability raises both the issue of entitlement to service connection for compensation purposes and entitlement to service connection for treatment purposes. See Mays v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 302, 306 (1993). A claim of entitlement to service connection for a dental disability for treatment purposes only is separate and distinct from a claim of entitlement to service-connection for a dental disability for compensation purposes. 38 C.F.R. § 3.381.

On February 29, 2012, the regulations applicable to service connection for dental conditions for dental treatment purposes were revised to clarify existing regulatory provisions and to reflect the respective responsibilities of the Veterans Health Administration (VHA) and Veterans Benefits Administration (VBA) in determinations concerning eligibility for dental treatment. The amended version of 38 C.F.R. § 3.381 clarifies that VBA will adjudicate a claim for service connection of a dental disorder for treatment purposes after VHA determines that a veteran meets the basic eligibility requirements of 38 C.F.R. § 17.161 and requests that VBA make a determination on relevant questions. 38 C.F.R. § 3.381 (a).

Based upon a review of the record, it does not appear that VHA considered or made a determination regarding the Veteran's eligibility for dental treatment. This constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error. Therefore, the Board finds that remand is necessary so that VHA may adjudicate the issue of entitlement to service connection solely for dental treatment purposes in the first instance. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802 (a).

The matters are REMANDED for the following actions:

1. Obtain an addendum opinion from a qualified clinician. The examiner must review the claims file but need only examine the Veteran in-person if, in their opinion, doing so is necessary to provide a valid opinion.

The examiner is asked to provide a response to the following questions:

(a)	Is the Veteran's migraine condition at least as likely as not related to service, to include direct incurrence during service with continuity of symptoms ever since?  

(b)	Is the Veteran's migraine condition at least as likely as not due to or caused by the Veteran's hearing loss and/or tinnitus condition?

(c)	Is the Veteran's migraine condition at least as likely as not aggravated, i.e., made worse, by the Veteran's hearing loss and/or tinnitus condition?

(d)	Is the Veteran's migraine condition at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) related to the Veteran's in-service exposure to toxins due to occupational exposure to fuels, oils, lubricants, and solvents?

 When providing this opinion, the examiner must consider: 

i.	 the total potential exposure through all applicable deployments; and 

ii.	 the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran.

Complete rationales must be supplied for each of the opinions above.

2. Obtain an addendum opinion from an appropriate clinician regarding whether the Veteran's bilateral hearing loss is at least as likely as not related to his in-service exposure to hazardous levels of noise, to include as manifesting during or within one year of discharge from active-duty service.

The examiner must consider the Veteran's competent lay reports of hearing loss symptoms. If there is a medical reason that weighs against the Veteran's lay reporting, it must be explained.

3. Obtain an addendum opinion from an appropriate clinician regarding whether the Veteran's tinnitus is at least as likely as not related to his in-service exposure to hazardous levels of noise, to include as manifesting during or within one year of discharge from active-duty service.

The examiner must consider the Veteran's competent lay reports of tinnitus symptoms. If there is a medical reason that weighs against the Veteran's lay reporting, it must be explained.

4. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination for the Veteran's claimed eye/vision condition. The examiner must review the claims file.

If a diagnosis cannot be provided but the Veteran's condition manifests in symptoms that cause functional impairment, then the examiner should consider them a "disability" for the purpose of providing the requested opinion(s) below.

(a)	Is the Veteran's eye/vision condition at least as likely as not related to service, to include direct incurrence during service with continuity of symptoms ever since?  

(b)	Is the Veteran's eye/vision condition at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) related to the Veteran's in-service exposure to toxins due to occupational exposure to fuels, oils, lubricants, and solvents?

 When providing this opinion, the examiner must consider: 

i.	 the total potential exposure through all applicable deployments; and 

ii.	 the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran.

The examiner must provide a complete explanation and rationale for each opinion.

5. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination for the Veteran's left and right knee conditions. The examiner must review the claims file.

If a diagnosis cannot be provided but the Veteran's condition manifests in symptoms that cause functional impairment, then the examiner should consider them a "disability" for the purpose of providing the requested opinion(s) below.

The examiner is asked to provide a response to the following:

(a)	Is the Veteran's left and/or right knee condition at least as likely as not related to service, including his report of traumatically injuring his knees during service?  

(b)	Is it at least as likely as not that the Veteran's knee left and/or right knee disabilities (1) began during active service, (2) manifested within 1 year after discharge from service, or (3) was noted during service with continuity of the same symptomatology since service?

6. Refer the Veteran's claim of entitlement to service connection for a mouth (dental or oral) disability for dental treatment purposes to VHA to adjudicate Class eligibility in the first instance under 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.381, 17.161.

 

 

R. Bisignani

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Robert Divis, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.