Citation Nr: A25034411
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 240806-479812
DATE: April 15, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to a 50 percent disability rating, but no higher, for depressive disorder due to another medical condition and unspecified anxiety disorder is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

Throughout the rating period on appeal, depressive disorder due to another medical condition and unspecified anxiety disorder has been manifested by occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to such symptoms as circumstantial speech and disturbances of motivation and mood.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to a disability rating of 50 percent, but no higher, for depressive disorder due to another medical condition and unspecified anxiety disorder have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.10, 4.124A, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9434.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

In a November 2023 rating decision, service connection was granted for depressive disorder due to another medical condition and unspecified anxiety disorder and a 30 percent disability rating was assigned effective June 29, 2023.  In August 2024, the Veteran submitted VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) and elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the October 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

Finally, it is noted that the issues other than the psychiatric rating on appeal were listed on the August 2024 VA Form 10182.  However, such issues had previously been listed on a July 2024 VA Form 10182 in which a hearing was requested.  These issues will be addressed in a separate Board decision.  

Increased Rating

Disability ratings are determined by applying the criteria set forth in the VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities, which is based on the average impairment of earning capacity.  Individual disabilities are assigned separate diagnostic codes.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1.  The basis of disability evaluations is the ability of the body as a whole, or of the psyche, or of a system or organ of the body to function under the ordinary conditions of daily life including employment.  38 C.F.R. § 4.10.  

In order to evaluate the level of disability and any changes in condition, it is necessary to consider the complete medical history of the veteran's condition. Schafrath v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 589, 594 (1991).  

Disability ratings are determined by evaluating the extent to which a veteran's service-connected disability adversely affects his ability to function under the ordinary conditions of daily life, including employment, by comparing his symptomatology with the criteria set forth in the Schedule for Rating Disabilities (Rating Schedule).  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.10. 

If two evaluations are potentially applicable, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that evaluation; otherwise, the lower evaluation will be assigned.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7.

In view of the number of atypical instances it is not expected, especially with the more fully described grades of disabilities, that all cases will show all the findings specified.  Findings sufficiently characteristic to identify the disease and the disability therefrom, and above all, coordination of rating with impairment of function will, however, be expected in all instances.  38 C.F.R. § 4.21. 

In evaluating a disability, the Board considers the current examination reports in light of the whole recorded history to ensure that the current rating accurately reflects the severity of the condition.  The Board has a duty to acknowledge and consider all regulations that are potentially applicable.  Schafrath v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 589, 593 (1991).  The medical as well as industrial history is to be considered, and a full description of the effects of the disability upon ordinary activity is also required.  38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.10.

The Board has reviewed all the evidence in the Virtual folders, which includes:  the Veteran's contentions, the private examination report, and C&P examination report.  Although there is an obligation to provide adequate reasons and bases supporting this decision, there is no requirement that the evidence submitted by the Veteran or obtained on his behalf be discussed in detail.  Rather, the claim and what the evidence in the claims file shows, or fails to show, with respect to the claim.  Gonzales v. West, 218 F.3d 1378, 1380-81 (Fed. Cir. 2000); Timberlake v. Gober, 14 Vet. App. 122, 128-30 (2000).

The Veteran's depressive disorder due to another medical condition and unspecified anxiety disorder is rated 30 percent disabling, effective June 29, 2023 per 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9434.  It is noted that service connection was established on a secondary basis due to his service-connected disabilities, rather than on a direct basis.

The Board first observes that the symptoms listed in VA's general rating formula for mental disorders are not intended to constitute an exhaustive list, but rather are to serve as examples of the type and degree of the symptoms, or their effects, that would justify a particular rating.  Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436, 442-43 (2002).  Evaluation under § 4.130 is symptom-driven, meaning that symptomatology should be the fact-finder's primary focus when deciding entitlement to a given disability rating under that regulation.  Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 116-17 (Fed. Cir. 2013).  In Vazquez-Claudio, the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit (Federal Circuit) explained that the frequency, severity and duration of the symptoms also play an important role in determining the rating.  Id. at 117.  If the evidence shows that the Veteran suffers symptoms listed in the rating criteria or symptoms of similar severity, frequency, and duration, that cause occupational or social impairment equivalent to what would be caused by the symptoms listed in the criteria for a particular rating, the appropriate equivalent rating will be assigned.  Mauerhan, 16 Vet. App. at 443; see also Vazquez-Claudio, 713 F.3d at 117.

Indeed, "VA must engage in a holistic analysis" that assess the severity, frequency, and duration of the signs and symptoms of the veteran's service-connected mental disorder; quantifies the level of occupational and social impairment caused by those symptoms; and assigns an evaluation that most nearly approximates the level of occupational and social impairment.  Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 10, 22 (2017).

Pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders, a 30 percent evaluation is warranted for occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks (although generally functioning satisfactorily, with routine behavior, self-care, and conversation normal), due to memory loss (such as forgetting names, directions, recent events).

A 50 percent evaluation is warranted for occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to such symptoms as: flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short- and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships. 

A 70 percent evaluation is warranted for occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a work-like setting); inability to establish and maintain effective relationships. 

A 100 percent evaluation is warranted for total occupational and social impairment, due to symptoms such as the following: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name.  38 C.F.R. § 4.130.

A June 2023 private Independent Medical Examination reflects diagnoses of depressive disorder due to other medical conditions with major depressive-like episode with anxious distress; unspecified alcohol-related disorder; and unspecified tobacco-related disorder.  The examiner found occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood.  The examiner noted that his symptoms were depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss, circumstantial, circumlocutory or stereotyped speech, impaired judgment, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, suicidal ideation, obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities, impaired impulse control such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence, intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living, including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene, reduced activity, social withdrawal, irritability, fatigue, poor self-esteem, relationship problems, hopelessness, guilt, kinesiophobia (avoidance of certain movements due to fear or reinjury/pain), and less interest in sex.  The Veteran reported living with his wife and daughter; his wife is supportive but is often concerned about his health.  They used to hike/engage in outdoor adventures, but he can no longer do so due to chronic pain.  He had a great relationship with his daughter.  He had a strained and distant relationship with his children from his first marriage, although he communicated with them every other week and may see them once every two or more years.  Due to his chronic pain, he hds become more withdrawn and isolated, and he is short-tempered and prone to irritability and anger.  He has become less social and is hypervigilant.  He often feels distracted by pain and he reported deficits in short-term memory.  He also reported decreased motivation.  

The Veteran worked full-time as an Express Service Technician for a car dealership.  Due to chronic pain, he had to take frequent breaks and isolates himself.  He reported hopelessness and helplessness with feelings of sadness, numbness, anger, and guilt.  When asked about suicidal ideation he reported having moments when he wishes that he were no longer alive but he denied having a plan or intent to end his life as he worried about leaving his family behind.  He denied homicidal ideation and denied hallucinations and delusions.  He reported problems with sleep and nightmares.  He reported a history of panic symptoms, and he has anxiety with racing thoughts, an inability to relax and nervousness.  He engaged in ritualistic behaviors and is hypervigilant and routine-oriented.  He reported consuming alcohol three times a week and he used smokeless tobacco.  

On mental status examination, he was dressed casually, his posture was tense, and he often had to readjust his position.  His speech was at a normal rate and volume, but it was circumstantial at times.  He was oriented to time, place and person.  He was also pleasant and cooperative during the session.  His mood was depressed and anxious and his affect was congruent.  His sleep was poor, his energy was low, and he reported that he is often tired and fatigued.  His thought process was logical, and his content was preservative of pain, sadness, depression, and irritability.  He denied any overt paranoia but endorsed hypervigilance at times.  He reported passive death wishes without a plan or intent.  The examiner opined that the Veteran was experiencing a persistent degree of emotional distress following his chronic pain.  The chronic pain has led to significant and intrusive anxious and depressive thoughts and feelings, which adversely impact multiple facets of his life, including social, occupational, and family environments.  Additionally, he experiences negative consequences to his mood symptoms.  

In November 2023, the Veteran underwent a C&P examination wherein the examiner diagnosed depressive disorder due to another medical condition and unspecified anxiety disorder.  The examiner that the best summary of the Veteran's level of occupational and social impairment was occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks although generally functioning satisfactorily with normal routine behavior, self-care and conversation.  He uses alcohol three times per week.  He reported being married and having a good relationship with his daughter.  He reported that he recently had started working for a different company.  He had symptoms of depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks that occur weekly or less often, chronic sleep impairment, and disturbances of motivation and mood.  He was cooperative with full affect, his speech was verbose, and linear to circumstantial.  He did not endorse suicidal/homicidal ideation.  Insight and judgment were fair.  

Based on the examination reports and affording the Veteran the benefit of the doubt, the Board finds that a disability rating of 50 percent, but no higher, is warranted for the entire appeal period.  As detailed, both the June 2023 and November 2023 examiners described the Veteran's depressive disorder as manifesting with occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks, which is contemplated by a 30 percent disability rating.  However, the November 2023 examiner indicated that he had disturbances of motivation and mood, and his speech was verbose and linear to circumstantial which are symptoms contemplated by a 50 percent disability rating.  Likewise, the June 2023 examiner also described his speech as a normal rate and volume but circumstantial at times, and he has disturbances of motivation and mood.  The June 2023 examiner also found that he had impaired judgment and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships.  Such symptoms are contemplated by a 50 percent disability rating.  Thus, in light of his psychiatric symptoms documented in the June and November 2023 examination reports, the Board has determined that a 50 percent disability rating is warranted for the entire appeal period.  

The Board has determined, however, that the symptomatology and resultant impairment from his depressive disorder most nearly approximates a 50 percent rating, rather than a higher 70 percent or 100 percent rating.  

The Board acknowledges that the June 2023 examiner listed symptoms including near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively, suicidal ideation, obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities, impaired impulse control such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence which are contemplated by a 70 percent rating, and an intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living, including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene which is contemplated by a 100 percent rating.  However, the objective findings and summary contained in the June 2023 examination report do not reflect such symptoms, as discussed below. 

The Veteran reported a history of panic symptoms and he had anxiety with racing thoughts, an inability to relax and nervousness.  But such report does not suggest that he experiences near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently; there was no report of an inability to function independently.  The Veteran clearly experiences chronic pain, but he is married and is employed in a full-time capacity.  Also, the November 2023 examination report reflects an objective finding of panic attacks that occur weekly or less often.  

With regard to the finding of suicidal ideation, while the Veteran reported having moments when he wishes that he were no longer alive, he denied having a plan or intent to end his life as he worried about leaving his family behind.  Also, the November 2023 examination report did not reflect any findings of suicidal ideation.  There is no showing that this symptom, while serious, has resulted in deficiencies in most areas over any portion of the rating period on appeal.

With regard to the finding of obsessional rituals that interfere with routine activities, while the Veteran described ritualistic behaviors and hypervigilance and being routine-oriented, such description does not suggest that this interferes with his routine activities.  However, the November 2023 examination report did not reflect objective findings of obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities.  

With regard to the finding of impaired impulse control such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence, the examination report does not contain any summary indicative of impulse control nor unprovoked irritability with periods of violence.  He reported that he is short-tempered and prone to irritability and anger but there was no description of resorting to violence or having problems with impulse control.  Also, the November 2023 examination report does not reflect a subjective complaint or objective finding of impaired impulse control such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence.  

Finally, with regard to the June 2023 finding of an intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living, including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene, the examination report does not reflect any example of an inability to perform activities of daily living.  Again, the Veteran is employed in a full-time capacity albeit with complaints of chronic pain.  While he tends to isolate, there is no indication that he is unable to perform activities of daily living.  Also, with regard to hygiene, he specifically reported that with regard to hygiene he reported that showering helps to soothe his pain which reinforces maintaining a healthy hygiene.  Also, the November 2023 examination reflects no reference to an inability to perform activities of daily living nor problems with hygiene.  

(Continued on the next page)

?

There are otherwise no objective findings that would support a disability rating in excess of 50 percent.  While the private examination categorizes the Veteran's level of impairment as involving deficiencies in most areas, for the reasons discussed above, this is not an accurate a description of the overall disability picture based on the actual symptoms reported by the Veteran.  A disability rating in excess of 50 percent is not warranted as it is not shown that his depressive disorder is manifested by occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood.

 

Eric S. Leboff

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Kreindler, Marcy W.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.