Citation Nr: A25034731
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 220817-268406
DATE: April 15, 2025

REMANDED

Service connection for intervertebral disc syndrome (IVDS) of the lumbar spine is remanded.

Service connection for left lower extremity sciatica secondary to IVDS is remanded.

Service connection for bilateral plantar fasciitis is remanded.

Service connection for a left ankle condition is remanded.

Service connection for a left foot condition is remanded. 

Service connection for hypertension is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from April 1996 to April 1999.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a March 2022 rating decision by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) regional office, which is the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).

The Veteran elected the Board's Direct Review docket. See August 2022 VA Forms 10182. This restricts the Board's review to the evidence of record at the time of the March 2022 rating decision. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301.

1. Service connection for IVDS of the lumbar spine is remanded.

2. Service connection for left lower extremity sciatica secondary to IVDS is remanded.

3. Service connection for bilateral plantar fasciitis is remanded.

4. Service connection for a left ankle condition is remanded.

5. Service connection for a left foot condition is remanded. 

6. Service connection for hypertension is remanded.

The Board finds it necessary to remand these matters to correct duty to assist errors that occurred prior to the issuance of the March 2022 rating decision. 38 U.S.C. § 5103A; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.159, 20.802.

The claims file does not show VA attempted to obtain pertinent medical records prior to issuing the rating decision on appeal. In the November 2021 VA Form 20-0995, the Veteran identified he had received medical treatment at the Long Beach VAMC. The record shows VA treatment records from Long Beach VAMC (a 2015 VA examination report and medical opinion) were previously added to the Veteran's claims file in June 2020. No additional records were added between the November 2021 application and the March 2022 rating decision. There is no memo that a search of the VA record system was performed and that no additional records were found. Upon remand, the AOJ will upload any treatment records from Long Beach VAMC not already in the record or add a memorandum to the file that there are no additional treatment records. 

The claims file also does not contain a complete copy of potentially pertinent private treatment records. The Veteran has filed multiple applications and supplemental claims for the alleged disabilities on appeal. He has submitted copies of private treatment records from St. Joseph Hospital, Kaiser Permanente healthcare, and Exempla Healthcare. See October 2014 & May 2019 Medical Treatment Records. These treatment records, however, appear to be incomplete. For example, a March 2010 treatment note states that the Veteran presented for a return visit and does not include the earlier treatment note(s). 

The claims file does not show VA has specifically requested the Veteran submit VA Forms 21-4142 and 4142a for St. Joseph Hospital, Kaiser Permanente, and Exempla Healthcare. To ensure VA has fulfilled its duty to assist the Veteran in obtaining evidence that could support one or more of his claims, the AOJ will request the appropriate releases and obtain a complete copy of the Veteran's private treatment records from St. Joseph Hospital, Kaiser Permanente, and Exempla Healthcare upon remand. 

The Board reminds the Veteran that VA's duty to assist in the development of his claims is not a one-way street. Wood v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 190, 193 (1991). VA's duty must be understood as a duty to assist a veteran in developing a claim, rather than a duty on the part of VA to develop the entire claim with the veteran performing a passive role. Turk v. Peake, 21 Vet. App. 565 (2008), citing to Wood, 1 Vet. App. at 193 ("If a veteran wishes help, he cannot passively wait for it in those circumstances where he may or should have information that is essential in obtaining the putative evidence."). 

Additionally, the Board has considered the Veteran argument that VA has not fulfilled its duty to assist him developing his claims and ordered VA examinations for all of his claimed disabilities. See, i.e., November 2021 & August 2022 VA Form 21-4138. VA must provide an examination and/or medical opinion when there is: (1) competent evidence of a current disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability; (2) evidence establishing that an event, injury, or disease occurred in service or establishing certain diseases manifesting during an applicable presumptive period for which the claimant qualifies; (3) an indication that the disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability may be associated with the Veteran's service or with another service-connected disability; and (4) there is insufficient competent medical evidence on file for VA to make a decision on the claim. McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 83-86 (2006).

The United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) held in Saunders v. Wilkie, that "pain need not be diagnosed as connected to a current underlying condition to function as an impairment" and that it can be a disability if the impairment diminishes the body's ability to function. Saunders, 886 F.3d 1356, 1364 (Fed. Cir. 2018). However, a veteran cannot "demonstrate service connection simply by asserting subjective pain"; the pain must reach a level of "functional impairment of earning capacity." Id. at 1367-68.  

With regard to the Veteran's claim for left lower extremity sciatica secondary to the IVDS, the AOJ previously found that the private treatment records showed the Veteran was diagnosed with this condition in March 2010. See March 2022 Rating Decision; see also October 2014 Medical Treatment Record. The Veteran's service treatment records (STRs) show he reported lower back pain in June 1998. See September 2004 STR. He asserts that the sciatica is secondary to his back disability that stems from the in-service back pain. See, i.e., November 2021 VA Form 21-4138. There is currently no opinion of record addressing the etiology of the left lower extremity sciatica. The Board finds the record contains insufficient medical evidence to decide this appeal. Therefore, pursuant to McLendon, the AOJ will obtain a VA examination and medical opinion that addresses whether the claimed left lower extremity sciatica is related to the Veteran's active service, to include due to a claimed back disability.

With regard to the claims of service connection for bilateral plantar fasciitis, a left ankle condition, a left foot condition, and hypertension, there is no duty to assist error relating to VA not ordering a VA examination and/or medical opinion for these claimed disabilities. Based on the evidence currently before the Board, there is no evidence of a current disability related to the Veteran's left foot or ankle. He has provided only general assertions of pain. He has not identified how his pain symptoms have amounted to a functional impairment affecting his earning capacity, e.g., the pain symptoms limit the amount of time he can stand or walk. Saunders, 886 F.3d at 1367-68. There is no evidence he has been diagnosed with hypertension. The first criterion of McLendon is not met for the remaining claimed disabilities.

The Board recognizes that the Veteran has raised additional arguments but will not address them at this time. See generally VA Forms 21-4138. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Ask the Veteran to complete VA Forms 21-4142 and 21-4142a for any outstanding private medical records relating to treatment he has received for his back, left lower extremity, left foot, left ankle, or hypertension from St. Joseph Hospital, Kaiser Permanente, and Exempla Healthcare. All attempts to secure this evidence must be documented in the claims file pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(e), and if, after making reasonable efforts to obtain named records, they are not able to be secured, provide the Veteran the required notice and opportunity to respond.

2. Obtain a copy of the Veteran's VA treatment records from the Long Beach VAMC and add it to the claims file. 

3. Schedule an examination by an appropriate clinician to determine the nature and etiology of the left lower extremity sciatica. The examiner must review the entire claims file, including a copy of this remand, and note such in the accompanying report.

The examiner is asked to opine on whether it is at least as likely as not that the left lower extremity sciatica is due to or aggravated by a back disability.

Under Spicer v. McDonough, 61 F.4th 1360 (Fed. Cir. 2023), when evaluating whether one condition is aggravated by another condition, a veteran need only show that there was an incremental increase in severity of the alleged disability and that the increase in severity would not have occurred "but for" the service-connected disability.

The examiner must provide a thorough rationale for all opinions and cite to the supporting clinical data and/or medical literature as appropriate. The rationale should address the Veteran's lay statements regarding the onset of his symptoms and all cited medical literature. See generally VA Form 21-4138. 

Because the Veteran is competent to attest to factual matters of which he has first-hand knowledge, including observable symptomatology, the examiner should provide a well-reasoned explanation if there is a medical basis that supports or calls into doubt the Veteran's reported history of his symptoms or if the alleged disability can be attributed to an intercurrent cause, such as post-service employment.

If the examiner is unable to provide an opinion, the examiner should indicate whether there is any additional evidence that would facilitate an opinion, or whether the examiner's inability to opine is based on the limits of the examiner's medical knowledge.

 

 

J. Abrams

Acting Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	T. Burden, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.