Citation Nr: A25034511
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 241217-501083
DATE:  April 15, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Air Force from February 1968 to February 1972, to include service in the Republic of Vietnam. 

This matter comes before the Board of Veteran's Appeal (Board) on appeal from a November 2024 rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO). The rating decision on appeal was issued in November 2024; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies. 

As background, in May 2024, the Veteran submitted an Intent to File form. Thereafter, in August 2024, the Veteran submitted his claim for service connection for his sleep apnea. Subsequently, in November 2024, the RO issued a rating decision that denied service connection for this disability. In response, in December 2024, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal and selected the Direct Review docket at the Board.

Based upon the selection of the Direct Review option, the Board may only consider the evidence of record as of November 25, 2024-the date of the rating decision on appeal. See 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.301. If the Veteran submitted evidence that was added to the record after November 25, 2024, the Board did not consider it. If the Veteran wishes to have VA consider any evidence that was not considered, a supplemental claim should be submitted identifying such evidence. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.

As a final preliminary matter, the Board acknowledges the recent precedential decision in Williams regarding 38 C.F.R. § 20.202(c)(2) and deciding AMA appeals before the time to change dockets has ended. See Williams v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 305 (2024). Generally, the Board may not decide an appeal before the deadline for requesting an AMA docket switch has elapsed. 38 C.F.R. § 20.202(c)(2) allows claimants to switch AMA dockets by completing and submitting a new Notice of Disagreement within one year from the date the AOJ mails notice of the decision on appeal, or 60 days from when the Board receives the Notice of Disagreement, whichever is later, unless a claimant has already submitted evidence or testimony as described in 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.302 and 20.303. In this case, less than one year has passed since the AOJ mailed notice of the decision on appeal; however, as the Board is remanding the issue for additional development, there is no prejudice to the Veteran in proceeding with the claim on appeal prior to the expiration of the deadline for requesting an AMA docket switch. 

Service Connection - Obstructive Sleep Apnea

After reviewing the evidence of record, the Board finds that remand is required to correct a duty to assist error that occurred prior to the issuance of the November 2024 rating decision. 

Specifically, the Board finds that the August 2024 and November 2024 VA medical opinions are inadequate for adjudicative purposes. The August 2024 VA examiner stated that the Veteran was diagnosed with central sleep apnea in 2015, and his condition began with snoring in 2001. See August 2024 VA Medical Opinion. This examiner opined that it was less likely than not that his central sleep apnea was cause by service. In support of this finding, the examiner noted that central sleep apnea is often caused by a central nervous condition. Further, the examiner relied on the lack of service treatment records showing treatment for snoring and apnea during service. However, the Board finds this opinion is inadequate because it is based on an inaccurate factual premise. In this regard, his September 2008 private medical record demonstrates that he was diagnosed with severe obstructive sleep apnea, not central sleep apnea. See September 2008 Private Medical Record. Additionally, the Veteran reported an onset of his symptoms in the 1980s, not 2001. He also described an onset of his sleep apnea as problems with sleeping soundly and issues with his breathing while sleeping. See August 2024 statement. Based on the foregoing, the Board finds that the August 2024 VA medical opinion is inadequate.

Additionally, the Board finds that the November 2024 VA examiner failed to consider all relevant evidence of record. In this regard, this examiner opined that was less likely than not that his sleep apnea was caused by herbicide agent and chemical exposures during service after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran. However, this examiner failed to address whether his condition was caused by weekly exposures to burn pits of photographic material, as contended by the Veteran. See August 2024 Lay Statements. Accordingly, the Board finds that this opinion is inadequate for adjudicative purposes to the extent that the examiner did not consider the Veteran's theory of entitlement. 

Of final note, no VA examiner has opined whether his obstructive sleep apnea was caused by service or any exposure to service. Instead, the examiners opined whether his central sleep apnea was caused by service, to include his exposures to herbicide agents and chemicals. Accordingly, the Board finds that this issue must be remanded for an addendum opinion. In ordering a remand, the Board is not making a preliminary formal finding as to the credibility of the Veteran's lay reports.? Rather, the Board is merely requesting that the?examiner?on remand consider the Veteran's own descriptions of the history of his sleep apnea.??See, Smith v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 332, 338-39 (2020). The AOJ's failure to obtain an adequate etiology opinion is a pre-decisional duty to assist error that necessitates a remand for development.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Send the claims file to an appropriate clinician to determine the etiology of the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea. The entire claims file should be made available to and be reviewed by the clinician in conjunction with this request. If the clinician believes that a physical examination should be conducted in order to provide the requested opinion, one should be provided. The examiner is asked to provide a response to the following:

(a.) Please state whether it is at least as likely as not (an approximate 50 percent probability or nearly 50 percent probability) that the Veteran's severe obstructive sleep apnea was related to any aspect of the Veteran's service, to include exposure to herbicide agents, chemicals, and burn pits of photographic materials. See September 2008 Private Medical Record (showing severe obstructive sleep apnea diagnosis) and June 2024 and August 2024 Lay Statements.

In providing a response to paragraph(a), please accept as true and discuss the Veteran's statement that he was exposed to burn pits of photographic material at the Lowry Air Force Base on a weekly basis. See June 2024 and August 2024 Lay Statements

Please keep in mind that the phrase "at least as likely as not" means that "the favorable and unfavorable evidence is in approximate balance or is nearly equal.

In providing the requested opinions, consider the Veteran's description of his post-service symptoms contained in the June 2024 and August 2024 lay statements. Do the Veteran's reports about his symptoms align with how the currently diagnosed disability is known to develop or are the Veteran's reports generally inconsistent with medical knowledge or implausible?

(The Board reminds the Veteran that in asking the examiner to accept the history he provided, the Board is not at this time making an assessment of the credibility of his statements). 

In offering any opinion, the examiner should consider medical and lay evidence dated both since the filing of the claim. The examiner should provide a complete rationale for any opinion rendered. If the examiner's opinion is negative, he or she must clearly explain why. If he or she cannot provide the requested opinions without resorting to speculation, he or she should expressly indicate this.

 

 

Mariah N. Sim

Acting Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	S. Foster, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.