Citation Nr: A25034556
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 240221-419086
DATE: April 15, 2025

ORDER

Service connection for tinnitus is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a left knee condition is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a right knee condition is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a left shoulder condition is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a thoracolumbar spine condition, also claimed as back pain, is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a foot condition is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, also claimed as anxiety disorder and insomnia, is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for diabetes mellitus type II is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

Tinnitus did not first manifest during active service and has not been continuous since service separation, and any current tinnitus did not manifest to a degree of 10 percent within one year of service separation, and is not related to exposure to acoustic trauma or other injury or event in service.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for service connection for tinnitus have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.304, 3.307, 3.309.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the Marine Corps from March 1980 to March 1984.

In the February 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement (NOD)), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the February 2023 and June 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) rating decisions on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  

For clarification, the Board notes that these appeals stem from claims filed in March 2022.  In a May 2022 rating decision, the AOJ denied service connection for foot pain and tinnitus.  In February 2023, the Veteran submitted a supplemental claim.  In February 2023, the AOJ determined that new and relevant evidence had been received to reopen previously denied claims for service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, foot pain, left knee, left shoulder, right knee, back, and tinnitus, and denied the claims for service connection.  In June 2023, the AOJ determined that new and relevant evidence had been received to reopen a previously denied claim for service connection for diabetes mellitus type II, and denied the claim.

1. Service connection for tinnitus.

The Veteran contends that service connection for tinnitus is warranted due to exposure to loud vehicles and "a lot of field training" in service.  See the March 2022 application for disability compensation.

To prevail on a direct service connection claim, there must be competent evidence of (1) a current disability, (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury, and (3) a nexus between the in-service disease or injury and the current disability.  Holton v. Shinseki, 557 F.3d 1362, 1366 (Fed. Cir. 2009); 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a).  A disability may be service connected on a secondary basis if it is proximately due to or the result of a service-connected disease or injury; or, if it is aggravated beyond its natural progress by a service-connected disease or injury.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a), (b).

Certain diseases, including tinnitus, are listed among the "chronic diseases" under 38 C.F.R. § 3.309(a); therefore, 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(b) applies.  See Walker v. Shinseki, 708 F.3d 1331 (Fed. Cir. 2013); Fountain v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 258, 271 (2015).  Where the evidence shows a "chronic disease" in service or "continuity of symptoms" after service, the disease shall be presumed to have been incurred in service.  For the showing of "chronic" disease in service, there is required a combination of manifestations sufficient to identify the disease entity, and sufficient observation to establish chronicity at the time.  With chronic disease as such in service, subsequent manifestations of the same chronic disease at any later date, however remote, are service connected, unless clearly attributable to intercurrent causes.  If a condition noted during service is not shown to be chronic, then generally, a showing of "continuity of symptoms" after service is required for service connection.

The Board finds that service connection for tinnitus is not warranted.

Service treatment records (STRs), including examinations done in March 1980 upon entrance and in February 1984 at separation, are silent for mention of complaints, diagnosis, or treatment of tinnitus or ringing in the ears.

Post-service VA treatment records indicate that in March 2021, the Veteran was seen for an audiological evaluation.  He reported having bilateral tinnitus, which was intermittent had been occurring for "2+ years."  He also reported "possible occupational noise exposure as he worked in a dental prosthesis lab for many years."

In February 2023, the Veteran reported having left ear tinnitus.

The Board finds that the weight of the evidence is against the claim for service connection.  The Veteran's statements regarding the onset of tinnitus lack the credibility necessary to afford them significant probative value, as they have been inconsistent.  See Caluza v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 498, 510-11 (1995) (noting that credibility can be generally evaluated by a showing of interest, bias, or inconsistent statements).  STRs do not document any complaints, symptoms, or findings of tinnitus, including the March 1984 examination upon separation from service.  Although the Veteran has asserted that he has tinnitus due to service, he also indicated in March 2021 that he had been experiencing tinnitus for approximately two years, and he indicated in February 2023 that he was having only left ear tinnitus.  

As such, the Veteran's lay assertions alone are not sufficient to establish tinnitus in service and since service.  The Board finds that the medical evidence generated at the time of the Veteran's period of active service, including the separation examination, to be highly probative.  These records were created contemporaneously with the Veteran's period of service and contain information that is inherently more reliable than that recorded at a later time.  The Board finds that the service medical evidence and the lack of complaints, treatment, or diagnosis of tinnitus in the medical evidence of record until approximately 37 years after service outweigh the Veteran's statements that he made in connection with his claim for service connection for tinnitus. 

In addition, there is also no probative medical evidence that relates any current tinnitus to military service.  In April 2022, a VA examiner reviewed the Veteran's file and opined that the claimed tinnitus was less likely than not caused by or a result of military noise exposure because STRs failed to show a diagnosis of tinnitus while on active duty, and there was no evidence of a diagnosis within a year of separation from service.  There was no documentation of continuity of care until many years after service.

In light of the above, the Board finds that the probative evidence of record weighs against a finding that any current tinnitus diagnosis is related to service.  As such, there is no benefit of the doubt to resolve in the Veteran's favor.  See Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to service connection for a left knee condition is remanded.

2. Entitlement to service connection for a right knee condition is remanded.

3. Entitlement to service connection for a left shoulder condition is remanded.

4. Entitlement to service connection for a thoracolumbar spine condition is remanded.

The Veteran contends that as a light vehicle operator, he put a lot of strain and wear-and-tear on his body, including his knees, back, and shoulders, which led to chronic conditions.  He states that STRs show complaints regarding his left knee, back, and left shoulder.  Furthermore, he was in a motorcycle accident in service, and some relevant STRs are illegible or partially illegible.  See April 2018 application for disability compensation and the February 2023 statement.  

In June 2018 VA examinations, the Veteran reported injuring his left knee and left shoulder in service, and back pain that started gradually in service.  He was diagnosed with bilateral knee strain, left shoulder strain, and lumbosacral strain.  The examiner opined that the diagnoses were each less likely than not caused by or a result of service based on review of the medical records, medical literature, and the examiner's clinical experience.  There was no continuity of symptomatology in close proximity from separation from active duty, and diagnoses 34 years later could not reasonably be connected to active duty when there had been other aging, occupational, and/or daily activity factors in the intervening years.

The Board finds that the June 2018 VA opinions are not sufficient bases on which to adjudicate these claims for service connection.  The examiner did not discuss the Veteran's statements regarding wear-and-tear in service, which he asserts led to chronic conditions.  The mere fact that medical records do not establish chronicity is not, in and of itself, a sufficient basis on which to rest a medical conclusion.  See Davidson v. Shinseki, 581 F.3d 1313, 1316 (Fed. Cir. 2009), quoting Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331, 1337 (Fed. Cir. 2006) ("[T]he Board cannot determine that lay evidence lacks credibility merely because it is unaccompanied by contemporaneous medical evidence.").  See also Dalton v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 23, 39-40 (2007) (holding that an examination was inadequate where the examiner did not comment on the Veteran's report of in-service injury but relied on the service medical records to provide a negative opinion). 

As such, and in light of the fact that there are STRs that are illegible that may be related to an in-service motorcycle accident, the Board finds a pre-decisional error in not obtaining adequate medical opinions on the nature and etiology of the claimed bilateral knee, left shoulder, and thoracolumbar spine conditions.

5. Entitlement to service connection for a foot condition is remanded.

VA treatment records indicate that the Veteran reported having chronic low back pain with associated numbness in his lower extremities to the foot soles bilaterally.  

The claim for service connection for a foot condition is therefore inextricably intertwined with the claim for service connection for a thoracolumbar spine condition being remanded herein, and the Board will remand the foot claim for adjudication at the same time as the thoracolumbar spine condition claim.  See Harris v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 180 (1991).

6. Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder is remanded.

The Veteran contends that he has anxiety and/or insomnia due to service directly and/or due to his claimed knee pain, foot pain, back pain, and diabetes.  See the April 2018 and March 2022 applications for disability compensation.

The claim for service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder is therefore inextricably intertwined with the claims for service connection being remanded herein, and the Board will remand the acquired psychiatric disorder claim for adjudication at the same time as the musculoskeletal conditions claims.  See Harris v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 180 (1991).

7. Entitlement to service connection for diabetes mellitus type II is remanded.

In an April 2023 VA diabetes mellitus examination, the Veteran was diagnosed with diabetes mellitus type II, which the examiner opined was less likely than not caused by or the result of the indicate toxic exposure risk activity(ies) (TERA) after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all TERA of the Veteran.  The rationale was that the Veteran did not participate in a TERA, and he had other risk factors outside of military service.

The Board notes, however, that it is unclear whether the Veteran participated in a TERA.  In a February 2023 memorandum, VA determined that the Veteran did not participate in a TERA.  In a May 2023 memorandum, VA determined that participated in a TERA, noting that he was a light vehicle operator and participated in garrison/field training with the use of fuel.  

The Board also notes that the April 2023 VA examiner did not opine on whether the Veteran's active service caused or aggravated his diabetes mellitus type II directly, to include as due to the fuel the Veteran was exposed to in service.

The Board therefore finds a pre-decisional error in the AOJ's failure to seek clarification regarding whether the Veteran participated in a TERA and failure to obtain an adequate medical opinion on the nature and etiology of the claimed diabetes mellitus type II.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain medical opinions on the current nature and likely etiology of the claimed left knee, right knee, left shoulder, and back conditions.  

After review of the entire record, the examiner should provide a medical opinion on whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that any left knee, right knee, left shoulder, and/or back condition is related to incident, injury, or event in active service, to include discussion of the Veteran's statements that his military occupation of light vehicle operator put a lot of strain and wear-and-tear on his body, including his knees, back, and shoulders, which led to chronic conditions.

A thorough rationale should be provided for all opinions expressed.  If any requested medical opinion cannot be given, the examiner should state the reason(s) why.

If the VA examiner determines that further examination is necessary in order to render the requested medical opinion(s), the AOJ should schedule the Veteran for such an examination.

2. Determine whether the Veteran participated in a toxic exposure risk activity(ies) (TERA), to include clarifying which of the February 2023, May 2023, and/or any other VA TERA memoranda in the file are correct.

3. Obtain a medical opinion on the current nature and likely etiology of the Veteran's diagnosed diabetes mellitus type II.  

After review of the entire record, the examiner should provide a medical opinion on the following:

a) If the Veteran is found to have participated in a TERA, whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's diabetes mellitus type II is related to his participation in a TERA.

b)  If the Veteran is not found to have participated in a TERA, whether it is at least as likely as not that the diabetes mellitus type II is related to incident, injury, or event in active service, to include consideration and discussion of the Veteran's military occupation of light vehicle operator, which included participation in garrison/field training with the use of fuel.

A thorough rationale should be provided for all opinions expressed.  If any requested medical opinion cannot be given, the examiner should state the reason(s) why.

If the VA examiner determines that further examination is necessary in order to render the requested medical opinion, the AOJ should schedule the Veteran for such an examination.

 

 

H. SEESEL

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	N. Nelson

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.