Citation Nr: A25034043
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 230314-330475
DATE: April 11, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an effective date prior to April 4, 2022, for the award of a 70 percent disability rating for the Veteran's service-connected posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) with panic attacks is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to an effective date prior to April 4, 2022, for the award of a total disability rating based on individual unemployability (TDIU) is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran's psychiatric disability manifested in, at worst, occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity prior to April 4, 2022.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 50 percent prior to April 4, 2022, for PTSD with panic attacks have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.126, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran had active service from November 1966 to November 1969. These matters come before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a January 2023 rating decision. These claims have been continuously pursued since the Veteran filed a claim for increase on August 30, 2021.

In August 2022, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued a supplemental claim decision that increased the rating for the Veteran's service-connected PTSD with panic attacks to 70 percent and awarded a TDIU, both effective date April 12, 2022.

In November 2022, the Veteran submitted a request for higher-level review (HLR) of the August 2022 supplemental claim decision. In January 2023, the AOJ issued the HLR decision on appeal, which considered the evidence of record at the time of the prior August 2022 rating decision and granted an effective date for the issues on appeal of April 4, 2022, based on the date on which a private examination was conducted.

The Veteran submitted a timely VA Form 10182 in January 2023 and elected the Direct Review docket. An April 2023 Board decision denied a rating in excess of 50 percent for PTSD prior to April 4, 2022, as well as an earlier effective date for TDIU. The Veteran appealed the denial to the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court). An August 2024 Memorandum Decision vacated the denials in the April 2023 Board decision and remanded them to the Board for further action. 

Because the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the August 2022 decision.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was associated with the claims file during a period of time when additional evidence was not allowed, the Board has not considered it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. § 20.300. Regarding the issue the Board is remanding, any such evidence will be considered by the AOJ on remand. Regarding the issue the Board is deciding, if the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was added to the claims file that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a supplemental claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a supplemental claim are included with this decision.

An effective date prior to April 4, 2022, for the grant of a 70 percent disability rating for the Veteran's service-connected PTSD with panic attacks is denied.

The Veteran contends that a rating in excess of 50 percent for PTSD is warranted prior to April 4, 2022. Following review of the evidence of record, the Board finds that a rating in excess of 50 percent is not warranted.

Generally, the effective date of compensation based on an original claim, a claim reopened after final disallowance, or a claim for increase will be on the date of receipt of the claim or the date entitlement arose, whichever is the later. 38 U.S.C. § 5110(a); 38 C.F.R. § 3.400. The effective date of an award of increased compensation shall be the earliest date as of which it is ascertainable that an increase in disability had occurred, if application is received within one year from such date. 

As the matter has been continuously pursued since the issuance of the October 2021 rating decision, the window for consideration of a higher rating is from up to one year prior to August 30, 2021, the date of the Veteran's initial claim for increase. 38 C.F.R. § 3.400(o)(2).

Disability ratings are determined by evaluating the extent to which a Veteran's service-connected disability adversely affects their ability to function under the ordinary conditions of daily life, including employment, by comparing their symptomatology with the criteria set forth in the Schedule for Rating Disabilities (Rating Schedule). See 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.10. If two ratings are potentially applicable, the higher rating will be assigned if the disability more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating; otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.7. Any reasonable doubt regarding the degree of disability will be resolved in favor of the Veteran. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.3.

In evaluating the severity of a particular disability, it is essential to consider its history. 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.41. However, where an increase in the disability rating, rather than the propriety of the initial rating, is at issue, the present level of disability is of primary importance, and past medical reports should not take precedence over current findings. Francisco v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 55, 58 (1994). Regardless of whether an appeal stems from disagreement with the initial rating assigned following an award of service connection or from disagreement with the rating assigned following a claim for increase, separate ratings can be assigned for separate periods of time based on the facts found. Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505, 509-10 (2007) (citing Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119, 126 (1999)).

The Veteran's PTSD is evaluated under the provisions of 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411. The applicable regulations establish a general rating formula for mental disorders. 38 C.F.R. § 4.130. Ratings are assigned according to the manifestation of particular symptoms. However, the use of the term "such as" in 38 C.F.R. § 4.130 demonstrates that the symptoms after that phrase are not intended to constitute an exhaustive list, but rather are to serve as examples of the type and degree of the symptoms, or their effects, that would justify a particular rating. Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436, 442-3 (2002).

As relevant here, a 50 percent rating is assigned for occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to such symptoms as: flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short- and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships.

A 70 percent evaluation is warranted where there is objective evidence demonstrating occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities, speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately, or effectively; impaired impulse control, such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence; spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work-like setting; and the inability to establish and maintain effective relationships. Id.

A maximum 100 percent evaluation is for application when there is total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; and memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name. Id.

Under the General Formula for Mental Disorders (General Formula), the Board must conduct a "holistic analysis" that considers all associated symptoms, regardless of whether they are listed as criteria. Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 10, 22 (2017); 38 C.F.R. § 4.130. The Board must determine whether unlisted symptoms are similar in severity, frequency, and duration to the listed symptoms associated with specific disability percentages. Then, the Board must determine whether the associated symptoms, both listed and unlisted, caused the level of impairment required for a higher disability rating. Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 114-118 (Fed. Cir. 2013).

Turning to the evidence of record, a January 2020 VA examination found that the Veteran's PTSD manifested in occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity. The Veteran showed symptoms such as a depressed mood, anxiety, panic attacks (weekly or less often), and chronic sleep impairment. Irritable behavior and angry outbursts were also noted, as well as disturbances of motivation and mood and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships. The Veteran was also noted to have one symptom commonly associated with a higher rating-difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a worklike setting. The Veteran reported that he felt stresses but had been working full-time for his employer since 2013. He indicated he planned to put in his notice, but noted he was able to get to work on time, attend consistently, and complete work tasks. The Veteran described a remote history of suicidal ideation but denied suicidal and homicidal ideation at the time of the examination. He noted he was taking medication to address his mood and that it was successful.

July 2020 VA treatment records reflect that the Veteran reported that he was doing ok but had a couple of bumps because his daughter almost died due to a fentanyl overdose and living with her boyfriend in a hotel. A November 2020 VA treatment record shows that the Veteran reported having quit his job due to stress at work three weeks prior. He reported that he had stopped taking his psychiatric medication a month prior. The Veteran was negative for suicidal or homicidal ideation. His speech was normal, he had a cooperative attitude, his thought process was normal, and his concentration, judgment, and memory was intact. 

VA treatment records from February 2021 showed a report of increased stress, and the Veteran reported panic attacks at times. He denied suicidal or homicidal ideation. May 2021 VA treatment records showed denial of suicidal or homicidal ideation. He was appropriately groomed, with normal speech, thought process, judgment, concentration, insight, and memory. 

A September 2021 VA examination found that the Veteran's psychiatric disability manifested in occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity. The Veteran had symptoms of depressed mood, anxiety, panic attacks weekly or less often, chronic sleep impairment, and mild memory loss. The Veteran also showed symptoms of impairment of short and long-term memory, disturbances of motivation and mood, and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships. The Veteran had more severe symptoms associated with a higher rating of difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances including in a work or a worklike setting. Irritable behavior and angry outbursts were again noted. At the time of the September 2021 VA examination, the Veteran reported that he had resigned from his job because he was having too many confrontations with supervisors, coworkers, and customers. He was casually dressed, with adequate personal hygiene, denied suicidal or homicidal ideation, and had normal thought process, insight, and judgment. 

In a September 2021 Request for Employment Information in Connection with Claims for Disability Benefits, the Veteran's prior employer stated that the Veteran had lost no time in the preceding 12-months due to disability, worked 8-hour shifts for a total of 40-hours per week, and voluntarily resigned his position on October 15, 2020, asserting the decision was based upon extreme pain in his bilateral knees and ankles and a high level of anxiety and depression.

The Veteran was seen for a VA mental health visit in January 2022. He reported being stressed out with depression and anxiety. He denied hopelessness and suicidal or homicidal ideation. His appearance was appropriately groomed, he was cooperative with normal speech, thought process, thought content, concentration, memory, judgment, and insight. He was seen again in March 2022 and again denied suicidal or homicidal ideation. His grooming was appropriate and his mental status examination mirrored that of the January 2022 visit.

Based on the findings of an April 4, 2022, private provider, the Veteran was granted a 70 percent rating for PTSD from that date. The April 2022 private examiner found occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, and more severe symptoms such as near continuous panic and depression, suicidal ideation, inability to establish and maintain effective relationships, and neglect of personal hygiene and appearance, in addition to the finding of difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances. The Veteran described two prior suicide attempts, with two hospitalizations in 1970 and 1990. The clinician noted that the Veteran showed him handcuffs that he kept next to the bed in case he experiences suicidal ideation. He stated that out of the blue, he will have intense feelings of wanting to kill himself. The Veteran also stated that he has panic attacks where he cannot breathe and has suicidal thoughts. He also stated that at times he would not bathe or get out of bed for two days. 

The Court indicated that the Board previously failed to address the private psychological report suggesting the Veteran experienced symptoms of suicidal ideation and lapses in personal hygiene prior to April 4, 2022. The Court also noted that previous VA examiners did not discuss evidence of suicidal ideation as early as 2013, referencing an October 2013 treatment record showing fleeting suicidal thoughts and panic attacks. Additionally, the Court noted that the private clinician appeared to indicate that the Veteran's panic attacks include suicidal ideation.

The 2020 examiner discussed the Veteran's history of suicidal ideation but noted it was not currently present, by the Veteran's own report. The 2021 VA examiner did not discuss the remote history of suicidal ideation but similarly noted that the Veteran did not endorse current suicidal ideation. Although neither examiner discussed suicidal ideation in 2013, the Board finds this omission does not render the examinations inadequate, as it still predated the claim period and the evidence contemporaneous to the VA examinations did not establish ongoing suicidal ideation. Notably, the Veteran did report panic attacks to both examiners. However, the Board finds it reasonable to assume the Veteran would have told the examiners that he was experiencing suicidal ideation, as well, if it was occurring in conjunction with his panic attacks at that time. 

The Board acknowledges that the Veteran consistently showed difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances including in a work or a worklike setting. Indeed, the Board is remanding his TDIU claim for referral for extraschedular consideration, as discussed in the remand portion of this decision, below. The Board finds, however, that this symptom, viewed in the context of his entire disability picture, does not establish occupational and social impairment commensurate with a 70 percent schedular rating prior to April 4, 2022. 

The Board has considered the Veteran's report of fleeting suicidal ideation in 2013. However, the Board again notes that this report is temporally not relevant to the current rating period on appeal, and the Veteran's VA treatment and examinations consistently show a lack of suicidal ideation during the portion of the claim period prior to April 4, 2022. 

Regarding irritability and angry outbursts, the Board finds this symptom does not contribute to an overall disability picture that more closely approximates the criteria for a 70 percent rating. Rather, it is more consistent with disturbances of motivation and mood. Notably, although the examiners noted irritability, they did not equate it to impaired impulse control. Furthermore, although the Veteran indicated during the 2021 VA examination that he had engaged in a physical altercation with a coworker, that his anger was increasing, and that he had not worked since that time, this statement is isolated and inconsistent with the other evidence of record, to include the information provided by the Veteran's last employer, to the extent it describes a period of violence. As a result, the report of a physical altercation is afforded minimal probative weight and does not contribute to establishing occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas.

Finally, the Board has also considered whether the report of the April 2022 private provider establishes that the Veteran's symptoms of suicidal ideation and difficulty with hygiene existed prior to the date of that examination. The Board acknowledges that at that examination the Veteran reported that he experiences suicidal ideation with panic attacks and suggested he has suicidal ideation from time to time. The Board notes, however, that the other evidence of record conflicts with his reported suicidal ideation, as he consistently denies suicidal ideation during mental health treatment and on VA examination. Prior to the April 4, 2022, private evaluation, the Veteran made no mention of suicidal ideation accompanying his panic attacks, and, as discussed above, the Board expects suicidal ideation to have been noted in the record if the Veteran had reported it occurred with his weekly panic attacks prior to April 4, 2022. The Veteran denied suicidal ideation during January 2022 and March 2022 VA mental health visits. The Veteran also had appropriate grooming at those times, and none of the competent medical evidence of record relevant to the period on appeal otherwise shows inadequate hygiene prior to the April 4, 2022, private examination. In short, the private examination report, insofar as it purports to establish the Veteran's symptoms prior to April 4, 2022, is inconsistent with the larger body of medical evidence during that period, which does not show suicidal ideation or inadequate hygiene. Greater probative weight is given to the consistent findings throughout the medical evidence of record prior to April 4, 2022, showing the Veteran denying suicidal ideation and presenting with adequate grooming and hygiene. 

Given the above, the Board concludes that the Veteran's symptoms did not cause the level of impairment required for a disability rating of 70 percent or higher prior to April 4, 2022.  The evidence does not establish a specific point between the September 2021 VA examination and the April 2022 examination at which the Veteran's symptoms became more severe, and the Board finds that a staged rating is appropriate for the reasons discussed above. Prior to April 4, 2022, the Veteran's symptoms more closely approximated the symptoms associated with a 50 percent rating and resulted in a level of impairment that most closely approximated the level of impairment associated with a 50 percent rating. As the evidence is persuasively against entitlement to a rating higher than 50 percent prior to April 4, 2022, the benefit of the doubt rule does not apply. The claim for increase is denied.

REASONS FOR REMAND

Entitlement to an effective date prior to April 4, 2022, for the award of a TDIU is remanded.

The Veteran does not meet the schedular criteria for a TDIU prior to April 4, 2022. However, based on review of the record, there was sufficient evidence, prior to issuance of the August 2022 rating decision, to substantiate a reasonable possibility that the Veteran was unemployable due to his service-connected PTSD during that period.  See Ray v. Wilkie, 31 Vet. App. 58, 66 (2019). 

Notably, the Veteran last worked in October 2020, and his employer indicated that his psychiatric disability played a part in his separation from employment. 

In short, referral of the claim to the Director of Compensation Service for extraschedular consideration was warranted, and the AOJ's failure to refer the claim prior to issuing the August 2022 decision is a pre-decisional error that must be corrected on remand.

(Continued on the next page)

?

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Refer the claim of entitlement to a TDIU prior to April 4, 2022, to the Director, Compensation Service, for extraschedular consideration under 38 C.F.R. § 4.16(b).

 

 

L. STEPANICK

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	J. Baker, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.