Citation Nr: A25034673
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 210728-181305
DATE: April 15, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an effective date prior to November 19, 2010, for the award of service connection for psychiatric disorder is denied.

Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 50 percent for unspecified trauma and stressor related disorder, to include unspecified alcohol related disorder (hereinafter, psychiatric disorder) is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to a total disability rating based on individual unemployability due to service-connected disabilities (hereinafter, TDIU) is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran did not file a formal or informal claim for service connection for psychiatric disorder prior to receipt of his informal claim on November 19, 2010.

2. For the entire appeal period, the Veteran's psychiatric disorder was manifested by symptomatology resulting in occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity, without more severe manifestations that more nearly approximate occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas or total occupational and social impairment.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for an effective date prior to November 19, 2010, for the award of service connection for psychiatric disorder have not been met.  38 U.S.C. § 5110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.400.

2. The criteria for an initial rating in excess of 50 percent for psychiatric disorder have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.7, 4.126, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from January 1973 to February 1975. 

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a rating decision issued in August 2020 by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office.

In the July 2021 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Evidence Submission docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the August 2020 rating decision, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or representative with, or within 90 days from receipt of, the VA Form 10182.  38 C.F.R. § 20.303.  If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal and prior to the date the Board received the VA Form 10182, or (2) more than 90 days following the date the Board received the VA Form 10182, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.303 and 20.801.

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

In addition to his initial increased rating claim, the Veteran, through his representative, argues that he is entitled to a TDIU because his service-connected disabilities impact his ability to secure and follow substantially gainful employment.  Pursuant to Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447 (2009), the Board must address entitlement to a TDIU for the entire period of evaluation for an associated increased rating claim, especially where the Veteran has contended that TDIU is due to service-connected disabilities.  To that end, the Board underscores that the associated increased rating claim stems from the award of service connection effective November 19, 2010.

1. Entitlement to an effective date prior to November 19, 2010, for the award of service connection for psychiatric disorder.

The Veteran has appealed with respect to the propriety of the effective date assigned for the award of service connection for his psychiatric disorder.  However, neither he nor his representative have made any specific assertions regarding the merits of such claim.

Generally, except as otherwise provided, the effective date of an evaluation and award of compensation based on an original claim, a claim reopened after final disallowance, or a claim for increase will be the date of receipt of the claim or the date entitlement arose, whichever is later.  38 U.S.C. § 5110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.400.

Prior to March 24, 2015, any communication indicating an intent to apply for a benefit under the laws administered by the VA may be considered an informal claim provided it identifies, but not necessarily with specificity, the benefit sought. 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.151, 3.155.  

In July 2020, the AOJ granted service connection for the Veteran's psychiatric disorder and assigned an initial evaluation of 50 percent effective November 19, 2010, the date the AOJ received the Veteran's VA Form 21-4138, Statement in Support of Claim.

Upon review, the Board finds there is no document of record that can be construed as a formal or informal claim for service connection for a psychiatric disorder that was received prior to the receipt of the November 19, 2010, informal claim.  In this regard, a claim for VA benefits, whether formal or informal, must be in writing and must identify the benefit sought.  38 U.S.C. § 5101; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.1 (p), 3.151, 3.155; see Rodriguez v. West, 189 F.3d 1351 (Fed. Cir. 1999); see also Lalonde v. West, 12 Vet. App. 377 (1999).

Consequently, the Board finds an effective date prior to November 19, 2010, for the award of service connection for psychiatric disorder is not warranted.  38 U.S.C. § 5110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.400.

2. Entitlement to initial rating in excess of 50 percent for psychiatric disorder.

The Veteran contends that a traumatic event that resulted in him being shot by his superior greatly impacted him mentally, and he experiences daily flashbacks and nightmares that cause him to lose sleep and wake up in a panic and cold sweat almost every night.  In addition, the physical residuals of his gunshot wound cause him to experience stabbing pain down his left side throughout the night, waking him up from his sleep throughout the night.  As a result, he would typically only get about four or five hours of interrupted sleep, causing him to feel constantly fatigued and lack energy at work; such contributed to his frequent mistakes and inability to concentrate at work.  The Veteran also reports that he has constant depression, with fleeting thoughts of suicide when his symptoms become too much, and he has also experienced homicidal thoughts towards his attacker over the years.

Disability ratings are determined by applying a schedule of ratings that is based on average impairment of earning capacity.  Separate diagnostic codes identify the various disabilities.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R., Part 4.  Each disability must be viewed in relation to its history and the limitation of activity imposed by the disabling condition should be emphasized.  38 C.F.R. § 4.1.  Examination reports are to be interpreted in light of the whole recorded history, and each disability must be considered from the point of view of the Veteran working or seeking work.  38 C.F.R. § 4.2.  All reasonable doubt will be resolved in the claimant's favor.  38 C.F.R. § 4.3.  Where there is a question as to which of two disability evaluations shall be applied, the higher evaluation is to be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating.  Otherwise, the lower rating is to be assigned.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7.

Separate ratings can be assigned for separate periods based on the facts found - a practice known as "staged" ratings.  See Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119 (1999); see also Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007).  Staged ratings are appropriate whenever the factual findings show distinct periods where the service-connected disability exhibits symptoms that would warrant different ratings.  Id.

The appeal period before the Board begins on November 19, 2010, the effective date of the award of service connection.  Throughout the pendency of the appeal, the Veteran's psychiatric disorder is rated as 50 percent disabling pursuant to Diagnostic Code 9411, which provides that such disability is evaluated under the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders (General Rating Formula).  38 C.F.R. § 4.130.  

In this regard, a 50 percent rating is warranted when there is occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to such symptoms as: flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short- and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships.

A 70 percent rating is warranted when there is occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or work-like setting); and inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.

A 100 percent rating is warranted when there is total occupational and social impairment due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent ability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; and memory loss for names of closest relatives, own occupation, or own name.

The United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit has held that the evaluation under 38 C.F.R. § 4.130 is "symptom-driven," meaning that "symptomatology should be the fact-finder's primary focus when deciding entitlement to a given disability rating" under that regulation.  See Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 116-117 (Fed. Cir. 2013).  The symptoms listed are not exhaustive, but rather "serve as examples of the type and degree of symptoms, or their effects, that would justify a particular rating."  See Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436, 442 (2002).  In the context of determining whether a higher disability evaluation is warranted, the analysis requires considering "not only the presence of certain symptoms, but also that those symptoms have caused occupational and social impairment in most of the referenced areas" - i.e., "the regulation...requires an ultimate factual conclusion as to the Veteran's level of impairment in most areas."  See Vazquez-Claudio, 713 F.3d at 117-118; 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411.

Further, when evaluating a mental disorder, the Board must consider the "frequency, severity, and duration of psychiatric symptoms, the length of remissions, and the Veteran's capacity for adjustment during periods of remission," and must also "assign an evaluation based on all the evidence of record that bears on occupational and social impairment rather than solely on the examiner's assessment of the level of disability at the moment of the examination."  38 C.F.R. § 4.126(a). 

As previously, noted, for the entire appeal period, the Veteran's PTSD with depression is rated as 50 percent disabling.  Therefore, to warrant a higher rating, the evidence must show that such disability resulted in psychiatric symptomatology that more nearly approximates occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas or total occupational and social impairment.

The record shows the Veteran was treated by multiple medical examiners during the pendency of this appeal.  From 2010 to 2020, the Veteran has been treated for chronic PTSD and his symptoms have also manifested into disorders to include recurrent major depressive disorder and moderate alcohol abuse that has been in remission for many years.

Since August 2010, the Veteran has been seeking treatment for his PTSD symptoms at the VA.  In October 2010, a treating physician noted the Veteran was alert, oriented, denied hallucinations or illusions, and denied suicidal or homicidal ideation or intent.  However, the treating physician noted the Veteran was in a depressed mood; however, there was no evidence of disordered thinking.  Also, in an October 2010 psychiatry assessment, the treating physician noted the Veteran has been abstinent from alcohol for the past 35 days but had previously been drinking daily.  After separating from the military, the Veteran stated he worked as a forklift driver but lost his job due to being intoxicated and flipping the forklift.  The Veteran further reported that he continued to drink heavily from the late 1970's until 2010, when he was fired from the same job for a second time.  The Veteran stated he realizes now, amidst health problems and loss of job and past prison time due to a driving under the influence citation (DUI) and hitting a motorcyclist, that he has to look at himself.  

However, in November 2013, a treating physician noted that the Veteran had relapsed about a month prior and was currently drinking about a pint a day.  The physician also noted that the Veteran declined inpatient detoxification and had no history of withdrawal symptoms or withdrawal seizures.  During the examination, the treating physician had also recommended the Veteran continue his psychiatric medications as prescribed.  However, the Veteran denied prominent mood symptoms, psychotic symptoms, or any homicidal or suicidal ideation.  

In July 2016, the Veteran was seen by a private physician who noted the Veteran experienced moderate depression and chronic insomnia.  Further, the examiner noted the Veteran had stopped consuming alcohol for months prior to the examination and had stopped taking the medication Lexapro in September 2016 because it upset his stomach.  Therefore, the examiner recommended the Veteran use the medication Remeron and melatonin to target his depression and insomnia. 

In a January 2017 VA examination, the VA examiner summarized the Veteran's level of occupational and social impairment as due to mild or transient symptoms which decrease work efficiency and the ability to perform occupational tasks only during periods of significant stress, or symptoms controlled by medication.  The Veteran's symptoms were noted as depressed mood, anxiety, and chronic sleep impairment.  The examiner's behavioral observations included that the Veteran appeared calm and was in no apparent acute distress.  Further, his thought processes were linear and goal-directed, he was not exhibiting any symptoms of psychosis, and his thought content was free of suicidal or homicidal ideations or intent.  Relevant family history noted the Veteran is married and has several adult children.  The Veteran's occupational history included being employed in warehousing, a battery company and a pipe fitting company.  

Relevant mental health history included that he currently reports that he has "good and bad days".  The Veteran had reported being seen by private doctors in the community but cannot recall what the current medications are that he takes.  The examiner noted that it appears he has had multiple trials of medications in the past and the most recent ones he stated that he did not take because they upset his stomach.  Although he reported a history of psychiatric care, the examiner noted the Veteran's records were not found on VBMS to support his self-report.  Further, he complained of low energy, poor sleep, some depression, some anxiety, and nightmares.  The Veteran's behavioral history was noted as him receiving four DUIs, with prison time beginning in 1998.  Further, the examiner noted that the Veteran has a long history of alcohol dependency and abuse beginning at age 14.  He also has a family history of substance abuse, and his alcohol abuse lasted for over 40 years; records indicated he was still drinking in 2014, and it was unclear if he currently abstained. 

In January 2018, a VA psychologist noted the Veteran was diagnosed with chronic PTSD.  The examiner also noted that the Veteran had been her patient at the VA Outpatient Clinic since October 2017 and a patient at the VA Outpatient clinic since August 2010.   

The Veteran was afforded an additional VA examination in December 2019.  In regard to the Veteran's specific symptomatology, the VA examiner reported the Veteran had anxiety, suspiciousness, chronic sleep impairment, and mild memory loss.  Here, the VA examiner summarized the Veteran's occupational and social impairment as an occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks, although generally functioning satisfactorily, with normal routine behavior, self-care, and conversation.  During the examination, relevant social and family history included the Veteran reported being married since 1978.  Further, he was a stepfather to two stepsons and had a good relationship with his adult sons and their families.  Further, he reported having a strong family support network, was actively engaged in the church, and enjoyed other's company (i.e. going to movies or beach).  His occupational and educational history included working at a steel plant from 1975 to 2010, and he reported briefly working at a battery store in between that time.  However, the examiner noted the Veteran retired from his job because it became too physically demanding at his age.  Relevant mental health history also noted the Veteran had nightmares once a month that had been re-occurring since 1973.

During the December 2019 examination, the examiner noted the Veteran was a poor historian of his life symptoms for PTSD after 1975, which was possibly due to his recent hospitalization and multiple medical issues impacting his memory.  Thus, the Veteran's wife was asked about what she witnessed starting after 1978.  Per his wife, the Veteran used to experience nightmares every night but now has them once a month.  Further, the Veteran would have trouble going to sleep and staying asleep, would keep the TV on the whole night, and denied knowing if he was watching TV or not.  The Veteran's wife further reported that he would have periods where he would become moody and irritable, telling her he was remembering the time he was shot.  His wife also reported that he would leave and go visit his family without telling her, which would happen on a weekly basis.  The Veteran's wife further reported that if he heard gunshots or fireworks, he would jump, and it would take him an hour to calm down.  Further, she reported that if they had family over and they had fireworks, he would get irritated and would ask them to leave.  Also, when the kids were being loud during events, the Veteran would get antsy and was always looking for an exit.  She also reported that the Veteran did better at other family gatherings where he was sitting down for dinner or church.  To this day, the wife reported that the Veteran had a hard time watching news/TV shows with violence.  She denied any issues at his place of work.  The Veteran's wife also reported that he had been going to the VA for services for the last 10 to 12 years and was reportedly being prescribed the medication Sertraline.

Further, the Veteran denied having a history of DUIs and alcohol dependency, even though his records showed such a history.  Behavioral observations included that the Veteran came to the appointment with a walker and had a euthymic mood and labile affect.  He was dressed casually and was oriented, but he had some difficulty with memory after 1975.  Further, the examiner remarked that the Veteran's alleged traumatic brain injury was recent and not in the records.  His memory issues could be due to a complex medical history, and he was retired and did not have a job.  Further, the examiner noted the Veteran's social impairment could be due to multiple medical health issues, and he did not believe this Veteran should be considered a current imminent or increased risk.

In July 2019, the Veteran sought an examination from a private physician.  During the examination, the Veteran reported that his social isolation had caused stress in his marriage, as his wife would have liked to have been able to mix with friends in social settings.  The Veteran also reported that he stopped consuming alcohol on the fourth of July in 2016 and had three years of sobriety.  Educationally, the Veteran had attended Florida Junior college and obtained the one credit that he was lacking to obtain his high school diploma.  He further took course work in auto mechanics and plumbing.  The private physician concluded that the Veteran's psychiatric symptoms have resulted in occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas.  The private physician found this impairment was due to symptoms such as a history of suicidal ideation and near continuous depression, which affected the Veteran's ability to function independently and appropriately.  He also had impaired impulse control with unprovoked irritability and difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work-like setting, and this had been the case since at least October 2010 to the present.  

After a review of the Veteran's treatment record, the private physician noted that VA treatment notes dated July 2010, December 2010, October 2017, and November 2017 document a history of the Veteran experiencing fleeting thoughts of suicide, with no attempts, as well as irritability when he is around crowds and outbursts of anger.  Thus, the private examiner opined that it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's psychiatric condition has precluded his ability to secure and follow substantially gainful employment.  The rationale was that the Veteran's anger, irritability, difficulty with concentration and attention to relevant task variables, and likely problems dealing with co-workers and supervisors would all militate against the Veteran's capability to return to substantially gainful employment.

In a November 2019 treatment note, the Veteran's symptoms were noted as moody and anxious, his affect was congruent, his interpersonal skills were cooperative, his cognition was fragmented, and his insight was fair.  Also, his thinking was somewhat pre-occupied but was goal-directed overall.  According to the November 2019 treatment note, the Veteran was having ongoing struggles with his chronic PTSD symptoms/anger and poor sleep, and he also reported ongoing sleep difficulties related to nightmares of having been shot.  Also, his energy level and his appetite were poor overall.  However, during this period the Veteran denied suicidal ideation, homicidal ideation, and auditory or visual hallucinations.  Additionally, treatment notes stated the Veteran's cognition is grossly intact, his insight and judgement are fair, and the Veteran's observed mental status appeared to be within normal limits.  As for personal appearance, the treatment notes stated the Veteran's appearance, gait, eye contact, speech, and cognitive content were within normal limits.

In treatment records from July 2020, the Veteran's mood was noted as mildly depressed, and his affect was calm, full ranging, non-labile, and non-irritable.  His thought processes were logical, linear, and goal-directed and without evidence of thought disorder or perceptual disturbances, and there were no loose associations and no expressed delusional content.  Suicidal and homicidal ideations were denied within the past thirty days and there had been no self-injurious behavior.  Further, his judgment and impulse control were adequate.  Cognition was grossly intact in terms of immediate, recent, and remote memory functioning, and attention and concentration during the interview were normal.  Further, there was no suicidal ideation reported.  As for personal appearance, the Veteran had good hygiene, ambulated slowly with a cane, and sat and stood without apparent muscle weakness. 

Additionally, the Veteran provided a lay statement in October 2021 to attest to the effect that his psychological disorder has had on his occupational and social impairments.  Occupationally, the Veteran stated that he was employed as a warehouse worker from May 2003 until his termination in September 2010.  As a result of his psychiatric condition, he began experiencing increased mental fogginess and had difficulty concentrating on work tasks, which caused him to make more frequent mistakes.  The Veteran stated that he was spoken to a few times about his carelessness, but he was too exhausted and distracted on most days to care.

Socially, the Veteran stated he struggled to get along with coworkers, especially supervisors.  He did not trust people, especially authoritative figures, after the in-service incident where his own sergeant shot him.  Further, the Veteran stated he had always believed that this attack was racially motivated, and he struggled to interact with white people in any capacity following this incident.  Further, he felt constantly anxious and combative, and he took every interaction with his white coworkers as an attack.  Thus, he chose to work mainly in isolation and avoided interacting with others because of this.  He further stated he was warned by another supervisor to keep his distance from his workspace to avoid future altercations.  The Veteran stated that he was terminated from his job in September 2010.  While he was not given a specific reason for his termination, he always suspected that it had something to do with his lack of focus on the job and his angry outbursts against authority.  Further, the Veteran stated that he has not worked in any capacity since, and his mental and physical disabilities have progressively worsened since this time.  Socially, he avoids leaving the house because he feels anxious and vulnerable in large groups of people.  Also, he does not trust others, and he avoid any social or family gatherings because his depression suppresses his wish to socialize or interact.

Upon review of the foregoing evidence, the Board finds a rating in excess of 50 percent for the Veteran's psychiatric disorder is not warranted at any time during the appeal period.  Here, the Board affords the VA examiners' findings significant probative value as such were based on psychological evaluations of the Veteran and consideration of his own lay reports of his symptoms in light of the rating criteria.  In particular, the January 2017 VA examiner summarized the Veteran's level of occupational and social impairment as due to mild or transient symptoms which decrease work efficiency and the ability to perform occupational tasks only during periods of significant stress, or symptoms controlled by medication.  Comparatively, the February 2019 examination report was indicative of symptoms only moderate in severity, and the examiner found the Veteran's level of occupational and social impairment was best described as an occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks.  Further, the VA examiner observed the Veteran is generally functioning satisfactorily, with normal routine behavior, self-care, and conversation.  Notably, such impairment aligns with the assignment of 10 percent and 30 percent ratings, respectively, both of which are lower than the currently-assigned 50 percent rating.

Moreover, with respect to the specific types of symptoms associated with a higher rating, the Board notes the evidence, to include the Veteran's own lay statements, reflected suicidal ideation during sporadic periods of stress.  However, the record does not show that suicidal ideation, obsessional rituals, speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant, or near-continuous panic or depression has affected the Veteran's ability to function independently, appropriately, and effectively during the appeal period.  In this regard, the Board recognizes that the Veteran asserts that he has constant depression with fleeting thoughts of suicide when his symptoms become too much to deal with, and he has also experienced homicidal thoughts towards his attacker over the years.  Socially, he avoids leaving the house because he feels anxious and vulnerable in large groups of people.  However, the Veteran's medical records reflect his reports that his symptoms have remained stable and do not reflect the presence of current suicidal ideation during the appeal period.  Additionally, the Veteran's medical records indicate no significant changes in his social impairment.  Likewise, the Board finds the reports of suicidal and homicidal ideation do not rise to the level of severity of symptomatology, in frequency or duration, contemplated by the criteria for a higher disability rating.  In this regard, the Board finds that, although the Veteran reports difficulties with anger and irritability, notably directed at other people, the record shows he has maintained relationships with his wife, his children, and his community throughout the appeal period.  In addition, the Veteran did not report suicidal intent or plan at any time during the pendency of the appeal.

Moreover, the Board acknowledges the private physician's conclusion that the Veteran's psychiatric symptoms have resulted in occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas due to symptoms such as a history of suicidal ideation and near continuous depression, which affected the Veteran's ability to function independently and appropriately.  He also had impaired impulse control with unprovoked irritability and difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work-like setting.  However, such is directly contradicted by the findings from the December 2019 VA examination report, wherein the Veteran reported having a strong family support network, being actively engaged in the church, and enjoying the company of others.  In addition, the evidence do not indicate that he needed assistance functioning independently as a result of his psychiatric symptoms.  Furthermore, the December 2019 VA examiner noted the Veteran retired from his job because it became too physically demanding.  Likewise, the Veteran's wife denied that he had any problems at work due to his psychiatric symptomatology.  Consequently, the Board affords the July 2019 private physician's assessment less probative value than the aforementioned VA examiners' determinations.

Finally, the Board notes the Veteran's October 2021 lay statements appears to describe psychiatric symptoms and resulting functional impairment of a greater severity than that contemplated by the currently-assigned 50 percent rating.  In this regard, the Board notes that reports generated for the purposes of medical treatment may be afforded greater probative value than a veteran's statements made in support of a claim for compensation benefits because there is a strong motive to tell the truth in order to receive proper care at the time. See Federal Rule of Evidence 804(3); Cucuras v. Sec'y of Health and Human Servs., 993 F.2d 1525, 1528 (Fed. Cir. 1993).  In addition, the December 2019 VA examiner noted the Veteran was a poor historian of his life symptoms for PTSD after 1975, which was possibly due to his recent hospitalization and multiple medical issues impacting his memory.  Thus, the Veteran's wife was asked about what she witnessed starting after 1978.  Thus, the Board affords the Veteran's October 2021 lay statement less probative value than the evidence found in the aforementioned treatment records and VA examination reports regarding the severity of his psychiatric symptoms and resulting functional impairment.   

Therefore, in consideration of the totality of the nature, frequency, severity, and duration of the Veteran's psychiatric symptomatology, and with particular attention to both the occupational and social impairment resulting therefrom, the Board finds a rating in excess of 50 percent for psychiatric disorder is not warranted under the General Rating Formula at any time during the appeal period.

The Board has considered whether staged ratings are appropriate for the Veteran's service-connected psychiatric disorder; however, the Board finds that his symptomatology has been stable throughout the period on appeal.  Therefore, the assignment of staged ratings for such disability is not warranted.  Further, neither the Veteran nor his representative have raised any other issues, nor have any other issues been reasonably raised by the record, with regard to the initial rating claim decided herein.  See Doucette v. Shulkin, 28 Vet. App. 366 (2017). 

In reaching such determination, the Board has considered the applicability of the benefit of the doubt doctrine.  However, as the weight of the evidence is against such claim, the benefit of the doubt doctrine is not applicable in such regard and the Veteran's increased rating claim must be denied.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7.

REASONS FOR REMAND

Entitlement to a TDIU.

The Veteran contends that he became too disabled to work and last worked full-time beginning in 2010.  As previously noted, the period on appeal commences on November 19, 2010.

Total disability ratings for compensation may be assigned, where the schedular rating is less than total, when a veteran is unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation as a result of service-connected disabilities, provided that if there is only one such disability, such disability shall be ratable as 60 percent or more, and if there are two or more disabilities, there shall be at least one disability ratable at 40 percent or more and sufficient additional disability to bring the combined rating to 70 percent or more.  38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a). 

Rating boards should submit to the Director of Compensation Service for extra-schedular consideration all cases of veterans who are unemployable by reason of service-connected disabilities but who fail to meet the percentage standards set forth in 38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a). 38 C.F.R. § 4.16(b).  Recently, in Ray v. Wilkie, 31 Vet. App. 58 (2019), the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) held that the initial extra-schedular referral decision under § 4.16(b) should address whether there is "sufficient evidence to substantiate a reasonable possibility that a veteran is unemployable by reason of his or her service-connected disabilities". 

With the result of this decision considered, at no point during the period on appeal does the Veteran meet the schedular criteria for consideration of a TDIU.  38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a).  Specifically, his psychiatric disorder is rated as 50 percent disabling and his scar, residuals of gunshot wound padding injury to the left ninth and tenth rib area (hereinafter, scar) is rated as 10 percent disabling, for a combined total of 60 percent throughout the period on appeal.

Nonetheless, as noted previously, if it is shown that the Veteran is rendered unemployable during the appeal period by reason of service-connected disabilities, the Board may refer the case to the Director of Compensation Service for extra-schedular consideration.  38 C.F.R. § 4.16(b).  The evidence shows the Veteran last performed substantially gainful employment in September 2010, and there is no evidence to dispute the finding that he was not gainfully employed at any point during the pendency of the appeal.

Thus, the crux of the issue is whether there is sufficient evidence to substantiate a reasonable possibility that the Veteran is unemployable by reason of his service-connected disabilities to warrant referral for extra-schedular consideration.  In his TDIU application, and the representative's associated brief, the Veteran argues that both his psychiatric disorder and scar prevent him from securing and following substantially gainful employment.

Again, the Board acknowledges the private physician's finding that the Veteran's history of suicidal ideation and near continuous depression affected his ability to function independently and appropriately and that his impaired impulse control with unprovoked irritability resulted in difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work-like setting.  

With respect to his physical limitations, a January 2011 VA examination noted pain to palpation of the scar and, with deep palpation, shooting pain affecting the ninth intercostal nerve branch locally.  There was also limitation of stretching with the left arm.  The Veteran reported aching pain, pain when laying on his left side or when bent that caused him to be unsteady on his feet and prevented him from climbing stairs or ladders or standing in precarious places.  

In the October 2021 brief, the representative asserted the Veteran's scar resulted in difficulty standing, walking, lifting, bending, and sleep impairment.  The Veteran, in his October 2021 lay statement, indicated that his current symptoms associated with his scar required him to use a walker and cane constantly.  He reportedly could not walk up and down stairs, was unable to bend over, and could not lift more than 15 pounds.  Per the Veteran, such symptoms had significantly worsened over the last couple of years, and he now required the constant aid of his wife at home.  

Given the Veteran's history of employment in positions primarily requiring manual labor, the Board finds the aforementioned is sufficient evidence to substantiate a reasonable possibility that the Veteran is currently unemployable by reason of his service-connected disabilities.  Consequently, referral to the Director for extra-schedular consideration of entitlement to a TDIU pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 4.16(b) is warranted.  As the Board is unable to address such in the first instance, a remand is required on the basis of a regulatory duty.

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Refer the Veteran's claim of entitlement to a TDIU to the Director of Compensation Service for extra-schedular consideration pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 4.16(b).

 

 

M. M. Celli

Acting Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Simmons, Shanita K.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.