Citation Nr: A25034616
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 240209-414919
DATE: April 15, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for a disability manifested by fatigue is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for a disability manifested by loss of cognitive function is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for a left lower extremity neurological disability is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for a right upper extremity neurological disability is denied.

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 50 percent disabling for asthma and sleep apnea is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a digestive tract disorder is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran has had?disability?manifested?by?fatigue, not already contemplated as part of his service-connected respiratory disorder or persistent depressive disorder, at any time during or approximate to the pendency of the claim.

2. The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran has had?disability?manifested?by?loss of cognitive function, not already contemplated as part of his service-connected persistent depressive disorder, at any time during or approximate to the pendency of the claim.

3. The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran has had a left lower extremity neurological disability at any time during or approximate to the pendency of the claim. 

4. The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran has had a right upper extremity neurological disability at any time during or approximate to the pendency of the claim. 

5. During the period on appeal, the Veteran's service-connected respiratory disability manifested with chronic respiratory failure with carbon dioxide retention or cor pulmonale, or; requires tracheostomy.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for service connection for a disability manifested by fatigue, other than a respiratory disorder and persistent depressive disorder, are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

2. The criteria for service connection for a disability manifested by a loss of cognitive function are not met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

3. The criteria for service connection for a left lower extremity neurological disability are not met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

4. The criteria for service connection for a right upper extremity neurological disability are not met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

5. The criteria for a rating in excess of 50 percent for asthma and sleep apnea have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.159, 4.3, 4.97, Diagnostic Code 6847.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from March 2008 to December 2012. 

In the February 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board?of?Veterans' Appeals?(Board) may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the January 2024 Agency?of?Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of service connection for a digestive tract condition, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of that claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Service Connection

Service connection may be granted for disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service.  38?U.S.C. §§?1110, 5107; 38?C.F.R. §?3.303.  The three-element test for service connection requires evidence of: (1)?a current disability; (2)?in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury.  Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166 -67 (Fed. Cir. 2004). 

Fatigue

Loss of Cognitive Function

The Veteran seeks service connection for a disability manifested by fatigue and for a disability manifested by loss of cognitive function, both claimed as due to exposure to solvents during service. 

The question for the Board is whether the Veteran has a current disability that began during service or is at least as likely as not related to an in-service injury, event, or disease. The Board concludes that the Veteran does not have a currently diagnosed disability manifested by fatigue, or a disability manifested by loss of cognitive function, and has not had one at any time during the pendency of the claim or recent to the filing of the claim. See Romanowsky v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 289, 294 (2013); McClain v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 319, 321 (2007).

In his August 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ, the Veteran did not specify the onset of his fatigue or loss of cognitive function, or identify any facilities at which he was treated for either fatigue or for loss of cognitive function. That form also indicated that if the Veteran had been treated by non-VA providers, he should either submit those records or authorize VA to obtain them by submitting a VA Form 21-4142 identifying the provider(s) and dates of treatment. However, review of the record does not show the Veteran ever submitted a VA Form 21-4142 in conjunction with the current claim.

Some VA treatment records dated through June 2022 are associated with the record. However, these do not show a diagnosis of a disability manifested by fatigue or loss of cognitive function. Instead, the VA treatment records reflect that a symptom of fatigue is associated with both his already service-connected persistent depressive disorder and his service-connected sleep apnea. They also do not show reports or evidence of any loss of cognitive function; a May 2018 mental health counseling note reflects that the Veteran's thought process was goal-directed and logical, he was fully oriented, and his memory and concentration were both intact. Similarly, the August 2016 VA Mental Disorders examination shows that the Veteran's depressive disorder is manifested by sleep impairment, and the August 2016 and May 2017 VA Sleep Apnea examination reports show that the Veteran remained fatigued during the daytime. Separate ratings for fatigue and/or cognitive function are thus not warranted as the regulation against pyramiding precludes the Board from awarding a separate rating. 38?C.F.R. §?4.14.  

VA must provide a medical examination or opinion when the following elements are established: 1) competent evidence of a current disability or recurrent or persistent symptom of a disability; 2) evidence establishing that an event, injury, or disease occurred in service; 3) an indication that the claimed condition may be associated with the Veteran's service or a current service-connected disability; and 4) insufficient medical evidence to decide the claim. McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006). Here, there is no evidence of a current diagnosed condition separate from the already service-connected respiratory and mental health diagnoses. Thus, lacking evidence of a current separate diagnosis, the "low" threshold for ordering an examination was not met prior to the rating decision on appeal.  See McLendon, 20 Vet. App. at 81.

While the Veteran believes he has a current diagnosis of a disability manifested by fatigue or a disability manifested by loss of cognitive function, he is not competent (meaning possessing the requisite formal education or training provided to medical professionals) to provide a diagnosis in this case. Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1376-77 (Fed. Cir. 2007). The issue is medically complex, as it requires knowledge of the interaction between multiple organ systems in the body. Consequently, the Board gives more probative weight to the competent medical evidence. Therefore, the appeals for service connection for a disability manifested by fatigue and for a disability manifested by loss of cognitive function must be denied. 

In reaching the conclusions stated above, the Board has considered the applicability of the benefit of the doubt doctrine.  As the evidence persuasively favors one side or the other, the doctrine is not for application.  See Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc); 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

Left Lower Extremity Neurological Disability

Right Upper Extremity Neurological Disability

The Veteran seeks service connection for a left lower extremity neurological disability, claimed as tingling and numbness in his legs and feet, and a right upper extremity neurological disability, both as due to exposure to solvent contamination during service.

The question for the Board is whether the Veteran has a current neurologic disability of the left lower and/or right upper extremity that began during service or is at least as likely as not related to an in-service injury, event, or disease. After review of the record, the Board concludes that the Veteran does not have either a currently diagnosed left lower or right upper extremity neurological disability, and has not had one at any time during the pendency of the claim or recent to the filing of the claim.  Romanowsky, 26 Vet. App. at 294; McClain, 21 Vet. App. at 321.

Again, the Veteran's August 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ did not specify the onset of his fatigue or loss of cognitive function, or identify any facilities at which he was treated for either fatigue or for loss of cognitive function. He also did not submit a VA Form 21-4142 identifying the provider(s) and dates of treatment for the claimed neurologic conditions. While some VA treatment records dated through June 2022 are associated with the record, these do not show a diagnosed left lower and/or right upper extremity neurological disability. Specifically, no reports of tingling or numbness in his left lower extremities, or of right upper extremity symptoms, are noted. Lacking evidence of a current diagnosis, an examination is not warranted. see McLendon, 20 Vet. App. at 81.

While the Veteran believes he has a current diagnosis of left lower and right upper extremity neurological disabilities, he is not competent to provide a diagnosis in this case. The issue is medically complex, as it requires knowledge of the interaction between multiple organ systems in the body. Jandreau, 492 F.3d at 1377. Lacking evidence of a currently diagnosed left lower or right upper extremity neurologic disability, the appeal for service connection for these conditions must be denied.

In reaching the conclusions stated above, the Board has considered the applicability of the benefit of the doubt doctrine.  As the evidence persuasively favors one side or the other, the doctrine is not for application.  See Lynch, supra; 38?U.S.C. §?5107; 38?C.F.R. §?3.102.

Increased Rating

Disability evaluations are determined by the application of the facts presented to VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities (Rating Schedule) at 38 C.F.R. Part 4. The percentage ratings contained in the Rating Schedule represent, as far as can be practicably determined, the average impairment in earning capacity resulting from diseases and injuries incurred or aggravated during military service and the residual conditions in civilian occupations. 38?U.S.C. §?1155; 38?C.F.R. §§?3.321(a), 4.1.??? 

Where the question for consideration is the propriety of the initial evaluation assigned, consideration of the medical evidence since the effective date of the award of service connection and consideration of the appropriateness of a "staged" rating is required. See Fenderson v. West, 12?Vet. App.?119, 125-26 (1999). VA adjudicators must consider whether to assign different ratings at different times during the rating period to compensate the Veteran for times when the disability may have been more severe than at others. The Court since has extended this practice even to established ratings, not just initial ratings. See Hart v. Mansfield, 21?Vet. App.?505, 509-10 (2007).??? 

Entitlement to a rating greater than 50 percent disabling for asthma and sleep apnea.

The Veteran?seeks a higher rating for his service-connected asthma and sleep apnea,?which?is currently rated 50 percent disabling from April 10, 2013, under 38 C.F.R. §?4.97, Diagnostic Code 6847. [The Veteran's respiratory disability was originally rated under Diagnostic Code 6847-6602. Ratings under Diagnostic Codes 6600 to 6817, and 6822 to 6847, will not be combined with each other. A single rating will be assigned under the Diagnostic Code which reflects the predominant disability picture, with elevation to the next higher rating where the severity of the overall disability warrants such elevation. 38 C.F.R. § 4.96.] The Veteran filed his claim for an increased rating in August 2023.

Diagnostic Code 6847 provides for a rating for sleep apnea syndromes and assigns a 50 percent rating for the required use of breathing assistance device such as continuous airway pressure (CPAP) machine. The maximum 100 percent rating requires chronic respiratory failure with carbon dioxide retention or cor pulmonale, or; requires tracheostomy. See 38 C.F.R. 4.97, Diagnostic Code 6847.

Under Diagnostic Code 6602, a 30 percent rating is assigned for FEV-1 of 56- to 70-percent predicted, or FEV-1/FVC of 56 to 70 percent or daily inhalational or oral bronchodilator therapy or inhalational anti-inflammatory medication. A 60 percent rating is assigned for an FEV-1 of 40- to 55-percent predicted, or FEV-1/FVC of 40 to 55 percent, or at least monthly visits to a physician for required care of exacerbations, or intermittent (at least 3 times per year) course of systemic (oral or parenteral) corticosteroids. The maximum 100 percent rating is assigned for bronchial asthma with an FEV-1 of less than 40-percent predicted; or FEV-1/FVC less than 40 percent, or more than 1 attack per week with episodes of respiratory failure, or requires daily use of systemic (oral or parenteral) high dose corticosteroids or immunosuppressive medications. 38 C.F.R. § 4.97.

When evaluating a disability based on pulmonary function tests (PFTs), post-bronchodilator results are used, unless the post-bronchodilator results were poorer than the pre-bronchodilator results. In those cases, the pre-bronchodilator results are used to determine the disability rating. 38 C.F.R. § 4.96 (d)(5). When there is a disparity between the results of different PFTs, so that the level of evaluation would differ depending on which result is used, the test result that the examiner states most accurately reflect the level of disability is used to evaluate for rating purposes. Id. at (d)(6).

In a review of October 2023 private records, the provider found the Veteran's chest radiographs were normal. On PFT, pre-bronchodilator FEV-1 was 98 percent predicted, and pre-bronchodilator FEV-1/FVC was 110 percent predicted.

On October 2023 VA respiratory examination, asthma was noted to be diagnosed in 2010.  The Veteran reported his symptoms had remained the same since onset in 2010, which included wheezing and dyspnea on exertion, and had been given an inhaler in the past, but had none now.  The examiner noted the Veteran's respiratory condition did not require the use of oral or parenteral corticosteroid medications, inhaled medications, oral bronchodilators, antibiotics, or oxygen therapy. The examiner noted that the Veteran had not experienced any asthma attacks with episodes of respiratory failure during the prior 12 months, or had any physician visits for required care of exacerbations. PFT testing results reflected the Veteran's current pulmonary function; pre-bronchodilator FEV-1 was 98 percent predicted, pre-bronchodilator FEV-1/FVC was 110 percent predicted, post-bronchodilator FEV-1 was 93 percent predicted, and post-bronchodilator FEV-1/FVC was 110 percent predicted. The examiner opined that the Veteran did not have multiple respiratory conditions diagnosed. The examiner opined that the Veteran's respiratory condition did not impact his ability to work.

The Veteran's VA treatment records of record through June 2022 reflect that the Veteran has been prescribed a CPAP machine for his sleep apnea, but does not include any episodes of respiratory failure with carbon dioxide retention or cor pulmonale, or a record of the Veteran undergoing a tracheostomy.

Based on review of the record, the Board finds that entitlement to a rating in excess of 50 percent for the Veteran's respiratory disability is not warranted at any point during the period on appeal. 

The Veteran's respiratory disability, classified as asthma and sleep apnea is rated under Diagnostic Code 6847, the criteria for sleep apnea.  A higher 100 percent rating is not warranted under Diagnostic Code 6847, as at no time during the period on appeal did the Veteran's respiratory disability result in chronic respiratory failure with carbon dioxide retention or cor pulmonale, or require a tracheostomy. 

Because the October 2023 VA examiner identified that the Veteran only had a diagnosis of asthma, which is rated under Diagnostic Code 6602, the Board has also considered whether a rating in excess of 50 percent disabling would be warranted under Diagnostic Code 6602. However, at no point during the period on appeal was PFT results of FEV-1 of 40- to 55-percent predicted, or FEV-1/FVC of 40 to 55 percent. Further, the Veteran was not shown to have at least monthly visits to a physician for required care of exacerbations or intermittent courses of systemic corticosteroids. Additionally, a higher 100 percent rating is not warranted because the Veteran's respiratory disability did not manifest in FEV-1 less than 40 percent of predicted value, or; the FEV-1/FVC less than 40 percent, more than one attack per week with episodes or respiratory failure; or require daily use of systemic high dose corticosteroids or immuno-suppressive medications. 

In deciding the Veteran's claim for increase, the Board has considered his lay statements that his service-connected disability is more severe than currently evaluated. He is competent to report symptoms because this requires only personal knowledge as it comes to him through his senses. Layno v. Brown, 6?Vet. App.?465 (1994). He is not, however, competent to identify a specific level of disability of this disorder according to the appropriate Diagnostic Codes. Jandreau, 492 F.3d at 1376-77. Such competent evidence concerning the nature and extent of the Veteran's disabilities has been provided by the qualified personnel who have treated him during the current appeal, and who have rendered pertinent opinions in conjunction with the evaluations. The competent medical findings (as provided in the examination reports and the clinical records) directly address the criteria under which his disability is evaluated. As such, the Board finds these records to be more probative than the Veteran's subjective complaints of increased symptomatology.?? 

Accordingly, a higher rating for asthma and sleep apnea is not warranted, and the appeal must be denied. The Board has considered the doctrine?of?reasonable doubt but has determined that it is inapplicable, because the evidence?of?record persuasively weighs against higher ratings. 38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7. 

REASONS FOR REMAND

Digestive Tract Disorder

The issue of service connection for a digestive tract disorder is remanded to correct duty to assist errors that occurred prior to the January 2024 rating decision; specifically, the Board finds that it cannot make a fully-informed decision as to the nature and etiology of his claimed digestive tract symptoms and that further clarification is necessary.

The Veteran has contended that he has a digestive tract disorder that is due to exposure to solvent contamination during service. At the October 2023 VA stomach and duodenal condition examination, the Veteran reported that he had onset of diarrhea for 1 week in 2012, and that the condition had stayed the same since onset.  The VA examiner opined that the Veteran did not have a diagnosis of any stomach or duodenum conditions.  Further, review of VA treatment records of record dated through June 2022 do not reflect a diagnosis of any digestive tract disorder. 

However, the VA Stomach or Duodenum Conditions Disability Benefits Questionnaire does not contemplate the Veteran's primary symptom, diarrhea; in other words, it is unclear whether the examiner found that the Veteran did not have a stomach or duodenum disability, but would have found that the Veteran had an intestinal conditions disability had a different Disability Benefits Questionnaire been completed. Moreover, the examination report does not address whether the Veteran's diarrhea could constitute a disability in the form of functional impairment of earning capacity. See Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356, 1368 (Fed. Cir. 2018). Thus, it is unclear whether the nature of the Veteran's claimed digestive disorder has been adequately investigated, particularly in the context of his conceded solvent use as part of his military occupational specialty (MOS) duties. See August 2023 VA Memorandum. As it stands, the Board does not find itself sufficiently informed by the pre-decisional record to make a determination in the Veteran's case as to this issue, Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 124 (2007), remand is required. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain an addendum opinion from an appropriate provider, with examination if deemed necessary by the examiner, on the likely etiology of any diagnosed digestive tract disorder. Copies of all pertinent records should be made available to the examiner for review. The examiner is specifically directed to fill out the Intestinal Conditions Disability Benefits Questionnaire, and should answer the following:

(a.) Identify all digestive tract disorders diagnosed since August 2022.

(b.) For each diagnosed digestive tract disorder, is it at least as likely as not have its onset in service, or was otherwise related to an in-service injury, event, or disease during any period of active duty service, to include?the Veteran's report of a 1-week history of diarrhea in December 2012, during service and/or the Veteran's exposure to solvents as a result of his MOS duties. 

(c.)  If no specific digestive tract disorder is diagnosed, the examiner must consider whether the Veteran's symptoms result in functional impairment of earning capacity. For any identified functional impairment based on digestive tract symptoms alone, the examiner must opine whether it is at least as likely as not related to an in-service injury event, or disease, to include?the Veteran's exposure to solvents as a result of his MOS duties.

(Continued on the next page)

?

The examiner should consider and discuss as necessary the Veteran's lay statements regarding onset of digestive tract symptoms during service and having continuing symptomatology ever since.

2. The examiner must explain the rationale for all opinions in detail, citing to supporting clinical data and/or medical literature, as appropriate. If an opinion cannot be provided, the examiner should indicate why.

 

J. Kirby

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Struening, Eric

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.