Citation Nr: A25034898
Decision Date: 04/16/25	Archive Date: 04/16/25

DOCKET NO. 240822-466031
DATE: April 16, 2025

ORDER

Service connection for left lumbar radiculopathy is denied. 

Service connection for right lumbar radiculopathy is denied. 

Service connection for obstructive sleep apnea, including as secondary to the service-connected left knee strain, right knee strain, left hip sprain or total hip joint replacement, right hip strain, pes planus, lumbosacral strain, or left hip scar, is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1.  The evidence does not show a current diagnosis of left lumbar radiculopathy.  

2.  The evidence does not show a current diagnosis of right lumbar radiculopathy.

3.  The evidence shows a current diagnosis of obstructive sleep apnea.

4.  There was no relevant in-service respiratory injury, disease, or event.

5.  The currently diagnosed obstructive sleep apnea was not incurred in service and is not etiologically related to service.

6.  The currently diagnosed obstructive sleep apnea was not otherwise caused or worsened in severity by the service-connected left knee strain, right knee strain, left hip sprain or total hip joint replacement, right hip strain, pes planus, lumbosacral strain, or left hip scar.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1.  The criteria for service connection for left lumbar radiculopathy have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.310.

2.  The criteria for service connection for right lumbar radiculopathy have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.310.

3.  The criteria for service connection for obstructive sleep apnea, including as secondary to the service-connected left knee strain, right knee strain, left hip sprain or total hip joint replacement, right hip strain, pes planus, lumbosacral strain, or left hip scar, have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.310.  

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran, who is the appellant in this case, served on active duty from July 1982 to November 1985.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a December 2023 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).  

In the August 2024 VA Form 10182, the Veteran timely appealed this decision to the Board by requesting the Direct Review docket; therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the December 2023 rating decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the December 2023 AOJ decision cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Service Connection Legal Authority

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active military, naval, or air service.  38 U.S.C. § 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a).  Service connection may be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge, when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).  As a general matter, service connection for a disability requires evidence of: (1) the existence of a current disability; (2) the existence of the disease or injury in service, and; (3) a relationship or nexus between the current disability and any injury or disease during service.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a), (d).

Service connection may be granted for a condition that is caused or aggravated by a service-connected disability.  38 C.F.R. § 3.310.  To prevail on the issue of secondary service connection, the record must show competent (1) evidence of a current disability, (2) evidence of a service-connected disability, and (3) competent nexus evidence establishing a connection between the current disability and the service-connected disability, which relates to either causation or aggravation. See id.; Reiber v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 513, 516-17 (1995).

When there is an approximate balance of evidence regarding the merits of an issue material to the determination of the matter, the Board gives the veteran the benefit of the doubt in resolving the issue.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 781-82 (2021) (en banc).

1.  Service connection for left lumbar radiculopathy is denied.

2.  Service connection for right lumbar radiculopathy is denied.

The Veteran contends that his service-connected lumbosacral strain caused left and right lumbar radiculopathy.  

After a review of the evidence, both lay and medical, the Board finds that the persuasive weight of the evidence shows no current disability of left or right lumbar radiculopathy.  

The Veteran was afforded two VA examinations that addressed radiculopathy.  The first examination was related to the thoracolumbar spine conditions and took place in August 2021.  The VA examiner conducted a straight leg raising test, which will suggest sciatic radiculopathy if there is a positive result.  The results of both the right and left sides were negative, indicating no sciatic radiculopathy.  The examiner further determined the Veteran did not have radicular pain, and there were no other signs or symptoms of radiculopathy.

The Veteran received a second examination in November 2023 related to the claim for service connection for radiculopathy.  Again, the VA examiner conducted the straight leg raising test, and the results for both the left and right sides were negative.  The examiner found that the Veteran does not have any signs or symptoms due to radiculopathy.  The examiner further acknowledged that there were no other neurologic abnormalities or findings related to the thoracolumbar spine condition.  The examiner noted the Veteran's concern about radiculopathy, but stated there is no clinical finding to suggest radiculopathy.  In the subsequent November 2023 medical opinion, the VA examiner determined there was no current left or right lumbar radiculopathy.  

The persuasive weight of the evidence shows no disability of left or right lumbar radiculopathy.  The findings of record are clinical findings and do not support a diagnosis of a radiculopathy or show a functionally impairing disability.  Additionally, the record contains multiple references indicating that the Veteran does not have a current radiculopathy disability, either by diagnosis or functional impairment.  See March 2022 VA Treatment Records ("the patient stated no radicular symptoms in lower or upper extremities"); September 2024 Appellate Brief ("Although the appellant was not diagnosed with bilateral lumbar radiculopathy...").  Because the evidence is persuasively against a finding of a current disability attributable to lumbar radiculopathy, the claims for service connection for lumbar radiculopathy must be denied.

3.  Service connection for obstructive sleep apnea, including as secondary to the service-connected disabilities, is denied.

The Veteran contends that current sleep apnea is secondary to service-connected disabilities, which include left knee strain, left hip sprain or total hip joint replacement, right knee strain, right hip strain, pes planus, lumbosacral strain, and left hip scar.  See August 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim.  

After review of all the lay and medical evidence of record, the Board finds that the persuasive weight of the evidence is against a finding that the sleep apnea was either caused or worsened in severity by the service-connected disabilities.  

In November 2023, the Veteran received a VA examination for sleep apnea.  The VA examiner noted that the Veteran's sleep apnea onset in 2015, and that after a sleep study and diagnosis of obstructive sleep apnea, he was given a CPAP machine.  The Veteran stated that although he uses the CPAP machine, he still has symptoms of awakening and gasping for air and a "feeling of dying."  A November 2023 sleep test shows findings consistent with mild obstructive sleep apnea.      

In the corresponding November 2023 VA medical opinions, the VA examiner opined there was no link between the sleep apnea and the service-connected left knee strain, right knee strain, left hip sprain or total hip joint replacement, right hip strain, pes planus, lumbosacral strain, or left hip scar.  The opinion was that it was less likely than not that the obstructive sleep apnea was proximately due to or the result of the Veteran's service-connected disabilities.  The VA examiner issued separate medical opinions for each of the service-connected disabilities and concluded that obstructive sleep apnea and each of the service-connected disabilities are not medically related.  With respect to all the claimed connections, the VA examiner concluded that sleep apnea is a separate entity and is unrelated to the service-connected left knee strain, right knee strain, left hip sprain or total hip joint replacement, right hip strain, pes planus, lumbosacral strain, and left hip scar.  The VA examiner noted that a thorough review of the medical literature did not demonstrate a causal relationship and a nexus had not been established to any of the service-connected disabilities.  The Board finds the VA examiner's opinions to be highly probative as they are based on an in-person examination, a review of the record, considered the Veteran's contentions, and are supported by pertinent medical literature.          

The November 2023 VA examiner did not specifically provide an opinion on the question of whether the current obstructive sleep apnea was either caused or worsened by the service-connected disabilities.  Nevertheless, no such medical opinion is needed because there is no competent evidence of record suggesting a causal or aggravation link between obstructive sleep apnea and any of the service-connected disabilities.  See Waters v. Shinseki, 601 F.3d 1274, 1277-1278 (Fed. Cir. 2010) (concluding that a veteran's lay belief that his schizophrenia and anti-psychotic drugs to treat it had aggravated his diabetes and hypertension was not of sufficient weight to trigger VA's duty to seek a medical opinion on the issue); Colantonio v. Shinseki, 606 F.3d 1378, 1382 (Fed. Cir. 2010) (recognizing that in some cases lay testimony "falls short" in proving an issue that requires expert medical knowledge).  

Although the Veteran has asserted that sleep apnea was caused or aggravated by service-connected left knee strain, right knee strain, left hip sprain or total hip joint replacement, right hip strain, pes planus, lumbosacral strain, and left hip scar, he is a lay person and, under the specific facts of this case that include no in-service symptom, documented post-service onset of symptoms, and diagnosis of sleep apnea many years after service, does not have the requisite medical training or credentials to be able to render an opinion regarding the cause of the sleep apnea. 

The etiology of the Veteran's sleep apnea is a complex medical etiological question dealing with the origin and progression of the respiratory system.  Sleep apnea is a disorder diagnosed primarily on symptoms, clinical findings, and physiological testing and would require knowledge of the etiology and progression of respiratory disorders, as well as the complex interaction or relationship between the different body systems, i.e., the physical (respiratory) disorder of sleep apnea with the impairments of disabilities to include left knee strain, right knee strain, left hip sprain or total hip joint replacement, right hip strain, pes planus, lumbosacral strain, and left hip scar.  While the Veteran is competent to report some of the respiratory symptoms that he experiences at any time, under the facts of this case, he is not competent to opine on whether there is a link between sleep apnea, symptoms of which were manifested many years after service, and active service or the service-connected left knee strain, right knee strain, left hip sprain or total hip joint replacement, right hip strain, pes planus, lumbosacral strain, and left hip scar (based on secondary causation or aggravation) because such opinions require specific medical knowledge and training.  For these reasons, the Veteran's unsupported lay assertion of nexus to service-connected disabilities is of no probative value.

Because the AOJ also denied the Veteran's service connection claims on a direct basis, the Board has further considered whether the Veteran's sleep apnea could be service connected under that theory.  After a review of all the evidence, lay and medical, the Board finds that the evidence shows no in-service injury, disease, or event relevant to sleep apnea.  The service treatment records, which are complete, show no complaints, symptoms, or relevant respiratory injury or disease, or the onset of sleep apnea or sleep apnea symptoms.   At the October 1985 service medical examination, the nose, chest, and lungs were clinically evaluated as normal.  In addition, on the October 1985 report of medical history, the Veteran checked "no" when asked if he had frequent trouble sleeping, pain or pressure in the chest, and shortness of breath.    

The service treatment records, which are complete, reflect that the Veteran was treated for other injuries and disorders during service, such as a sprained ankle for which he sought treatment; however, the same service treatment records show no complaints, symptoms, findings, or treatment for sleep apnea.  In consideration of the other evidence included in the service treatment records showing complaints and treatment for various disorders, including a sprained ankle, eye injury, vasectomy, lacerated thumb, and possible kidney infection, it is likely that any history of injury, complaints, symptoms, or treatment for sleep apnea would similarly have been mentioned and/or detected during service, that is, any sleep apnea symptoms would have been recorded in the service treatment records had such symptoms occurred during service; as a result, the absence of any in-service complaint, finding, or reference to treatment for sleep apnea or related symptoms is evidence that weighs against finding an in-service injury, disease, or event.  Kahana v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 428, 438 (2011) (stating that VA may use silence in the service treatment records as evidence contradictory to a veteran's assertions if the service treatment records appear to be complete and the injury, disease, or symptoms involved would ordinarily have been recorded had they occurred) (Lance, J., concurring); Buczynski v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 221, 224 (2011) (the absence of a notation in a record may only be considered if it is first shown both that the record is complete and also that the fact would have been recorded had it occurred); see also Fed. R. Evid. 803(7) (indicating that the absence of an entry in a record may be evidence against the existence of a fact if such a fact would ordinarily be recorded).  

Importantly, the Veteran does not assert that his sleep apnea onset during service or that it is a direct result of service.  The evidence of record reflects that the Veteran reported that his sleep apnea onset in 2015.  Together, with no post-service symptoms until 30 years after service, the evidence weighs against a finding of in-service sleep apnea or chronic symptoms during service or continuous symptoms after service.  The evidence of record does not reflect a link between the Veteran's sleep apnea and service.  The weight of the lay and medical evidence of record shows that the sleep apnea symptoms did not begin during service or for years after service.    

In consideration of the foregoing, the Board finds that the persuasive weight of the lay and medical evidence of record is against a finding that sleep apnea was caused by active service or was either caused or worsened by the service-connected left knee strain, right knee strain, left hip sprain or total hip joint replacement, right hip strain, pes planus, lumbosacral strain, and left hip scar; consequently, the appeal must be denied. 

 

J. PARKER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Prairie, N. R.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.