Citation Nr: A25034011
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 210414-152723
DATE: April 11, 2025

ORDER

An initial compensable disability rating for the service-connected right shoulder scars associated with rotator cuff tear with degenerative arthritis is denied.

A compensable disability rating for the service-connected left shoulder scar associated with left shoulder replacement is denied.

A total disability rating based on individual unemployability (TDIU) due to service-connected disabilities is granted.

REMANDED

Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 20 percent for the service-connected right shoulder rotator cuff tear with degenerative arthritis is remanded.

Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 50 percent for the service-connected left shoulder replacement is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The service-connected right shoulder scars associated with rotator cuff tear with degenerative arthritis are not associated with any underlying soft tissue damage, they do not cover area or areas of 144 square inches (929 square centimeters); and the scar(s) are neither painful nor unstable.

2. The service-connected left shoulder scar associated with left shoulder replacement are not associated with any underlying soft tissue damage, they do not cover area or areas of 144 square inches (929 square centimeters); and the scar(s) are neither painful nor unstable.

3. The Veteran completed a Bachelor of Arts in political science and had experience as a customer service manager and local government manager and executive; he was last gainfully employed on May 5, 2017.

4. As of December 8, 2015, the Veteran's service-connected disabilities included left shoulder replacement, rated as 50 percent disabling; right shoulder rotator cuff tear with degenerative arthritis, rated as 20 percent disabling; left shoulder neurological effects, rated as 10 percent disabling; and a left shoulder scar associated with left shoulder replacement, rated as noncompensable.

5. The evidence is at least approximately evenly balanced as to whether the Veteran was unable to maintain substantially gainful employment due to his service-connected disabilities after his last day of gainful employment.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for a compensable disability rating for the service-connected right shoulder scars associated with rotator cuff tear with degenerative arthritis are not met. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.6, 4.7; 4.118, Diagnostic Codes 7801-7805.

2. The criteria for a compensable disability rating for the service-connected left shoulder scar associated with left shoulder replacement are not met. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.6, 4.7; 4.118, Diagnostic Codes 7801-7805.

3. The criteria for assignment of a TDIU have been met.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.340, 3.341, 4.16, 4.19.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from January 1970 to August 1972.

This case is before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a March 26, 2021, Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO) rating decision.  In that decision, the RO denied a disability rating in excess of 50 percent for the service-connected left shoulder replacement, a disability rating in excess of 20 percent for the service-connected right shoulder rotator cuff tear with degenerative arthritis, compensable disability ratings for right and left shoulder scars, and denied a TDIU.

On April 14, 2021, VA received the Veteran's VA Form 10182 Decision Review Request: Notice of Disagreement (NOD).  The Veteran selected the Hearing docket.

On November 6, 2024, the Veteran testified at a virtual hearing before the undersigned Veterans Law Judge (VLJ).  A transcript of that testimony is of record.

Therefore, the Board may consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 26, 2021, decision on appeal, additional evidence submitted on the date of the Board hearing (including testimony), and additional evidence submitted within 90 days of the hearing.  38 C.F.R. § 20.302.

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider regarding claim(s) that have been denied by this decision in whole or in part, he may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim[s], considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

Because the Board is remanding the claims for increased ratings for the service-connected right shoulder rotator cuff tear with degenerative arthritis, left shoulder replacement and entitlement to SMC under 38 C.F.R. § 1114(l) based on the need for aid and attendance, any evidence that the Board could not consider with respect to the claims will be considered by the RO in the adjudication of the claims on remand.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Procedural History:

By way of history, in a January 2017 rating decision issued in the "legacy" review system, the RO granted service connection for a right rotator cuff tear with degenerative arthritis, assigning a 20 percent disability rating, and increased the disability rating for the service-connected left shoulder replacement from 20 percent to 50 percent.  Both ratings were effective from December 8, 2015.

In December 2017, VA received a new claim for increased rating for the left shoulder replacement, with new and material lay and medical evidence submitted alongside this claim.  In a March 2018 rating decision, the RO granted a 100 percent temporary total rating based on the need for convalescence under 38 C.F.R. § 4.30 from April 6, 2017, to August 3, 2017; granted a 100 percent under 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5051, following left shoulder prostetic joint revision surgery, from August 4, 2017, to September 30, 2018; and reassigned a 50 percent rating from October 1, 2018.

In June 2018, VA received a new claim for increase for the service-connected left shoulder replacement, again with new and material lay and medical evidence submitted alongside the claim.  In a September 2018 rating decision, the RO denied a disability rating in excess of 50 percent for the left shoulder replacement.

In December 2018, VA received a third claim for increase for the service-connected left shoulder replacement, with new and material medical evidence submitted alongside the claim.  Thereafter, on January 16, 2019, VA received a legacy NOD relating to the September 2018 rating decision and a VA Form 21-8940 Veterans Application for Increased Compensation Based on Unemployability.

In a February 2019 rating decision, the RO granted a 100 percent rating under 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5051, following a left shoulder reserve total arthroplasty procedure, from September 12, 2018, to October 31, 2019; and reassigned a 50 percent rating from November 1, 2019.  The RO also noted that a temporary 100 percent disability rating based on the need for convalescence under 38 C.F.R. § 4.30 was incorporated into the 100 percent rating under 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5051 and that a temporary 100 percent rating based on the need for hospitalization under 38 C.F.R. § 4.29 was not warranted.  Notably, the RO did not address the TDIU claim.

In March 2020, the RO issued a Statement of the Case (SOC) in response to the January 2019 NOD; the Veteran did not perfect a legacy appeal with a VA Form 9, substantive appeal to the Board.

Thereafter, the RO realized that the TDIU claim remained unadjudicated.  As such, in an August 2020 rating decision based on special review of the claims file, the RO granted service connection for a right shoulder scar and assigned an initial noncompensable disability rating, effective from January 16, 2019 (the date of receipt of the January 16, 2019, VA Form 21-8940, but denied increased ratings for the service-connected left shoulder replacement and right shoulder rotator cuff tear and denied entitlement to a TDIU.

In October 2020, VA received the Veteran's VA Form 20-0995 Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim as to the August 2020 rating decision.  Thereafter, the RO issued the March 26, 2021, rating decision on appeal.

Although the RO mandated the August 2020 special review based on a failure to specifically address a TDIU in the February 1, 2019 rating decision, a TDIU is also reasonably raised in conjunction with the increased rating claims on appeal.  See Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447 (2009).

Finally, in a post-hearing brief, the Veteran's representative included the issue of entitlement to assignment to SMC based on the need for regular aid and attendance by another person under 38 U.S.C. § 1114(l), though he did not raise any similar contention during the hearing.  Review of the claims file indicates that a claim for SMC under 38 U.S.C. § 1114(l) is pending at the RO level and is based, in large part, on disabilities that were not service-connected at the time of the rating decision on appeal.  Furthermore, as of March 26, 2021, there was no suggestion that the Veteran's then-service-connected disabilities might necessitate aid and attendance by another person.  For example, a February 18, 2021, VA medical record suggested that the Veteran was independent as to activities of daily living, was able to grocery shop, manage his medication, and travel to appointments.  While the Veteran has recently (in November 2024) provided a statement regarding difficulty with toileting and dressing, claimed as due to his right and left shoulder disabilities, these statements clearly pertain to his current functioning and not to the rating period addressed by this decision.  Given the above, an inferred claim for SMC based on the need for regular aid and attendance by another person is not reasonably raised.

Increased Rating

1. Entitlement to an initial compensable disability rating for the service-connected right shoulder scars associated with rotator cuff tear with degenerative arthritis.

2. Entitlement to a compensable disability rating for the service-connected left shoulder scar associated with left shoulder replacement.

Disability ratings are determined by applying the criteria set forth in VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities, which is based on the average impairment of earning capacity.  Individual disabilities are assigned separate diagnostic codes.  See 38 U.S.C. §1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1.  Where there is a question as to which of two evaluations shall be applied, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria for that rating.  Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.7.  Any reasonable doubt regarding a degree of disability will be resolved in favor of the veteran.  38 C.F.R. § 4.3.  When the evidence is in relative equipoise, the veteran is accorded the benefit of the doubt.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b).

When an appeal arises from the initially assigned disability rating, consideration must be given as to whether staged ratings should be assigned to reflect entitlement to a higher rating at any point during the pendency of the claim.  Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119 (1999).  Moreover, staged ratings are appropriate in any increased-rating claim in which distinct time periods with different ratable symptoms or differing levels of severity can be identified.  Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007).

The Veteran's service-connected right and left shoulder are both rated under 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 7802.

Scars not of the head, face, or neck are rated under 38 C.F.R. § 4.118, Diagnostic Codes 7801-7805.

Diagnostic Code 7801 states that scars not of the head, face, or neck that are associated with underlying soft tissue damage, in an area or areas of at least 6 square inches (39 square centimeters) but less than 12 square inches (77 square centimeters) will be assigned a 10 percent rating.

Diagnostic Code 7802 states that scars not of the head, face, or neck that are not associated with underlying soft tissue damage, in an area or areas of 144 square inches (929 square centimeters) or greater will warrant a 10 percent rating.

Diagnostic Code 7804 pertains to unstable or painful scars.  A 10 percent evaluation is assigned for one or two scars that are unstable or painful.  A 20 percent evaluation is assigned for three or four scars that are unstable or painful.  A 30 percent evaluation is assigned for five or more scars that are unstable or painful.  Note (1): an unstable scar is one where, for any reason, there is frequent loss of covering of skin over the scar.  Note (2): If one or more scars are both unstable and painful, 10 percent is added to the evaluation that is based on the total number of unstable or painful scars.  Note (3): Scars evaluated under Diagnostic Codes 7800, 7801, 7802, or 7805 may also receive an evaluation under Diagnostic Code 7804, when applicable.

Diagnostic Code 7805 instructs to evaluate any disabling effect(s) not considered in a rating provided under diagnostic codes 7800-04 under an appropriate diagnostic code.

In this case, the evidence persuasively weighs against assignment of compensable disability ratings for the service-connected right and left shoulder scars.

Specifically, at no time during the rating period have the right and left shoulder scars covered an area of at least 6 square inches (77 square centimeters), to include when considered together, and have not been noted to be painful or unstable.  For example, during a July 2020 VA examination, the left shoulder scar was measured to be 21 centimeters by .5 centimeters and the right shoulder scar was measured to be 1 centimeter by .3 centimeters, for a total area of 10.8 square centimeters.  The Veteran denied that the scars were painful during the examination, and during all other examinations of record.  There is also no evidence that the scars are unstable - or are manifested by frequent loss of covering of skin around the scars.

During the November 2024 Board hearing, the Veteran testified that he experienced numbness in the area of the left shoulder scar.  See Tr. at 18.  However, he is already separately in receipt of a 10 percent disability rating for left shoulder neurologic effects, which are rated under 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8515.  Therefore, assignment of a compensable rating for the scar based on numbness, in consideration of 38 C.F.R. §4.118, Diagnostic Code 7805, would compensate the same symptom - numbness - twice and result in impermissible pyramiding.  38 C.F.R. § 4.14; Lyles v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 107 (2017).  Moreover, to the extent that the Veteran testified that he was unable to clearly differentiate his shoulder and scar symptoms, and there is no reason to doubt his statement in this regard, this statement, standing alone, does not indicate that the Veteran experiences pain from the scars themselves, particularly in light of the medical evidence discussed above.

Given the above, the evidence persuasively weighs against assignment of compensable disability ratings for the right shoulder scars associated with rotator cuff tear with degenerative arthritis and left shoulder scar associated with left shoulder replacement.  Accordingly, compensable disability ratings are not warranted, and the benefit of the doubt doctrine is inapplicable.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (only when the evidence persuasively favors one side or another is the benefit of the doubt doctrine not for application).

TDIU

3. Entitlement to a TDIU due to service-connected disabilities.

A total disability rating may be assigned, when it is determined that the disabled person is unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation as the result of service-connected disabilities.  See 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.340, 3.341, 4.16.

Total disability ratings based on individual unemployability due to service-connected disabilities may be assigned on a schedular basis pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a) where the schedular rating is less than total, when the disabled person is, in the judgment of the rating agency, unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation as a result of service-connected disabilities; provided that, there is one disability ratable at 60 percent or more, or, if more than one disability, at least one disability is ratable at 40 percent or more, and there is sufficient additional disability to bring the combined rating to at least 70 percent.  38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a).  For the purpose of establishing one 60 percent disability, or one 40 percent disability in combination, the following will be considered as one disability: (1) disabilities of one or both upper extremities, or of one or both lower extremities, including the bilateral factor, if applicable; (2) disabilities resulting from common etiology or a single accident; (3) disabilities affecting a single body system, e.g., orthopedic, digestive, respiratory, cardiovascular-renal, neuropsychiatric; (4) multiple injuries incurred in action, or; (5) multiple disabilities incurred as a prisoner of war.  Id. 

Under 38 C.F.R. § 4.16(b), even if the schedular threshold percentage requirements noted above are not met, it is VA's established policy that all veterans who are unable to secure and follow a substantially gainful occupation by reason for service-connected disabilities shall be rated totally disabled.  Therefore, rating boards should submit to the Director, Compensation Service, for extra-schedular consideration all cases of veterans who may be unemployable by reason of service-connected disabilities but who fail to meet the threshold percentage standards set forth in 38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a).

Consideration may be given to a veteran's level of education, special training, and previous work experience in arriving at a conclusion, but not to his age or the impairment caused by nonservice-connected disabilities.  See 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.341, 4.16, 4.19; see also Todd v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 79, 85-86 (2014).  Disabilities that are not service connected cannot serve as a basis for a total disability rating.  38 C.F.R. §§ 3.341, 4.19.

The Court has indicated that the unemployability question, or the Veteran's ability or inability to engage in substantial gainful activity, has to be looked at in a practical manner and that the crux of the matter rests upon whether a particular job is realistically within the capabilities, both physical and mental, of the appellant.  See Moore v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 356 (1991).

Marginal employment shall not be considered substantially gainful employment and generally shall be deemed to exist when a veteran's earned income does not exceed the amount established by the United States Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, as the poverty threshold for one person.  Marginal employment may also be held to exist, on a facts-found basis (includes but is not limited to employment in a protected environment such as a family business or sheltered workshop), when earned annual income exceeds the poverty threshold.  Consideration shall be given in all claims to the nature of the employment and the reason for termination.  38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a).  The central inquiry is "whether the Veteran's service-connected disabilities alone are of sufficient severity to produce unemployability."  Hatlestad v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 524, 529 (1993).

In Faust v. West, 13 Vet. App. 342 (2000), the Court defined "substantially gainful employment" as an occupation that provides an annual income that exceeds the poverty threshold for one person, irrespective of the number of hours or days that the Veteran actually works and without regard to the Veteran's earned annual income.

The phrase "unable to secure and follow a substantially gainful occupation" contains both economic and noneconomic components.  See Ray v. Wilkie, 31 Vet. App. 58, 73 (2019).  The economic component refers to an occupation earning more than marginal income (outside of a protected environment) as determined by the U.S. Department of Commerce as the poverty threshold for one person.  Id.  The noneconomic component requires a determination as to a veteran's ability to secure and follow such employment.  Id.  Attention should be given to the veteran's history, education, skills, and training; whether the veteran has the physical ability (both exertional and nonexertional) to perform the types of activities required by the occupation at issue (e.g., lifting, bending, sitting, standing, walking, climbing, as well as auditory and visual limitations); and whether the veteran has the mental ability to perform the activities required by the occupation at issue (e.g., memory, concentration, ability to adapt to change, handle work place stress, get along with coworkers, and demonstrate reliability and productivity).  Id. 

A TDIU serves an important role in ensuring that Veterans who are unable to work due to their service-connected disabilities are properly compensated.  Where, however, a Veteran's disabilities do not result in lost income or where legally required accommodations permit a Veteran to maintain gainful employment, an award of TDIU does not serve its intended purpose.  Cantrell v. Shulkin, 28 Vet. App. 382 (2017) (Lance, J., concurring) ("Where a claimant's employer is required by law to provide reasonable accommodations pursuant to the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) and those accommodations allow the claimant to engage in a substantially gainful occupation, a TDIU award would, in effect, constitute a second paycheck on the back of the taxpayer.").

The term "protected environment" is not defined in the regulations governing TDIU claims.  Cantrell, 28 Vet. App. at 382.  The applicable VA regulations suggest that a "protected environment" includes "a family business or sheltered workshop."  38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a).  The Veteran did not work in a family business.  See also Arline v. McDonough, 34 Vet. App. 238, 250 (2021).  Factors such as the type and extent of accommodations received, the employer behavior or intent toward the veteran, and whether the veteran's income is significantly above the poverty threshold can be considered.  Id. at 260, 261 (Bartley, J., dissenting in part).

In this case, the Board defines a protected environment to constitute employment where more than reasonable accomodation for the Veteran's disabilities was required in order to secure or maintain such employment.  "Reasonable," as an adjective, means "rational;" or, it is defined as "moderate, fair," per Merriam-Webster Dictionary Online, https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/reasonable, Definition 1c.

The applicable regulations place responsibility for the ultimate TDIU determination on the VA, not a medical examiner.  Geib v. Shinseki, 733 F.3d 1350, 1354 (Fed. Cir. 2013). A TDIU is to be assigned based on the judgment of the rating agency.  Floore v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 376, 381 (2013).

The Veteran first met the schedular threshold percentage requirements for consideration of a TDIU under 38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a) as of December 8, 2015.  As of the date, the Veteran's service-connected disabilities included left shoulder replacement, rated as 50 percent disabling; right shoulder rotator cuff tear with degenerative arthritis, rated as 20 percent disabling; left shoulder neurological effects, rated as 10 percent disabling; and a left shoulder scar associated with left shoulder replacement, rated as noncompensable.  The combined disability rating was 70 percent, with a bilateral factor of 6.4.  As of November 2, 2018, the Veteran's service-connected disabilities also included cervical muscle strain associated with left shoulder replacement, rated as 20 percent disabling.  The new combined disability rating was 80 percent.  As of January 16, 2019, the Veteran's service-connected disabilities, also included a right shoulder scar associated with rotator cuff tear with degenerative arthritis, rated as noncompensable.  The combined disability rating remained at 80 percent.  Given that the Veteran has a single service-connected disability rated as at least 50 percent disabling and a combined disability rating of at least 70 percent disabling from December 8, 2015, the schedular threshold percentage thresholds for consideration of a schedular TDIU are satisfied from December 8, 2015.  38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a)(2).

Accordingly, the only remaining question is whether the Veteran's service-connected disabilities preclude substantially gainful employment consistent with his education and work history.

The Veteran's VA Form 21-8940 indicates that he last worked full-time on May 5, 2017.  He reported working as an executive for a local housing authority.  Highest gross earnings per month were $8,916.00 and maximum yearly earnings were $107,000.00.  He completed a bachelor of arts degree from a four-year university, identified as in political science in a November 2024 brief submitted by the Veteran's representative.

In the November 2024 brief, the Veteran's representative further identified work history including work at electronics companies, as a customer sales manager, and in various government jobs, to include as a manager.  Much of this work was sedentary in nature.  However, during the November 2024 Board hearing, the Veteran testified that he once advised by a doctor to leave a job that required him to restrain mentally ill people, stated as due to impairment from the left shoulder.

For purposes of this decision, "sedentary" is defined as "[r]equiring or marked by much sitting <a sedentary desk job>," sedentary employment is a job where the worker primarily sits down.  See WEBSTER'S II NEW COLLEGE DICTIONARY 999 (1999).  However, an October 2020 vocational assessment completed by T.M., M.A., C.R.C., also included a Dictionary of Occupational Titles (DOT) definition of sedentary work as the following:

Work that involves exerting up to 10 pounds of force occasionally (Occasionally: activity or condition exists up to 1/3 of the time) and/or a negligible amount of force frequently (Frequently: activity or condition exists from 1/3 to 2/3 of the time) to lift, carry, push, pull, or otherwise move objects, including the human body. Sedentary work involves sitting most of the time, but may involve walking or standing for brief periods of time.  Jobs are sedentary if walking and standing are required only occasionally and all other sedentary criteria are met.

There is no reason to reject use of the DOT definition of sedentary work provided in the October 2020 vocational assessment, of the definitions of "occasionally" and "frequently" included therein, and as such, it is also adopted for purposes of the present decision.

The October 2020 vocational assessment, which was based on a telephonic interview of the Veteran, indicates that the Veteran reported that his last job as an executive for a local housing authority required him to perform fieldwork, maintain records, and write reports, budgets, and personnel documents.

Regarding the impact of the service-connected left shoulder replacement and right shoulder rotator cuff tear with degenerative arthritis, a November 2016 examiner for the left shoulder suggested that the Veteran would have difficulty performing work overhead or requiring prolonged use of the shoulders.  A February 2018 examiner noted that the Veteran would be unable to lift heavy objects and was or lift his left arm above chest level.  An August 2018 examiner noted that the Veteran would be unable to lift a box or do anything that requires use of both arms.  A July 2020 examiner suggested that the Veteran would be unable to perform occupations requiring strenuous lifting, pushing pulling, and working with his hands above his head; however, the examiner suggested that his ability to perform sedentary work would not be limited.  Next, a March 2021 examiner noted that the Veteran would be unable to lift more than 5 pounds with his left arm or more than 15 pounds with his right arm.  He was unable to raise his arms above his head or perform physical work in general.  The examiner suggested that the Veteran would be able to perform "part time" sedentary work, and tasks such as answering the phone, but that his prior jobs involved physical activity.  Finally, in the October 2020 vocational assessment, T.M. suggested that the Veteran would be unable to use his left, nondominant arm to complete work tasks, and would suffer a decrease in efficiency from performing tasks one-handed (and using his also-impaired dominant right arm).

Regarding the service-connected cervical muscle strain (from January 16, 2019), a January 2019 VA examiner for the cervical spine did not note any functional impairment due to the cervical spine.  Nonetheless, during that examination, the Veteran reported increased stiffness and soreness of his neck "[d]epending on how much I try to use my arm or turned my head."  In a November 2024 statement, the Veteran recalled that he began to experience decreased range of motion of his neck, with symptoms felt most acutely while driving.  In the October 2020 vocational assessment, T.M. suggested that the cervical spine disability would make operating a car "difficult" or keep the neck in a static position for an extended period of time, such as while reviewing paperwork.  T.M. suggested that the Veteran would be able to maintain his neck in a static position for no longer than 30 minutes, resulting in additional time spent off task.

There is no evidence of functional impairment associated with the right or left shoulder scars or left shoulder neurological disability.

After considering all of the evidence of record, including the Veteran's statements and the medical evidence, the evidence is at least in approximate balance as to whether the Veteran's service-connected disabilities, taken together, preclude performance of substantially gainful employment, as of May 6, 2017, the following his last day of full-time employment.  The determination of whether a veteran is unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation due to service-connected disabilities is a factual rather than a medical question and that it is an adjudicative determination properly made by the Board or the RO.  See Geib v. Shinseki, 77F.3d 1350, 1354 (Fed. Cir. 2013).

Specifically, the lay and medical evidence suggests that the Veteran's right and left shoulder and neck disabilities would inhibit carrying of even light weights, such as boxes of papers or office supplies, for even short distances and prevent him from obtaining objects stored above his head - for example on a shelf - without assistance.  Furthermore, as noted by T.M. in the October 2020 vocational opinion, the Veteran's cervical spine disability, as well as his interrelated shoulder disabilities, was cause him to be unable to keep his neck in a static position for extended periods of time, such as while reviewing papers or typing work product on a computer.  Similarly, these disabilities would impair the Veteran's ability to conduct out-of-office field work consistent with his most recent employment due to difficulty with driving.  Finally, the Veteran's left shoulder has required 10 total surgeries, with the most recent occurring in 2018, and as a result, he has spent long periods convalescing during the rating period.  His extensive medical needs in this regard, which would be expected to keep him out of the office for extended periods of time, are also not consistent with maintenance of substantially gainful employment.

In summary, the Veteran last worked full-time on May 5, 2017, and the evidence is at least approximately evenly balanced as to whether the Veteran's service-connected disabilities preclude performance of substantially gainful employment.  Resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, a TDIU is warranted.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 53 (1990).

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 20 percent for the service-connected right shoulder rotator cuff tear with degenerative arthritis.

The Veteran most recently received a VA examination for the service-connected right shoulder rotator cuff tear with degenerative arthritis in March 2021.  Review of this examination report indicates that it was only partially completed, with the examiner failing to complete approximately half of the pertinent disability benefits questionnaire.  For example, no findings were provided for rotator cuff conditions, shoulder instability, dislocation or labral pathology, or surgical procedurals, for which previous VA examinations provided detailed responses, including test results and other observed pathology.

Furthermore, while the examiner suggested that the Veteran did not experience flare-ups at the time of the examination (though during the November 2024 Board hearing, the Veteran suggested that he was not asked about flare-ups at all during the examination), the examination report indicates that he did have increased right shoulder pain "with prolonged use."  However, while the examiner suggested that the Veteran was able to complete 3 repetitions of movement, the examiner failed to provide post-testing measurements or address additional functional loss following repeated use over time.

The above errors render the March 2021 examination inadequate to rate the service-connected right shoulder rotator cuff tear.  This is a pre-decisional duty-to-assist error requiring remand for a new VA examination for the right shoulder.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

2. Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 50 percent for the service-connected left shoulder replacement.

The Veteran has undergone numerous examinations for his left shoulder.  Unfortunately, none of these examinations have been fully sufficient to rate the left shoulder disability.

During examinations performed in November 2016, February 2018, and August 2018, the Veteran reported flare-ups of left shoulder pain but each examiner declined to estimate additional functional loss during flare-ups due to inability to observe the Veteran under those circumstances.  A January 2019 examination was conducted during the period covered by a 100 percent following the revision arthoplasty noted in the "Introduction."  Sharp v. Shulkin, 29?Vet. App.?26 (2017).  A July 2020 examiner failed to note the point at which left shoulder pain began; notably, the March 2021 examiner suggested that there was a 10 degree difference between initial flexion/abduction and the point at which pain began, findings that are replicated throughout the Veteran's VA and private treatment records.  See Mitchell v. Shinseki, 25?Vet. App.?32, 44 (2011).  Finally, the errors of the March 2021 examiner also affect the left shoulder.  For example, although there is no rating available in excess of 50 percent based on limitation of motion of the shoulder of under 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5051 - under which the Veteran is currently rated and for which a 100 percent rating is warranted only for one year following implantation of a prothesis - there is a 70 percent rating available under Diagnostic Code 5202 (humerus, other impairment of) for loss of head of (flail shoulder).  The March 2021 examiner failed to complete the section for humerus impairment, despite the Veteran's well-documented history of repeated dislocations of the left shoulder, which, again, went unacknowledged in the examination report.

Accordingly, remand is also warranted for a new VA examination for the left shoulder to remedy the above-noted pre-decisional duty-to-assist error.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

Finally, the Veteran is also in receipt of service connection for left shoulder neurologic effects, originally suggested to be "possible brachia plexopathy" during a January 1995 VA examination.  Here, the Veteran's repeated claims for increased ratings reasonably include a claim for increase for the associated left shoulder neurological disability.  Failure to address the neurological component of the service-connected left shoulder disability is also a pre-decisional duty-to-assist error requiring remand.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for a VA orthopedic examination to determine the current severity of the service-connected right shoulder rotator cuff tear with degenerative arthritis and left shoulder replacement, to include the associated service-connected left shoulder neurological disability. The claims file, including a copy of this Remand, must be made available to the examiner and the examiner should indicate that the claims file was reviewed in the examination report. A complete rationale for all opinions must be provided.

The examiner should provide a full description of the disability and report all signs and symptoms necessary for evaluating the Veteran's disability under the rating criteria.

In so doing, the examiner must test the Veteran's active motion, passive motion, and pain with weight-bearing and without weight-bearing. If it is not possible to provide a specific measurement without speculation, the examiner must state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training).

In so doing, the examiner must attempt to elicit information regarding the severity, frequency, and duration of any flare-ups, and the degree of functional loss during flare-ups. If it is not possible to provide a specific measurement based on direct observation, the examiner should provide an estimate, if at all possible, of the additional impairment due to flare-ups based on the other evidence of record and the Veteran's statements. 

(Continued on the next page)

?

If it is not possible to provide a specific measurement without speculation, the examiner must state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training).

 

 

L. B. CRYAN

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	D. Small, Attorney Advisor

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.