Citation Nr: A25034568
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 240919-524248
DATE: April 15, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an effective date earlier than May 2, 2023, for the award of service connection for tinnitus, is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for vertigo is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral hearing loss is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. Following a March 2019 rating decision denying the Veteran's claim for service connection for tinnitus, the Veteran did not appeal or seek review of the decision, which became final.

2. May 2, 2023, the date of receipt of the Veteran's intent to file (which was  followed by a timely, complete claim for service connection for tinnitus), is the later of the dates of receipt of the claim or the date entitlement arose.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for an effective date earlier than May 2, 2023, for the award of service connection for tinnitus, have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1131, 5110; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.400, 3.2500.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served in the United States Air Force on active duty from September 1963 to September 1967.

The issues come before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an October 2023 rating decision issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA). 

In May 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, and requested readjudication of the claims for service connection for bilateral hearing loss, tinnitus, and vertigo, most recently addressed in a March 2019 rating decision.  In October 2023, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the supplemental claim decision on appeal, which found that new and relevant evidence had been received and denied the claims based on the evidence of record at the time of that decision.

In the September 19, 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Evidence Submission docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the October 2023 AOJ decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or his representative, with, or within 90 days from receipt of, the VA Form 10182.  38 C.F.R. § 20.303.  If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal and prior to the date the Board received the VA Form 10182, or (2) more than 90 days following the date the Board received the VA Form 10182, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.303, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of service connection for hearing loss and vertigo, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Earlier Effective Date

The Veteran contends that an earlier effective date is warranted for the grant of service connection for tinnitus, as his diagnosis of tinnitus precedes the May 2, 2023 effective date.

Generally, the effective date for the grant of service connection for a disease or injury is the day following separation from active duty or the date entitlement arose if a claim is received within one year after separation from service.  38 U.S.C. § 5110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.400.  Otherwise, the effective date is the date of receipt of claim, or date entitlement arose, whichever is later.  38 C.F.R. § 3.400.  For reopened claims, the effective date for the grant of service connection for a disease or injury is the date of receipt of claim or date entitlement arose, whichever is later.  38 C.F.R. § 3.400(r). 

38 C.F.R. § 3.155(b) provides an important exception to the general rule assigning an effective date.  If VA receives a complete application appropriate to the benefit sought within one year of receipt of an intent to file a claim, VA will consider the complete claim filed as of the date the intent to file a claim was received.  38 C.F.R. § 3.155(b).

For claims within VA's modernized AMA review system, the effective date will be fixed in accordance with the date of receipt of the initial claim or date entitlement arose, whichever is later, if a claimant continuously pursues an issue by timely filing in succession any of the available review options as specified in paragraph 38 C.F.R. § 3.2500(c) within one year of the issuance of the decision.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2500(h).  A claimant may continuously pursue a claim or an issue by timely and properly filing one of the appropriate administrative review options, to include a supplemental claim, a request for HLR, or an appeal to the Board, following notice of a decision on an initial claim or a supplemental claim by the AOJ.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2500(c).

In November 2018, the Veteran submitted a claim for entitlement to service connection for tinnitus.  In a March 2019 rating decision, the AOJ denied the Veteran's tinnitus claim.  Within a year of the March 2019 rating decision, the Veteran did not appeal the AOJ's denial of service connection or pursue available review options.  Accordingly, the March 2019 rating decision became final.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.160(d)(1).

The Veteran filed a VA Form 21-0966, Intent to File, which was received into the record on May 2, 2023.  The Veteran then submitted a VA Form 20-0995, Supplemental Claim Application for service connection for tinnitus in June 2023.  In the October 2023 rating decision on appeal, the AOJ granted the Veteran's claim for service connection for tinnitus, with an effective date of May 2, 2023.  The Veteran appealed the AOJ's decision, challenging the effective date of service connection.

As the Veteran's March 2019 rating decision became final, the Veteran's claim for entitlement to service connection is a claim to reopen for the purposes of assigning an effective date under 38 C.F.R. § 3.400(r).  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.160.  Thus, the effective date for the award of service connection cannot be earlier than May 2, 2023, the date of receipt of the Veteran's intent to file.  

The Board acknowledges that the evidence of record shows the Veteran received a diagnosis of tinnitus in his January 2019 VA examination.  Accordingly, the date entitlement arose for service connection for tinnitus is prior to May 2, 2023, and the effective date for the award of service connection is affixed as May 2, 2023.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.400(r).

The Board recognizes the Veteran's contention that he submitted an earlier application for disability benefits prior to the effective date assigned for his grant of service connection.  However, the March 2019 rating decision which denied the previous claim became final.  Once the decision becomes final, the only basis for challenging the effective date is a motion to revise the decision on the basis of clear and unmistakable error (CUE); the reversal of which would result in an earlier effective date.  38 U.S.C. § 5109A; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.105, 3.160; Rudd v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 296, 299 (2006).

In the present case, the Board finds that the Veteran's claim for an earlier effective date did not contain allegations asserting CUE with specificity.  See Andre v. West, 14 Vet. App. 7, 10 (2000) (per curium), aff'd sub nom., Andre v. Principi, 301 F.3d 1354 (Fed. Cir. 2002). 

The Board empathizes with the Veteran and his request for an earlier effective date.  However, the Board is bound by the applicable law and regulations and is without authority to grant benefits on an equitable basis.  38 U.S.C. §§ 503, 7104(c), 7105, see Office of Personnel Management v. Richmond, 496 U.S. 414, 426 (1990) (holding "no equities, no matter how compelling, can create a right to payment of the United States Treasury which has not been provided for by Congress").

Thus, as the Veteran did not continuously pursue his original November 2018 claim for service connection, the evidence of record is against a finding of an effective date earlier than May 2, 2023, for the grant of service connection for tinnitus, and the claim is denied.  38 C.F.R. §§ 3.400, 3.2500.  As the evidence persuasively weighs against a finding of entitlement to an earlier effective date, the evidence is not in approximate balance, and the benefit of the doubt doctrine does not apply.  See Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

REASONS FOR REMAND

Hearing Loss 

In May 2023, the Veteran submitted correspondence containing citations and abstracts for medical and scientific research noting the effects of exposure to noise and jet fuel on hearing loss.  One study cited in the May 2023 correspondence noted that findings suggest that jet fuel has a toxic effect on the auditory system.

In August 2023, the AOJ provided a medical opinion addressing the Veteran's claimed bilateral hearing loss.  Notably, the examiner stated there is no medical or scientific evidence available that provides any indication of a relationship between the development of the bilateral hearing loss and the indicated toxic exposure risk activity (TERA) of jet fuel exposure.  Here, the Board notes the August 2023 medical opinion did not address the medical evidence provided by the Veteran, and is seemingly based on an inaccurate factual premise.  See Reonal v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 458, 461 (1993).  Accordingly, an addendum VA medical opinion is needed to address the Veteran's claim that his hearing loss is related to in-service toxic exposure.

Vertigo 

The Veteran generally contends that he suffers from vertigo related to his active service, to include exposure jet fuel during service.  See June 2023 Correspondence.

An August 2017 record from Dorminy Medical Center reflects that the Veteran reported dizziness associated nausea that started after he woke up.  The examiner's primary impression was that the Veteran had vertigo.  The Veteran reported that he had vertigo in the past with similar symptoms.  In a January 2020 treatment record from Tift Regional Medical Center, the Veteran reported having a fall related to his dizziness.  In addition, in a February 2020 private audiological evaluation, the Veteran reported symptoms of transient vertigo but denied prolonged episodes of dizziness.  He also reported a history of positional vertigo years ago.  More recently, in a February 2023 private treatment record, the Veteran reported experiencing disequilibrium and dizziness. 

In September 2023, the AOJ provided the Veteran with a VA ear conditions examination.  The Veteran reported a history of symptoms of vertigo with an onset in 2010.  During the clinical interview, the Veteran reported that he had an incident during which he felt like the room was spinning and he was unable to stand up straight.  The Veteran received treatment at a private emergency department.  The Veteran reported that he no longer received treatment for vertigo and that it had been several years since a symptomatic episode.  The examination report indicated that the Veteran was not receiving any current treatment and there was no current diagnosis of a vestibular condition, to include vertigo.  The VA examiner noted the Veteran's examination was normal with no objective findings of vertigo and provided a medical opinion that the Veteran's vertigo was less likely than not incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness.  Additionally, the VA examiner opined that the Veteran's vertigo was less likely than not caused by the Veteran's indicated toxic exposure risk activities (TERA), after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all TERA of the Veteran.

However, in the September 2023 VA medical opinion, under the Evidence Review section, there was an excerpt from a positive medical opinion.  Specifically, the statement indicated that based upon all presented evidence, the Veteran's hearing loss, tinnitus, and vertigo are more likely than not the result of the Veteran's years of military service as a jet aircraft mechanic and that the Veteran should be granted service connection for bilateral hearing loss and bilateral tinnitus with vertigo.  It is unclear where this opinion is from, but it is inconsistent with the negative opinions that were provided.

Given the private treatment records detailed above, which provide a history of symptoms related to vertigo, the Board finds that an additional VA opinion is needed to clarify whether the Veteran has a diagnosis of vertigo.  Accordingly, a remand is warranted to obtain an adequate opinion. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain an addendum opinion from the August 2023 VA examiner regarding the Veteran's bilateral hearing loss, or, if not available, another appropriately qualified VA medical professional.  If the examiner determines that an examination is needed to provide the requested opinion, then such examination should be scheduled.  The claims file should be reviewed in conjunction with the examination.  A copy of this remand should be made available to the examiner.

Following a review of the evidence of record, the examiner must opine as to:

Whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's bilateral hearing loss had its onset during or is otherwise etiologically related to active-duty service.

The examiner must address the Veteran's contention that his diagnosed hearing loss is related to his established in-service exposure to jet fuel.  The examiner must address the medical literature favorable to the Veteran, provided in the Veteran's May 16, 2023 correspondence.

The examiner must provide a comprehensive report including a clearly stated rationale for any opinions offered and conclusions reached.  The examiner must include objective medical findings leading to the conclusions found, and conclusions must not be based solely on the lack of records.  In this regard, the Board emphasizes that the Veteran is competent to report his symptoms and history, and such statements by the Veteran regarding symptomatology and medical history must be specifically acknowledged and considered in formulating any opinions concerning the onset and severity of his disability.  If such reports are rejected by the examiner, a reason for doing so must be provided.

2. Obtain an addendum opinion from the September 2023 VA examiner regarding the Veteran's vertigo, or, if not available, another appropriately qualified VA medical professional.  If the examiner determines that an examination is needed to provide the requested opinion, then such examination should be scheduled.  The claims file should be reviewed in conjunction with the examination.  A copy of this remand should be made available to the examiner.

The examiner should identify any vertigo or disorders related to the Veteran's symptoms of dizziness that were present during the appeal period or within close proximity thereto.  If any previously diagnosed vertigo or disorders related to dizziness are not found, the examiner should address whether they were misdiagnosed or have resolved.

For each diagnosis identified, the examiner should address whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's vertigo had its onset during or is otherwise etiologically related to active-duty service.

The examiner must address the Veteran's contention that his vertigo is related to his established in-service exposure to jet fuel.  

In rendering this opinion, the examiner should address the following private treatment records:

"	An August 2017 record from Dorminy Medical Center which reflects that the Veteran reported dizziness associated with nausea that started after he woke up.  

"	A January 2020 treatment record from Tift Regional Medical Center, where the Veteran reported having a fall related to his dizziness.  

"	A February 2020 private audiological evaluation, where the Veteran reported symptoms of transient vertigo but denied prolonged episodes of dizziness.  

"	A February 2023 private treatment record, where the Veteran reported experiencing disequilibrium and dizziness.

(Continued on the next page)

?

The examiner must provide a comprehensive report including a clearly stated rationale for any opinions offered and conclusions reached.  The examiner must include objective medical findings leading to the conclusions found, and conclusions must not be based solely on the lack of records.  In this regard, the Board emphasizes that the Veteran is competent to report his symptoms and history, and such statements by the Veteran regarding symptomatology and medical history must be specifically acknowledged and considered in formulating any opinions concerning the onset and severity of his disability.  If such reports are rejected by the examiner, a reason for doing so must be provided.

 

 

J. SAIKH

Acting Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	A. V. Bona

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.