Citation Nr: A25034349
Decision Date: 04/14/25	Archive Date: 04/14/25

DOCKET NO. 240524-443466
DATE: April 14, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 10 percent for insomnia disorder is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from August 1978 to August 1981 and from October 1981 to September 1986.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an August 2023 rating decision by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) regional office, which is the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).

The Veteran elected the Board's Direct Review docket.  See May 2024 VA Form 10182.  This restricts the Board's review to the evidence of record at the time of the August 2023 rating decision.  38 C.F.R. ยง 20.301.

In Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447 (2009), the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) held that a claim for a total disability rating based on individual unemployability (TDIU) is part and parcel of an increased rating claim when such is raised by the record. The Veteran reported in a March 2023 statement in support of claim that his "insomnia symptoms have impacted [his] ability to hold a job."  However, he further reported current, long-term employment in a May 2023 VA examination report and in a July 2023 private mental health evaluation.  Thus, a TDIU claim has not been raised, and no action under Rice is necessary.

Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 10 percent for insomnia disorder is remanded.

In a March 2023 statement in support of claim, the Veteran reported that after being diagnosed with tinnitus he began to experience problems with his sleep, noting that it takes him more than 20 minutes to fall asleep, he wakes up earlier than necessary, sleeps less than 6 hours, awakens multiple times through the night, and has poor quality of sleep.  He stated that due to his insomnia he is easily angered, unable to concentrate, and has a hard time remembering things.  He further stated that he has a hard time holding a job and has been written up in the past due to poor performance.  He stated that he forgets the name or job titles of close family members and friends and sometimes cannot bring himself to perform the most basic hygiene tasks, such as showering or bathing.

The Veteran was afforded a VA mental disorders examination in May 2023.  A diagnosis of insomnia disorder was noted, as was occupational and social impairment due to mild or transient symptoms which decrease work efficiency and ability to perform occupational tasks only during periods of significant stress.  The Veteran reported being married for 37 years and reported having a stable marriage.  He further reported being a network engineer for the federal government for 22 years, having fatigue and poor concentration on the job, but "[n]ever [being] written up at work or reprimanded."  Chronic sleep impairment was the only noted symptom.  Nonetheless, the VA examiner stated that the Veteran's insomnia is "directly related to tinnitus loudness as well as psychological factors which include annoyance and depressed mood."  It was further noted that he reported nodding off throughout the day, has slowed productivity, and irritability.

The Board notes that the VA examination report contradicts the Veteran's March 2023 lay statement that he has been written up for poor performance at his work.  Further, the VA examiner did not address the Veteran's March 2023 lay statements regarding problems with concentration, memory, being easily angered, and intermittent inability to bathe or shower.  The Board notes that a medical opinion that fails to consider lay statements is inadequate.  Dalton v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 23, 39 (2007).

In a July 2023 statement in support of claim, the Veteran reported that he forgets names, has to write things down, only sleeps 3 hours per night.

A July 2023 independent mental health evaluation from A.E., a nurse practitioner, notes that, upon review of the Veteran's June 2023 lay statement, he has symptoms of chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss, impairment of short- and long-term memory, disturbance of motivation, and fatigue.  The nurse practitioner concluded that the Veteran should be awarded a 50 percent rating for his insomnia.

The Board notes that this opinion does not discuss the Veteran's March 2023 lay statements regarding being easily angered and intermittent inability to shower or bathe.  As such, it is of limited probative value.

The Board finds the AOJ's reliance on these inadequate opinions constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error and remand is required for an addendum opinion that fully considers the Veteran's lay statements.  See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007).

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Obtain an addendum opinion by an appropriate clinician to determine the current severity of the service-connected insomnia disorder.  The examiner should provide a full description of the disability and report all signs and symptoms necessary for evaluating the Veteran's disability under the rating criteria.  The examiner must attempt to elicit information regarding the severity, frequency, and duration of symptoms.  To the extent possible, the examiner should identify any symptoms and social and occupational impairment due to insomnia disorder alone.  

The need for an in-person examination of the Veteran is left to the discretion of the examiner.

The examiner must address all of the Veteran's lay statements.

 

 

T. V. Casey

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Keeley, Brian

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.1303.