Citation Nr: A25034253
Decision Date: 04/14/25	Archive Date: 04/14/25

DOCKET NO. 241026-486165
DATE: April 14, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent for tinnitus with insomnia is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from June 1995 to October 1998. 

In August 2024, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, and requested readjudication of entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent for tinnitus with insomnia most recently addressed in a July 2024 rating decision. In October 2024, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the supplemental claim decision on appeal, which found that new and relevant evidence had been received and denied the claim based on the evidence of record at the time of that decision.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the decision on appeal.

In the October 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the October 2024 AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent for tinnitus with insomnia, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Evaluation of bilateral tinnitus with insomnia, which is currently 10 percent disabling, is continued

On review, the Board finds that the issue of entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent for tinnitus with insomnia must be remanded to correct a duty to assist error that occurred prior to the October 2024 rating decision on appeal. The AOJ obtained an April 2024 PTSD examination and opinion prior to the October 2024 rating decision on appeal. However, the examination report and opinion are inadequate to decide the claim.

The Veteran asserts that his service-connected tinnitus warrants a higher rating than the 10 percent disability rating presently assigned. He asserts that his tinnitus has gotten louder and because of this he cannot sleep. See March 2024 VA 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim. He asserts that the worsening of his tinnitus has caused severe insomnia and because his worsening tinnitus has aggravated his insomnia beyond normal progression, service connection should be granted for insomnia on a secondary basis and assigned a separate disability rating. See VA 21-4138, Statement in Support of Claim and VA Form 20-0995, Supplemental Claim Application received August 10, 2024.

In April 2024, the Veteran was afforded a review PTSD VA examination. The examiner noted that the Veteran is service connected for PTSD with major depressive disorder, recurrent, with associated alcohol use disorder, moderate, and bilateral tinnitus. In their review of the claims file, the examiner noted that report of a September 2023 VA initial PTSD examination indicates that the Veteran has a diagnosis of PTSD, and subsumed in the diagnosis was the symptom of sleep disturbance. Regarding the Veteran's relevant mental health history, the examiner noted that the Veteran has a tinnitus sound therapy machine that he started one night prior for the first time. The examiner diagnosed insomnia, PTSD, major depressive disorder recurrent episode, and alcohol use disorder. As to insomnia, the examiner commented that the Veteran reported difficulty sleeping and that he gets about 3.5 to 4.5 hours of sleep per night. He reported his tinnitus intensified about 18 months prior and at that time his sleep decreased from about 6 hours per night to about 3.5 to 4.5 hours per night. He reported he is awakened by nightmares or hearing noises, but he is unable to fall back asleep due to the ringing from the tinnitus. The VA examiner also diagnosed major depressive disorder, recurrent episode and commented that during the examination, the Veteran's endorsed symptoms included insomnia. With regards to all mental diagnoses, the examiner summarized the Veteran's level of occupational and social impairment as occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking and/or mood. The examiner stated that due to the overlap in diagnoses, it is not possible to differentiate which impairments are caused by which diagnosis without conjecture. The examiner indicated that for VA rating purposes, chronic sleep impairment is a symptom that applies to the Veteran's diagnoses.

Nevertheless, in an April 2024 medical opinion, the same VA examiner opined that the Veteran's insomnia is at least as likely as not proximately due to or the result of his service-connected tinnitus. The examiner reasoned that on current evaluation, the Veteran endorsed sleep disturbances indicative of a diagnosis of insomnia with increased symptoms related to his tinnitus. The examiner stated that there are indications that he had sleep disturbances in the past, but sleep disturbance was reported to have intensified with intensification of symptoms of tinnitus. Thus, the examiner stated that the Veteran's insomnia is as likely as not due to his service-connected tinnitus.

On review, it appears that Veteran's insomnia has been found to be due to his service-connected tinnitus, as well as a symptom of his service-connected PTSD with major depressive disorder, recurrent, with associated alcohol use disorder, moderate. Indeed, the April 2024 examiner indicated that for VA rating purposes, chronic sleep impairment is a symptom that applies to the Veteran's diagnoses. The April 2024 VA examiner also listed insomnia as a symptom endorsed related to the Veteran's service-connected recurrent major depressive disorder. Finally, the examiner indicated that with regards to all mental diagnoses, which appears to include insomnia, the examiner summarized the Veteran's level of occupational and social impairment as occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking and/or mood. The examiner stated that due to the overlap in diagnoses, it is not possible to differentiate which impairments are caused by which diagnosis without conjecture. 

As it is unclear whether the Veteran has a diagnosis of insomnia that is a separate disorder from his service-connected PTSD with major depressive disorder, recurrent, with associated alcohol use disorder, a remand is necessary to opinion an opinion as to whether his diagnosed insomnia is a separate and distinct disorder from his service-connected PTSD with major depressive disorder, with associated alcohol use disorder. See Barr, 21 Vet. App. at 303; see also McLendon, 20 Vet. App. at 81-83.

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

1. Forward the Veteran's claims file for an opinion with an appropriate VA examiner, to determine whether his insomnia is separate and distinct from his service-connected PTSD with major depressive disorder, recurrent, with associated alcohol use disorder. The claims file and a copy of this remand will be made available to the examiner, who will acknowledge receipt and review of these materials. 

The examiner MUST respond to the following:

(a.) Provide an opinion as to whether the Veteran's diagnosed insomnia is separate and distinct from his service-connected PTSD with major depressive disorder, recurrent, with associated alcohol use disorder.

(b.) If the examiner determines that symptoms of the Veteran's insomnia overlap with symptoms of his service-connected PTSD with major depressive disorder, recurrent, with associated alcohol use disorder, the examiner is asked to determine whether the symptoms can be differentiated. In doing so, the examiner is asked to AVOID a conclusion that an opinion cannot be rendered without mere speculation. Instead, the examiner is asked to provide a fully explained analysis of how the symptoms overlap, and to differentiate them to the extent possible.

All relevant evidence must be fully addressed. Any opinion that does not fully address all relevant evidence and/or is not fully and completely explained, is not adequate. The examiner's attention is drawn to the following:

-	Service connection is in effect for PTSD with major depressive disorder with associated alcohol use disorder and bruxism.

-	Report of July 2019 initial PTSD VA examination indicates chronic sleep impairment is a symptom of unspecified depressive disorder. 

-	Report of April 2020 VA mental disorders examination indicates sleep problems is a symptom of the Veteran's major depressive disorder.

-	Report of a November 2020 VA PTSD examination indicates that that chronic sleep impairment is a symptom of the major depressive disorder and alcohol use disorder.

-	Report of a January 2021 VA mental disorders examination indicates that chronic sleep impairment is a symptom of major depressive disorder and alcohol use disorder.

-	Report of a June 2021 VA PTSD examination indicating that chronic sleep impairment is a symptom of PTSD, major depressive disorder, and alcohol use disorder in sustained remission.

-	Report of a December 2021 VA PTSD examination indicates that chronic sleep impairment is a symptom of the Veteran's PTSD, major depressive disorder, and alcohol use disorder.

-	Report of a September 2023 VA PTSD examination indicates that chronic sleep impairment is a symptom of the Veteran's PTSD.

-	Report of an April 2024 VA PTSD examination includes diagnoses of PTSD, major depressive disorder, alcohol use disorder, and insomnia.  The examiner indicated that chronic sleep impairment is a symptom of such diagnoses. The examiner listed insomnia as a symptom of major depressive disorder. 

-	VA treatment notes document sleep impairment in the context of mental health treatment. 

The examiner must provide a thorough explanation for the requested opinions. If the examiner cannot provide the requested opinions without resorting to speculation, s/he should expressly indicate this and provide supporting rationale as to why the opinions cannot be made without resorting to speculation.

(Continued on the next page)

?

If the examiner determines that a medical examination is necessary to provide an adequate opinion, then a VA examiner should be scheduled  at the direction of the medical examiner.

 

 

M. MILLS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	D. Rogers, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.