Citation Nr: A25034503
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 230907-375448
DATE: April 15, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an increased disability rating of 100 percent for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) from April 7, 2020 is granted, subject to the laws?and?regulations controlling the award of monetary benefits. 

Entitlement to a total disability rating based on individual unemployability (TDIU) due to service-connected PTSD is dismissed as moot. 

FINDINGS OF FACT

1.  From April 7, 2020, the symptoms?and?overall impairment caused by the Veteran's PTSD more nearly approximated total occupational and?social impairment. 

2.  The Veteran is now in receipt of a?100?percent?disability rating?for PTSD?for?the entire appeal period, and this is the only disability for which he is in receipt of service connection.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1.  From April 7, 2020, the criteria for an increased disability rating of 100 percent for PTSD are met. ?38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1-4.10, 4.125, 4.126, 4.130, Diagnostic Code (DC) 9411. 

2.  The issue of entitlement to a TDIU is moot.  38 U.S.C. § 7105;?38 C.F.R. §§ 3.340, 3.341, 4.16. 

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from July 1969 to May 1971, to include service in Vietnam.

These matters come before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a September 2022 rating decision of a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO) that, after the Veteran submitted a Supplemental Claim in August 2022, continued the 50 percent evaluation for PTSD.  While the September 2022 rating?decision did not specifically state whether?new?and?relevant?evidence was received to warrant readjudicating the claim, the Board finds that there was new evidence received after the prior, August 2021 denial of an increased rating for PTSD, specifically VA treatment records relating to PTSD, that tended to prove a matter at issue in the claim and therefore was new and relevant. ? 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501 ("Relevant evidence is information that tends to prove or disprove a matter at issue in a claim").

In September 2023, the Veteran timely appealed the September 2022 rating decision in a Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) (VA Form 10182) and selected a hearing before a Veterans Law Judge (VLJ).  38 C.F.R. § 20.202(b)(2).  The Veteran testified during a virtual Board hearing in April 2025, of which a transcript is not necessary given that the Board is granting the 100 percent disability rating for PTSD that the Veteran's attorney indicated at the Board hearing would satisfy the appeal.  Accordingly, the Board will consider the evidence of record as of the date of the September 2022 rating decision on appeal, evidence submitted at the April 2025 Board hearing, and evidence submitted within 90 days following the hearing.  38 U.S.C. § 7113(a); 38 C.F.R. § 20.302(b).  The Board will not consider evidence added to the record in between the date of the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal and the date of the hearing or added to the record more than 90 days after the date of the hearing.  If evidence was added during any ineligible period, the Board did not consider it.  If the Veteran wishes to have VA consider any evidence that was not considered, he may at any time file a supplemental claim with the AOJ after receiving this decision and the additional evidence will be considered in connection with the supplemental claim.  38 U.S.C. §§ 5104C(a)(1)(B), (b); 5108; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.2501, 20.1105(a).  If filed within one year, this supplemental claim will preserve the date of the claim denied herein as the effective date of the grant of the benefit or benefits sought.  38 U.S.C. § 5104C(a)(2)(B); 38 C.F.R. § 3.2500(h)(1).  

As a final preliminary matter, entitlement to a TDIU has been raised as part and?parcel of the higher disability rating claim for PTSD. ?Phillips?v. McDonough, 37?Vet. App.?394, 400?(2024) ("VA must consider whether a?TDIU award is warranted 'whenever a veteran submits evidence of a medical disability?and?makes a claim for the highest rating possible,?and?additionally submits evidence of unemployability'" (quoting Roberson v. Principi,?251 F.3d 1378, 1384?(Fed. Cir. 2001)). 

Entitlement to an increased disability rating for PTSD 

The Veteran contends that he is entitled to a 100 percent disability rating for his PTSD, or, in the alternative, a 70 percent disability rating for PTSD and entitlement to a TDIU.  The issue of entitlement to a TDIU will be discussed in the next section. 

Disability evaluations are determined by the application of VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities, which is based on average impairment of earning capacity. ?38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. Part 4. Where service connection has already been established?and?an increase in the disability rating is at issue, it is the present level of disability that is of primary importance.  Francisco v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 55, 58?(1994). 

In evaluating a disability, the Board considers the current examination reports in light of the whole recorded history to ensure that the current rating accurately reflects the severity of the condition.  The medical as well as industrial history is to be considered,?and?a full description of the effects of the disability upon ordinary activity is also required. ?38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.10. Where there is a question as to which of two evaluations shall be applied, the higher rating will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating.  Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned. ?38 C.F.R. § 4.7. 

The schedular criteria for rating psychiatric disabilities incorporate the American Psychiatric Association's Diagnostic?and?Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM-5). ?38 C.F.R. §§ 4.125, 4.130.  The Veteran's PTSD is rated 50 percent from September 29, 2014, the date of a claim, under 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, DC 9411, pursuant to the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders.  As discussed further below, the Veteran is?entitled to a uniform initial disability rating of?100?percent from April 7, 2020, the date of a Fully Developed Claim (VA Form 21-526EZ), as he has continuously pursued this claim under the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA) since that date.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.2500(c).  

Under the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders, a 50 percent disability rating is assigned when symptoms such as flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; or difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships cause occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.

A 70 percent disability rating is warranted when there is occupational?and?social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately?and?effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance?and?hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a worklike setting);?and?inability to establish and?maintain effective relationships. 

A 100 percent disability rating is warranted when there is total occupational?and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place;?and?memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name. 

Under the General Rating Formula, the Board must conduct a "holistic analysis" that considers all associated symptoms, regardless of whether they are listed as criteria.  Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 10, 22?(2017); 38 C.F.R. § 4.130.  The Board must determine whether unlisted symptoms are similar in severity, frequency, and?duration to the listed symptoms associated with specific disability percentages.  Then, the Board must determine whether the associated symptoms, both listed?and?unlisted, caused the level of impairment required for a higher disability rating.  Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 114-118?(Fed. Cir. 2013). 

The symptoms under the rating criteria are meant to be examples of symptoms that would warrant the rating, but are not meant to be exhaustive,?and?the Board need not find all or even some of the symptoms to award a specific rating.  On the other hand, if the evidence shows that the Veteran suffers symptoms or effects that cause occupational or social impairment equivalent to what would be caused by the symptoms listed in the diagnostic code, the appropriate equivalent rating will be assigned.  Sellers v. Principi, 372 F.3d 1318, 1326?(Fed. Cir. 2004).  

During a June 2020 VA examination, the Veteran reported that he was married with a daughter from a prior relationship that he met once.  He was retired from working as an upholstery specialist and spent his time painting.  The Veteran endorsed symptoms of depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, chronic sleep impairment, and flattened affect.  There were no problems with concentration or attention during the examination, and his thoughts were logical, organized, and without evidence of thought disorder.  The examiner found that the Veteran experienced occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks, although generally functioning satisfactorily, with normal routine behavior, self-care, and conversation.

During a September 2022 VA examination, the Veteran reported that he had friends in Washington, D.C. and Maryland that he remained in contact with and visited, but he did not have any friends in Missouri as he preferred to be by himself and channel his energy into painting.  He experienced military-related intrusive distressing ideation that occurred frequently often and was accompanied by emotional distress and a strong physiological response.  Nightmares related to stressor-events happened once every two weeks.  For the past 20 years, the Veteran painted throughout the night and went to sleep when his wife woke up because he had hit his wife during nightmares.  The Veteran also endorsed symptoms of avoidance of thoughts, memories, and external reminders, changes in cognition related to the trauma including persistent and exaggerated beliefs about the world, hypervigilance and exaggerated startle response, problems with concentration and poor short-term memory, intermittent depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, flattened affect, disturbances of motivation and mood, marked loss of interest and participation in activities, low motivation, lethargy, excessive guilt, indecision, and feelings of detachment and disconnection from others.  He denied suicidal ideation, intent, or plan.  The examiner found that the Veteran experienced occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.

During his April 2025 Board hearing, the Veteran testified that it was difficult for him to get out of bed, he could not get anything done, and he sometimes went three weeks without bathing.  He had suicidal thoughts twice per week and was unable to focus and concentrate.  The Veteran experienced memory problems, trouble sleeping, obsessive behavior, and anxiety.  Further, he isolated himself and was unable to function socially.  The Veteran additionally indicated that his symptoms were as severe or worse than when he filed his claim and that he sometimes did not disclose his PTSD symptoms to his doctor.

For the following reasons, the symptoms?and?impairment of the Veteran's PTSD more nearly approximated the criteria required for a total 100 percent disability rating from April 7, 2020.

From April 7, 2020, the Veteran endorsed symptoms of avoidance of thoughts, memories, and external reminders, changes in cognition related to the trauma including persistent and exaggerated beliefs about the world, hypervigilance and exaggerated startle response, problems with concentration and poor short-term memory, intermittent depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, flattened affect, disturbances of motivation and mood, marked loss of interest and participation in activities, low motivation, lethargy, excessive guilt, indecision, feelings of detachment and disconnection from others, chronic sleep impairment, suicidal ideation, nightmares, military-related intrusive distressing ideation, obsessive behaviors, and neglect of personal appearance and hygiene.

In addition, the evidence of record shows that, throughout the appeal period, the Veteran experienced total occupational and?social impairment.  In regard to total occupational impairment, the evidence of record shows that the Veteran had not worked as an upholstery specialist since approximately 2003, and his inability to work full-time was due to his PTSD symptoms, to include his lack of motivation and inability to focus and concentrate.  As to total social impairment, the evidence indicates that the Veteran's PTSD symptoms were so debilitating that he had withdrawn from society, stayed in bed for weeks at a time, and neglected his hygiene.

The Board also finds competent and credible the Veteran's testimony during his April 2025 Board hearing that his PTSD symptoms were as severe or worse than when he filed his April 2020 claim and that he sometimes did not disclose his PTSD symptoms to his doctor.  In this regard, it is therefore reasonable to infer that his PTSD symptoms and impairment were of the same significant severity throughout the appeal period as required for a 100 percent disability rating.

Based on the evidence of record, including the lay?and?medical evidence of record, the Veteran's symptoms?and?impairment throughout the appeal period more nearly approximated total occupational?and?social impairment as required for an increased disability rating of 100 percent from April 7, 2020.  Significantly, there is no heightened requirement for a 100 percent rating under the general rating formula for mental disorders; the standard of 38 C.F.R. § 4.7, that the symptoms and impairment need only more nearly approximate the total occupational and?social impairment for this rating, applies.  Del Valle v. Gober, No. 96-1116, 1997 U.S. Vet. App. LEXIS 960 (mem dec) (Oct. 1, 1997) (citing Giusti-Bravo v. United States Veterans Administration, 853 F. Supp. 34 (D.P.R. 1993) (discussing VA's San Juan Memorandum 82-3 which incorrectly advised rating board specialists to use heightened requirements for veterans seeking 100 percent disability ratings for psychiatric disorders); Bethea v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 252, 254 (1992) (single judge decisions may be relied upon for any persuasiveness or reasoning they contain). 

In reaching the above conclusions, the Board is mindful that the symptoms listed in the rating schedule are essentially examples of the type?and?degree of symptoms indicative of the level of impairment required for each such rating,?and?that the Veteran need not demonstrate those exact symptoms to warrant a higher disability rating.  Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436?(2002).  As explained above, the evidence of record shows that the Veteran has manifested sufficient symptoms of the type?and?extent, frequency, or severity to more nearly approximate the total occupational and?social impairment required for an increased disability rating of 100 percent from April 7, 2020. 

For the above reasons, throughout the appeal period, the Veteran's symptoms?and impairment more nearly approximated the total occupational?and?social impairment required for an increased disability rating of 100 percent for PTSD.  An increased disability rating of 100 percent is therefore warranted for the Veteran's PTSD from April 7, 2020.

Entitlement to a TDIU 

As discussed in the introduction, the issue of entitlement to a TDIU was raised as part and parcel of the claim for an increased disability rating for PTSD.

A TDIU may be assigned "where the schedular rating is less than total"?and?the evidence shows that a veteran is precluded, by reason of her service-connected disabilities, from securing?and?following "substantially gainful employment" consistent with her education?and?occupational experience.? 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.340, 3.341, 4.16. 

Although a TDIU is not necessarily moot when a Veteran is receiving a 100 percent rating because TDIU could in certain circumstances assist a veteran in receiving special monthly compensation pursuant to 38 U.S.C. § 1114(s)(1), Buie v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 242, 250 (2011); Bradley v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 280, 294 (2008), in this case, the only disability for which the Veteran is in receipt of service connection is PTSD.  Therefore, as TDIU could not assist the Veteran in obtaining additional compensation, the issue of entitlement to a TDIU is moot, and dismissal of entitlement to a TDIU is warranted.  Sabonis v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 426, 430 (1994). 

 

Jonathan Hager

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	H. Styer, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.