Citation Nr: A25034360
Decision Date: 04/14/25	Archive Date: 04/14/25

DOCKET NO. 230917-376394
DATE: April 14, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 10 percent for a left knee status post anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) tear (left knee disability) is denied.

Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 10 percent for right knee status post ACL tear (right knee disability) is denied.

Entitlement to an initial compensable rating for a traumatic brain injury (TBI) is denied.

Entitlement to an initial compensable rating for posttraumatic headaches (headaches) is denied.

REMANDED

Service connection for a lumbar spine disorder is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran's left knee disability is productive of extension limited to 10 degrees, but not flexion limited to 60 degrees or less, extension limited to 15 degrees or more, instability, or the functional equivalent thereof.

2. The Veteran's right knee disability is productive of painful motion, but not flexion limited to 60 degrees or less, extension limited to 15 degrees or more, instability, or the functional equivalent thereof.  

3. The Veteran's only TBI residual is recurrent headaches for which he is separately service connected.

4. The Veteran's migraine headaches are not productive of characteristic prostrating attacks.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for an initial rating in excess of 10 percent for a left knee disability have not been met.  38?U.S.C. §§?1155, 5107; 38?C.F.R. §§?3.102, 4.3, 4.7, 4.40, 4.45, 4.59, 4.71a, Diagnostic Code (DC) 5261.

2. The criteria for an initial rating in excess of 10 percent for a right knee disability have not been met.  38?U.S.C. §§?1155, 5107; 38?C.F.R. §§?3.102, 4.3, 4.7, 4.40, 4.45, 4.59, 4.71a, DC 5260.

3. The criteria for an initial compensable rating for a TBI have not been met.  38?U.S.C. §§?1155, 5107; 38?C.F.R. §§?3.102, 4.3, 4.7, 4.124a, DC 8045.

4. The criteria for an initial compensable rating for headaches have not been met.  38?U.S.C. §§?1155, 5107(b); 38?C.F.R. §§?3.102, 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.10, 4.124a, DC 8100.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from January 2012 to August 2013, in July 2019, from April 2020 to July 2020, and from January 2021 to July 2022.

The case is on appeal from a May 2023 rating decision in which service connection was granted, and initial ratings were assigned, for the right knee disability, TBI, and headaches.  Therein, entitlement to service connection for lumbosacral strain was also denied.  This case is also on appeal from a July 2023 rating decision in which service connection was granted, and an initial rating was assigned, for the left knee disability.  In September 2023, the Veteran filed a VA Form 10182 to appeal to the Board's Direct Review Docket.  Thus, for each claim, the Board will review the evidence of record at the time of the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision adjudicating the claim was issued.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301.

With regard to service connection for lumbosacral strain, the Board has recharacterized the claim as one of entitlement to service connection for a lumbar spine disorder to ensure that all lumbar spine diagnoses are considered.  See Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1 (2009).

Increased Ratings

Ratings are based on a schedule of reductions in earning capacity from specific injuries or combination of injuries.? The ratings shall be based, as far as practicable, upon the average impairments of earning capacity resulting from such injuries in civil occupations.? 38?U.S.C. §?1155.??Generally, the degrees of disability specified are considered adequate to compensate for considerable loss of working time from exacerbations or illnesses proportionate to the severity of the several grades of disability.? 38?C.F.R. §?4.1.????? 

Where there is a question as to which of two evaluations shall be applied, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating.? Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned.? 38?C.F.R. §?4.7.??When after careful consideration of all procurable and assembled data, a reasonable doubt arises regarding the degree of disability such doubt will be resolved in favor of the claimant.? 38?U.S.C. §?5107(b);?38?C.F.R. §§?3.102, 4.3.????? 

For musculoskeletal disabilities, such as those to the knees, there are additional criteria.  Functional loss may be due to absence of part, or all, of the necessary bones, joints and muscles, or associated structures, or to deformity, adhesions, defective enervation, or other pathology, or it may be due to pain, supported by adequate pathology and evidenced by visible behavior of the claimant undertaking the motion.? Weakness is as important as limitation of motion; a part that becomes painful on use must be regarded as seriously disabled.  38?C.F.R. §§?4.10, 4.40, 4.45.???? 

VA must analyze the evidence of pain, weakened movement, excess fatigability, or incoordination and determine the level of associated functional loss under 38?C.F.R. §?4.40, which requires VA to regard as "seriously disabled" any part of the musculoskeletal system that becomes painful on use.???? 

Although pain may cause a functional loss, "pain itself does not rise to the level of functional loss as contemplated by VA regulations applicable to the musculoskeletal system."? Rather, pain may result in functional loss, but only if it limits the ability "to perform the normal working movements of the body with normal excursion, strength, speed, coordination, or endurance." ?Mitchell v. Shinseki, 25?Vet. App.?32 (2011), quoting 38?C.F.R. §?4.40.???? 

With respect to joints, in particular, the factors of disability reside in reductions of normal excursion of movements in different planes.? Inquiry will be directed to more or less than normal movement, weakened movement, excess fatigability, incoordination, pain on movement, swelling, deformity, or atrophy of disuse.? 38?C.F.R. §?4.45.???? 

Furthermore, the intent of the rating schedule is to recognize painful motion with joint or particular pathology as productive of disability.? Thus, actually painful, unstable, or malaligned joints, due to healed injury, are entitled to at least the minimum compensable rating for the joint.? The joints should be tested for pain on both active and passive motion, in weight-bearing and non-weight-bearing and, if possible, with the range of the opposite undamaged joint.? 38?C.F.R. §?4.59.???? 

When 38?C.F.R. §?4.59 is raised by the claimant or reasonably raised by the record, even in non-arthritis context, the Board should address its applicability.??Burton v. Shinseki, 25?Vet. App.?1, 5 (2011).?? 

1. Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 10 percent for a left knee disability

2. Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 10 percent for a right knee disability

The Veteran claims that is current ratings for his knee disabilities do not reflect the severity of his symptoms.  Specifically, the Veteran in the September 2023 VA Form 10182 stated that his life has been limited because of pain in his left knee and that he has chronic pain and discomfort in the right knee.

The Veteran's right knee disability is currently rated under DC 5260 and the Veteran's left knee disability is currently rated under DC 5261.

DC 5260 provides for a 30 percent rating for flexion limited to 15 degrees, a 20 percent rating for flexion limited to 30 degrees, a 10 percent rating for flexion limited to 45 degrees, and a noncompensable rating for flexion limited to 60 degrees.  38 C.F.R. §?4.71a, DC 5260.

DC 5261 provides for a 50 percent rating for extension limited to 45 degrees, a 40 percent rating for extension limited to 30 degrees, a 30 percent rating for extension limited to 20 degrees, a 20 percent rating for extension limited to 15 degrees, a 10 percent rating for extension limited to 10 degrees, and a noncompensable rating for extension limited to 5 degrees.  38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, DC 5261.

Ratings for knee instability are also available under DC 5257. For recurrent subluxation or instability, a 30 percent rating is warranted following unrepaired or failed repair of complete ligament tear causing persistent instability, and a medical provider prescribing both an assistive device (cane, crutch, walker) and brace for ambulation; a 20 percent rating is warranted for sprain, incomplete ligament tear or repaired ligament tear causing persistent instability and a medical provider prescribing an assistive device or brace, or following unrepaired or failed repair of a complete ligament tear causing persistent instability and a medical provider prescribing a brace or assistive device; and a 10 percent rating is warranted for a sprain, incomplete ligament tear, or complete ligament tear (repaired, unrepaired, or failed repair) causing persistent instability without a prescription for an assistive device or brace for ambulation. 38C.F.R. § 4.71a, DC 5257.

For patellar instability, a 30 percent rating is warranted where there is a diagnosed condition involving the patellofemoral complex with recurrent instability after surgical repair that requires a prescription by a medical provider for a brace and either a cane or a walker; a 20 percent rating is warranted where there is a diagnosed condition involving the patellofemoral complex with recurrent instability after surgical repair that requires a prescription by a medical provider for one of the following: a brace, cane, or walker; a 10 percent rating is warranted where there is a diagnosed condition involving the patellofemoral complex with recurrent instability (with or without history of surgical repair) that does not require a prescription from a medical provider for a brace, cane, or walker. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, DC 5257.

"Persistent" is defined as "continuing or inclined to persist in a course" with "continuing" defined as "constant" and "persist" defined as "to continue to exist." Merriam-Webster's Dictionary (merriam-webster.com/dictionary).

The increased rating period on appeal begins July 2, 2022, the effective date of service connection for both knees, and ends with the issuance of the May 2023 rating decision for the right knee and the issuance of the July 2023 rating decision for the left knee.

VA treatment records show that the Veteran has a history of receiving injections to relieve knee pain.

A March 2021 VA treatment record notes left knee range of motion from 0 degrees to 120 degrees without significant pain.  Mild medial/lateral joint line tenderness was noted.  An October 2021 VA treatment record notes range of motion in the right knee form 0 degrees to 120 degrees without significant pain.  Again, mild medial/lateral joint line tenderness was noted.

A July 2022 VA treatment record notes that the Veteran was still able to run 12 miles per week and participate in CrossFit.  Left knee ACL tear was noted, and the Veteran was planning to undergo surgery to repair the tendon.

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination of his knees in January 2023.  The Veteran noted stiffness, tenderness, loss in range of motion, and pain.  The Veteran reported flare-ups 4-5 times per week lasting for a few hours after walking, lifting, or sitting.  For relief, he rested, took over-the-counter medications, and receive injections for knee pain.  The Veteran also stated that, during a flare-up, he is unable to climb stairs, needs to rest, and cannot stand, and that his knee buckles.

Active and passive range of motion in the right knee was from 0 degrees to 110 degrees, with pain at the end point of range of motion in flexion.  Pain was noted in both active and passive motion which causes the functional impairment noted above.  Active and passive range of motion in the left knee was from 10 degrees to 100 degrees with pain at the end point of range of motion in flexion and extension.  Pain was again noted in active and passive motion, causing the functional impairment noted above.  No further reduction in range of motion was noted upon repetitive testing or expected with repeated use over time or during a flare-up.  Additional functional impairment was noted as interference with sitting and standing, and less movement than normal.  A complete ligament tear was noted bilaterally, which was repaired successfully in the right knee.  No joint instability was noted.  The Veteran did not use any devices to assist with ambulation.

A January 2023 VA treatment record notes that the Veteran's right knee range of motion was from 0 degrees to 140 degrees.  The Veteran was experiencing knee pain, and it was noted that the Veteran might be a good candidate for arthroscopic surgery.  There is no indication that this surgery had occurred prior to the issuance of the May 2023 AOJ decision on appeal.

A February 2023 VA treatment record notes a history of left knee instability after a fall during service.

The Board finds that the January 2023 VA examination combined with the Veteran's treatment reports are adequate to rate the claims as the examination report includes range of motion testing in active and passive motion with testing for pain in weight-bearing and nonweight-bearing.  The examination report also considers the functional impairment with repeated use over time and a flare-up.  The treatment reports also note range of motion findings with pain. See Sharp v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 26 (2017); Correia v. McDonald, 28 Vet. App. 158 (2016).

The Board finds that a rating in excess of 10 percent for either knee based on range of motion is not warranted.  For the right knee, painful range of motion was indicated; however, flexion has consistently been to more than 60 degrees, and extension has been to 0 degrees.  A 10 percent rating is assigned for painful motion.  See Southall-Norman v. McDonald, 28 Vet. App. 346 (2016).  For the left knee, a 10 percent rating is warranted under DC 5261 for extension limited to 10 degrees as shown at the January 2023 examination.  However, a higher rating is not warranted because range of motion testing has consistently shown flexion to at least 60 degrees.  These ratings contemplate the Veteran's reports of pain, stiffness, tenderness, and being unable to climb stairs or stand during a flare-up.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.45.  Notably, the Veteran maintains an active lifestyle and, despite his knee pain, is able to run 12 miles per week and attend CrossFit classes.  Given the range of motion testing, functional impairment, and the Veteran's reported exercise regimen, the Board finds that ratings in excess of 10 percent for right and left knee disabilities based on loss of range of motion are not warranted.

The Board also finds that additional ratings for the right and left knee disabilities are not warranted.  The Veteran does have an unrepaired left knee ACL tear and a repaired right knee ACL tear.  The Veteran reported having flare-ups during which his knee would buckle.  However, there was no instability found in the joint at the January 2023 VA examination.  A February 2023 VA treatment record did note a history of left knee instability but did not state whether symptoms were on-going or the frequency of such symptoms.  Further, despite the February 2023 report of a history of left knee instability, including that the Veteran is able to run 12 miles per week and participate in CrossFit.  The Veteran is competent to report symptoms such as knee buckling or instability.  English v. Wilkie, 30 Vet. App. 347 (2018).  However, given the Veteran's lay reports of his exercise regimen (running and CrossFit), the Board finds that any instability is not continuing or constant per the definition of "persistent" noted above.  Further, the Veteran does not use any assistive devices to aid in ambulation.  Finally, there is no indication in the record that the Veteran has a diagnosed patellofemoral complex condition or patellar instability as defined by 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, DC 5257.  Therefore, the Board finds that a separate rating for right or left knee instability is not warranted.

In the September 2023 VA Form 10182, the Veteran argued that a higher rating is warranted because his knee disabilities have limited his activities and caused pain and discomfort.  However, the Board has considered the more specific descriptions of functional impairment noted in the record.  Further, as explained above, the ratings assigned for the right and left knee disabilities contemplate painful motion.  See Southall-Norman, supra.

The Board also acknowledges the Veteran's complaint of being unable to bend completely and difficulty with stiffness and tightness. However, those symptoms are contemplated in the currently assigned ratings. There is no evidence of ankylosis or the functional equivalent of ankylosis. 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.31, 4.71a, DC 5256.

Finally, the Board notes that a January 2023 VA treatment record indicates that the Veteran might soon undergo right knee surgery.  The record does not indicate that the right knee surgery had yet taken place at the time the AOJ decision on appeal was issued.  When it does, the Veteran may apply for a temporary total or additional ratings.

Thus, as the evidence of record persuasively weighs against the claim, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply, and ratings in excess of?10 percent for right and left knee disabilities are denied.? 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b);?38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough,?21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021). 

3. Entitlement to an initial compensable rating for a TBI

The Veteran claims that his initial noncompensable rating for a TBI does not reflect the severity of his symptoms, which include sensitivity to bright lights, sun, and fluorescent lights.

Under 38?C.F.R. §?4.124a DC 8045, there are three main areas of dysfunction that may result from a TBI and have profound effects on functioning: cognitive (which is common in varying degrees after a traumatic brain injury), emotional/behavioral, and physical.? Each of these areas of dysfunction may require evaluation.? 38?C.F.R. §?4.124a, DC 8045.? 

Cognitive impairment is defined as decreased memory, concentration, attention, and executive functions of the brain.? Executive functions are goal setting, speed of information processing, planning, organizing, prioritizing, self-monitoring, problem solving, judgment, decision making, spontaneity, and flexibility in changing actions when they are not productive.? Not all of these brain functions may be affected in a given individual with cognitive impairment, and some functions may be affected more severely than others.? In a given individual, symptoms may fluctuate in severity from day to day.? VA is to evaluate cognitive impairment under the table titled "Evaluation of Cognitive Impairment and Other Residuals of a Traumatic Brain Injury Not Otherwise Classified."? 

Subjective symptoms may be the only residual of a TBI or may be associated with cognitive impairment or other areas of dysfunction.? Subjective symptoms that are residuals of a TBI, whether or not they are part of cognitive impairment, should be evaluated under the subjective symptoms facet in the table titled "Evaluation of Cognitive Impairment and Other Residuals of a Traumatic Brain Injury Not Otherwise Classified."? However, VA is to separately evaluate any residual with a distinct diagnosis that may be evaluated under another diagnostic code, such as migraine headache, even if that diagnosis is based on subjective symptoms, rather than under the "Evaluation of Cognitive Impairment and Other Residuals of a Traumatic Brain Injury Not Otherwise Classified" table.? 

VA is to evaluate emotional/behavioral dysfunction under 38?C.F.R. §?4.130 (Schedule of ratings-mental disorders) when there is a diagnosis of a mental disorder.? When there is no diagnosis of a mental disorder, evaluate emotional/behavioral symptoms under the criteria in the table titled "Evaluation of Cognitive Impairment and Other Residuals of Traumatic Brain Injury Not Otherwise Classified."? 

VA is to evaluate physical (including neurological) dysfunction based on the following list, under an appropriate diagnostic code: motor and sensory dysfunction, including pain, of the extremities and face; visual impairment; hearing loss and tinnitus; loss of sense of smell and taste; seizures; gait, coordination, and balance problems; speech and other communication difficulties, including aphasia and related disorders, and dysarthria; neurogenic bladder; neurogenic bowel; cranial nerve dysfunctions; autonomic nerve dysfunctions; and endocrine dysfunctions.? 

The preceding list of types of physical dysfunction does not encompass all possible residuals of a TBI.? For residuals not listed in 38?C.F.R. §?4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8045, that are reported on an examination, VA is to evaluate under the most appropriate diagnostic code.? Each condition is to be evaluated separately, as long as the same signs and symptoms are not used to support more than one evaluation and combine under 38?C.F.R. §?4.25 the evaluations for each separately rated condition.? The evaluation assigned based on the "Evaluation of Cognitive Impairment and Other Residuals of a Traumatic Brain Injury Not Otherwise Classified" table will be considered the evaluation for a single condition for purposes of combining with other disability evaluations.? 

DC 8045 instructs that VA should consider the need for special monthly compensation for such problems as loss of use of an extremity, certain sensory impairments, erectile dysfunction, the need for aid and attendance (including for protection from hazards or dangers incident to the daily environment due to cognitive impairment), being housebound, etc.? 

The table titled "Evaluation of Cognitive Impairment and Other Residuals of a Traumatic Brain Injury Not Otherwise Classified" addresses 10 facets of a traumatic brain injury related to cognitive impairment and subjective symptoms.? It provides criteria for levels of impairment for each facet, as appropriate, ranging from 0 to 3, and a 5th level, the highest level of impairment, labeled "total."? Not every facet has every level of severity.? The consciousness facet, for example, does not provide for an impairment level other than "total," since any level of impaired consciousness would be totally disabling.? A 100 percent evaluation is assigned if "total" is the level of evaluation for one or more facets.? If no facet is evaluated as "total," the overall 38 C.F.R. § as follows: 0 = 0 percent; 1 = 10 percent; 2 = 40 percent; and 3 = 70 percent.? For example, a 70 percent evaluation is assigned if 3 is the highest level of evaluation for any facet.? 

The increased rating period on appeal begins July 2, 2022, the effective date of service connection, and ends with the issuance of the May 2023 rating decision.

The Veteran was afforded VA examinations to assess the severity of any TBI residuals in January 2023.  At the TBI examination, the Veteran reported having posttraumatic headaches 2-3 times per week and some sleep disturbance, both of which are relieved with over-the-counter treatments.  No deficits were noted in the 10 facets of TBI impairment-memory, attention, concentration, and executive function; judgment; social interaction; orientation; motor activity; visual spatial orientation; subjective symptoms; neurobehavioral effects; communication; and consciousness.  The only residual noted was headaches.  Though it was noted that the Veteran initially did not remember the incident which led to his TBI, his memory later returned, and no current memory deficit was noted.  The Veteran was also afforded a posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) examination; however, no diagnosable acquired psychiatric disorder was present.  The Veteran noted getting 5-6 hours of sleep per night and using coping strategies like reading or working out to help fall asleep.  The Veteran denied anxiety, depression, irritability, problems with focus and concentration, intrusive thoughts, avoidance behaviors, negative changes in mood and cognition, and hyperarousal.  No diagnosed mental health disorder was noted.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.130.

The Board finds that a compensable rating is not warranted for the Veteran's TBI under DC 8045.  The Veteran did not have deficits in any of the facets of TBI impairment.  Rather, the only residual noted was headache, for which the Veteran is separately service connected.  The Veteran has stated that he experiences sensitivity to bright lights, sun, and fluorescent lights.  However, this is contemplated in the symptoms noted discussed in assigning a rating for the Veteran's headaches.  The Veteran did note having some sleep disturbance; however, per the examiner who conducted the January 2023 PTSD did not find that any sleep difficulties rose to the level of chronic sleep impairment.  38 C.F.R. § 4.130, General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders (listing chronic sleep disturbance in the criteria for the 30 percent rating).  Given that the Veteran does not experience any functional impairment related to his TBI other than headaches, a compensable rating for TBI under DC 8045 is denied.

Thus, as the evidence of record persuasively weighs against the claim, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply, and a compensable rating for TBI under 8045 is denied.?38 U.S.C. § 5107(b);?38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch, supra. 

4. Entitlement to an initial compensable rating for headaches

The Veteran claims that his current noncompensable rating for headaches does not reflect the severity of his symptoms, and specifically, his tendency to get headaches when exposed to bright lights. 

Under DC?8100, a 0 percent (noncompensable) rating is assigned for migraines with less frequent attacks.  A 10 percent rating is assigned for migraines with characteristic prostrating attacks averaging one in 2 months over the last several months.  A 30 percent rating is assigned for migraines with characteristic prostrating attacks occurring on an average of once a month over the last several months.  A 50 percent rating is assigned for migraines with very frequent completely prostrating and prolonged attacks productive of severe economic inadaptability. 

The rating criteria of DC?8100?are considered successive, meaning that a claimant cannot fulfill the criteria of the higher rating without fulfilling those of the next lower rating.  Johnson v. Wilkie,?30?Vet. App.?245, 252?(2018).  This renders 38?C.F.R. §§ 4.7?and 4.21 inapplicable.? Id.? 

The rating of headaches or migraines under DC?8100?focuses on "attacks."  It is the frequency, duration, severity, and economic impact of these attacks that differentiate the levels of disability in DC?8100.  Holmes v. Wilkie,?33?Vet. App.?67, 72?(2020). 

The phrase "characteristic prostrating attacks" is used in the criteria corresponding to 10 percent and 30 percent ratings under DC?8100?to describe the nature and severity of migraines, but it is not defined in the regulation.  Pursuant to Dorland's Illustrated Medical Dictionary 1531 (32d ed. 2012), prostration is defined as "extreme exhaustion or powerlessness."  Thus, the phrase "characteristic prostrating attacks" is understood to describe migraine attacks that typically produce extreme exhaustion or powerlessness. 

DC?8100?does not define "economic inadaptability."  The Court has held that under DC?8100, a headache disorder need only be "capable of producing" economic inadaptability, and that this standard is different from the "unemployability" standard applicable in the context of determining entitlement to a total disability rating based on individual unemployability (TDIU).  Pierce v. Principi,?18?Vet. App.?440, 445-46?(2004); see?38 C.F.R. §§ 3.340, 4.16 (setting forth the requirements for establishing entitlement to TDIU). 

The rating criteria for a 50 percent rating contain several undefined phrases.  The descriptive phrase "very frequent" connotes a frequency at least greater than once a month, as is required by the rating criteria corresponding to a lesser 30 percent rating.  Johnson,?30 Vet. App. at 253.  The phrase "completely prostrating" generally means that the migraines attack must render the veteran entirely powerless. ?Id. ?The completely prostrating attacks must also be "prolonged," which is defined as "to lengthen in time: extend duration: draw out: continue, protract."? Id.?(internal citation omitted).  Lastly, the 50 percent rating criteria requires that the very frequent completely prostrating and prolonged attacks be "productive of severe economic inadaptability."  Productive can be read as having either the meaning of "producing" or "capable of producing," and, with regard to severe economic inadaptability, nothing in DC?8100?requires that the claimant be completely unable to work in order to qualify for a 50 percent rating.  Pierce v. Principi,?18?Vet. App.?440, 445-46?(2004). 

The increased rating period on appeal begins July 2, 2022, the effective date of service connection, and ends with the issuance of the May 2023 rating decision.

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination of his headaches in January 2023.  He reported having headaches 2-3 times per week that become worse when exposed to bright lights or high-pitched sounds.  The Veteran reported occasionally taking over-the-counter medication to relieve symptoms.  Symptoms were reported as pain on both sides of the head, sensitivity to light, and sensitivity to sound.  These symptoms lasted less than one day.  The Veteran did not have characteristic prostrating attacks of pain.  It was noted that the Veteran's headaches had no functional impact.

The Board finds that a compensable rating for the Veteran's migraine headaches is not warranted.  The Veteran reported having headaches 2-3 times per week, worse with exposure to bright lights and high-pitched sounds.  In the September 2023 VA Form 10182, the Veteran also described that his TBI made him sensitive to bright lights, sun, and fluorescent lights.  Despite these symptoms, the Veteran's head pain did not result in characteristic prostrating attacks or other functional impairment noted as criteria required for a compensable rating.  The Veteran did note occasionally taking over-the-counter medications, which would presumably relieve symptoms.  However, there have been no symptoms noted at the January 2023 VA examination or in the medical and lay evidence of record which would indicate the presence of prostrating attacks, economic inadaptability or other functional impairment.  Finally, the occasional use of medication to relieve symptoms would indicate, at most, that there are attacks less frequent than every two months.  See, e.g., "occasional," Merriam-Webster.com Online Dictionary, https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/occasional (defining occasional as "encountered, occurring, appearing, or taken at irregular or infrequent intervals").  If the Veteran believes that symptoms warranting a compensable rating are present, the most expeditious way for VA to consider new and relevant evidence is for the Veteran to file a supplemental claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.

Thus, as the evidence of record persuasively weighs against the claim, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply, and a compensable rating for headaches is denied.?38 U.S.C. § 5107(b);?38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch, supra. 

REASONS FOR REMAND

Service connection for a lumbar spine disorder 

The Board finds that, based on the evidence of record at the time of the AOJ decision on appeal, a remand is necessary to obtain a medical opinion as to the etiology of the Veteran's lumbar spine disorder.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination of his lumbar spine in January 2023, at which time a diagnosis of lumbosacral strain as noted.  In April 2023, an examiner opined that the Veteran's lumbar spine disorder was less likely than not related to service because there was no documentation in the Veteran's service treatment records (STRs).  However, an opinion based solely on the lack of diagnosis in STRs is inadequate.  See Dalton v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 23 (2007).  Once VA affords a veteran an examination, it must ensure that the examination is adequate.  See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007).  

Thus, a remand is necessary to ensure an adequate medical opinion regarding the Veteran's lumbar spine disorder is obtained and to correct this pre-decisional duty to assist error.  In remanding the claim for a medical opinion, the Board notes a December 2022 VA treatment record which notes the Veteran's report that back pain onset six days earlier when putting on his shoes.

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Obtain a new medical opinion regarding the etiology of the Veteran's lumbar spine disorder.  Specifically, the examiner should opine as to:

Whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's lumbar spine disorder is related to service.

A complete rationale should be provided for any opinion rendered.  A reliance solely on the lack of documentation in STRs will be deemed inadequate.  Please consider the December 2022 VA treatment record which notes the Veteran's report that back pain onset six days earlier when putting on his shoes.

 

 

C. CRAWFORD

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	J. George

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.