Citation Nr: A25034785
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 231129-397728
DATE: April 15, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to a compensable rating for bilateral hearing loss is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral dry eye is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for erectile dysfunction with loss of sexual drive is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for hypertension is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. Throughout the appeal period, the Veteran's bilateral hearing loss manifested by no more than Level I hearing impairment in the right ear and Level II hearing impairment in the left ear, which corresponds to a noncompensable rating.

2. The most persuasive evidence is against a finding the Veteran's current bilateral dry eye was incurred in service or is otherwise related to service.

3. The most persuasive evidence is against a finding the Veteran's current erectile dysfunction was incurred in service or is otherwise related to service.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. Throughout the period on appeal, the criteria for entitlement to a compensable rating for bilateral hearing loss have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38C.F.R. §§3.102, 4.7, 4.85, 4.86, Diagnostic Code 6100.

2. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for bilateral dry eye have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

3. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for erectile dysfunction have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from June 1973 to June 1975.

These matters are before the Board of Veterans' Appeal (Board) on appeal from an August 2023 rating decision denying entitlement to service connection for a bilateral dry eye condition and erectile dysfunction as well as entitlement to a compensable rating for bilateral hearing loss and a September 2023 rating decision denying entitlement to service connection for hypertension by the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) of the United States Department of Veterans Affairs (VA). 

In November 2023, the Veteran filed a timely VA Form 10182 Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) (NOD), in which he expressed disagreement with the decisions on appeal. The Veteran elected the Direct Review option. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the AOJ decisions on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decisions on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of entitlement to service connection for hypertension, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of that claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Service Connection

Service connection may be granted if the evidence demonstrates that a current disability resulted from an injury or disease incurred or aggravated during active military service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a). Service connection may be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge when all evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).

In general, service connection requires: (1) evidence of a current disability; (2) medical, or in certain circumstances, lay evidence of an in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) medical evidence of a nexus between the claimed in-service disease or injury and the current disability. See Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

Furthermore, the Board notes the Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxins Act of 2022 (PACT Act) was signed into law on August 10, 2022. The PACT Act included changes to medical examination requirements where there is documented toxic exposure risk activity (TERA).

VA has indicated the Veteran was exposed to toxins as a result of a military occupational specialty (MOS) of Tank Commander. See May 2023 VA Memorandum. The dates and locations of the Veteran's qualifying deployments are outlined therein. Thus, a TERA is established.

Under 38 U.S.C. § 1168, a disability examination and medical opinion may be requested for certain non-presumptive conditions involving TERA. When a medical opinion involving a TERA is requested, the examiner must consider the total potential exposure through all applicable deployments and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran.

When the evidence is evenly balanced or approximately so with regard to whether service connection is warranted, VA shall resolve reasonable doubt in favor of the claimant. 38U.S.C. §5107; 38C.F.R. §§3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc). To deny a claim on its merits, the evidence must persuasively weigh against the claim. Id. (only when the evidence persuasively favors one side or another is the benefit of the doubt doctrine not for application).

1. Entitlement to service connection for bilateral dry eye

The Veteran seeks entitlement to service connection for bilateral dry eye, which he contends was incurred in or caused by service, specifically as due to exposure to hazardous chemicals while performing his military occupational specialty as a Tank Commander during active duty. See April 2023 Claim for Benefits.

As noted above, the first element of service connection requires medical evidence of a present disability. A diagnosis of a bilateral dry eye condition was found as a favorable finding by the rating decision on appeal.

The question remaining before the Board is whether the Veteran's bilateral dry eye is etiologically related to service, particularly as due to conceded exposure to hazardous chemicals.

Based on a careful review of the subjective and clinical evidence, the Board finds that the evidence persuasively weighs against finding service connection for bilateral dry eye, is warranted.

The Veteran's service treatment records (STRs) have been associated with the claims file, including the Veteran's June 1973 entrance examination and May 1975 separation examination. They do not document any findings related to any complaint, treatment, or diagnosis of any eye condition, to include bilateral dry eye.

The Veteran underwent a VA examination to assess the nature and etiology of his eye conditions, in August 2023 to address whether the Veteran's participation in a toxic risk exposure activity (TERA), caused his bilateral dry eye.

On examination, the Veteran complained of dryness, redness, and irritation in both eyes starting in 2013. He denied any history of eye surgery or injury and reported using lubricating eye drops for relief.

The examiner confirmed a diagnosis of bilateral dry eye. He then opined that the Veteran's bilateral dry eye was less likely than not incurred in or caused by service, stating that following a review of the Veteran's record and relevant medical literature, the etiology of bilateral dry eye, does not support those past exposures to hazardous chemicals/lubricants/ and solvents, specifically Acetone, Toluese, Isobutane, diesel fuel, exhaust gas and other petroleum distillates causes or is etiologic factor to developing bilateral dry eye, after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all TERAs of the Veteran.

The VA examiner first noted the Veteran medical records do not show that Veteran was diagnosed with any eye conditions related to dry eyes while in service. He continued by noting the Veteran's records do show that Veteran has a thyroid disorder as well as advanced age, and medical literature shows that patients with thyroid disorders as have a higher incidence of dry eyes, and the condition is more common in those in advanced age. Thus, the August 2023 VA examiner concluded that the Veteran's dry eye syndrome is most likely due to his systemic conditions and age and less likely than not incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service event, to include the Veteran's confirmed in-service TERA exposure. 

There is no evidence that the August 2023 examiner was either not competent or not credible. Significantly, the August 2023 examiner based his opinion on the Veteran's reported history of the disability, a review of the medical evidence including a specific acknowledgement of the Veteran's in-service and post-service treatment, lay statements of record, provided a more likely etiology of the Veteran's bilateral dry eye condition and provided a well-reasoned rationale supporting the overall conclusion based on the totality of the evidence of record. As such, the Board finds that the February 2023 examiner's opinion is entitled to significant probative weight. See Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 124-25 (2007); Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295 (2008) (holding that it is the factually accurate, fully articulated, sound reasoning for the conclusion that contributes to the probative value of a medical opinion).

Finally, the Board recognizes that the Veteran sincerely believes that his bilateral dry eye, was incurred in or caused by service. The Veteran is competent to report on matters observed or within his personal knowledge and is therefore competent to make statements regarding his symptoms and medical history. See Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 470 (1994). However, a probative medical opinion on the etiology or underlying causes of his bilateral dry eye, requires the specialized training of a medical professional. In this case, as a layperson not shown to possess appropriate medical training and expertise, the Veteran is not competent to render a persuasive or competent medical opinion on whether his bilateral dry eye, was incurred in or caused by his military service. See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 (Fed. Cir 2006). Therefore, any opinion by the Veteran regarding the etiology of his disability is not competent evidence. The Board finds the August 2023 VA medical opinion provided by a qualified medical professional, to be more probative regarding causation and is against a finding of a relationship to his service.

In summary, the evidence is neither evenly balanced nor approximately so with regard to whether entitlement to service connection for bilateral dry eye, is warranted. Rather, the evidence persuasively weighs against such a finding. Therefore, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply, and the service connection claim must be denied. Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc) (only when the evidence persuasively favors one side or another is the benefit of the doubt doctrine not for application).

2. Entitlement to service connection for erectile dysfunction with loss of sexual drive

The Veteran seeks entitlement to service connection for erectile dysfunction with loss of sexual drive, which he contends was incurred in or caused by service, specifically as due to exposure to hazardous chemicals while performing his military occupational specialty as a Tank Commander during active duty. See April 2023 Claim for Benefits.

As noted above, the first element of service connection requires medical evidence of a present disability. A diagnosis of erectile dysfunction was found as a favorable finding by the rating decision on appeal.

The question remaining before the Board is whether the Veteran's erectile dysfunction is etiologically related to service, particularly as due to conceded exposure to hazardous chemicals.

Based on a careful review of the subjective and clinical evidence, the Board finds that the evidence persuasively weighs against finding service connection for erectile dysfunction is warranted.

The Veteran's service treatment records (STRs) have been associated with the claims file, including the Veteran's June 1973 entrance examination and May 1975 separation examination. They do not document any findings related to any complaint, treatment, or diagnosis of any conditions of the reproductive system, to include erectile dysfunction.

The Veteran underwent a VA examination to assess the nature and etiology of his eye conditions, in June 2023 to address whether the Veteran's participation in a toxic risk exposure activity (TERA), caused his erectile dysfunction with loss of sexual drive.

On examination, the Veteran reported the condition began in 2003.

The examiner confirmed a diagnosis of erectile dysfunction. He then opined that the Veteran's erectile dysfunction was less likely than not incurred in or caused by service, stating that following a review of the Veteran's record and relevant medical literature, the etiology of erectile dysfunction does not support those past garrison exposures causes or is etiologic factor to developing erectile dysfunction, after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all TERAs of the Veteran.

He continued by explaining that sexual problems become more common with aging, pointing to a strong association between sexual function, aging, and male health shown in medical literature. He further explained the risk of erectile dysfunction is higher for men with diabetes, hypertension, heart disease as well as polypharmacy and psychiatric disorders. The VA examiner stated that along with the risk factor of advanced age, the Veteran also carries risk factors of hypertension, atherosclerosis, obesity, polypharmacy, a history of smoking and alcohol use. Thus, he concluded, due to the large time gap between separation from service and the onset and diagnosis of the condition as well as the presence of multiple comorbidities, nexus cannot be established as we cannot rule out natural progression of natures as well as confounding comorbidities, the condition less likely than not incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service event, to include the Veteran's confirmed in service TERA exposure.

There is no evidence that the June 2023 examiner was either not competent or not credible. Significantly, the June 2023 examiner based his opinion on the Veteran's reported history of the disability, a review of the medical evidence including a specific acknowledgement of the Veteran's in-service and post-service treatment, lay statements of record, provided a more likely etiology of the Veteran's erectile dysfunction and provided a well-reasoned rationale supporting the overall conclusion based on the totality of the evidence of record. As such, the Board finds that the June 2023 examiner's opinion is entitled to significant probative weight. See Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 124-25 (2007); Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295 (2008) (holding that it is the factually accurate, fully articulated, sound reasoning for the conclusion that contributes to the probative value of a medical opinion).

Finally, the Board recognizes that the Veteran sincerely believes that his erectile dysfunction was incurred in or caused by service. The Veteran is competent to report on matters observed or within his personal knowledge and is therefore competent to make statements regarding his symptoms and medical history. See Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 470 (1994). However, a probative medical opinion on the etiology or underlying causes of his erectile dysfunction requires the specialized training of a medical professional. In this case, as a layperson not shown to possess appropriate medical training and expertise, the Veteran is not competent to render a persuasive or competent medical opinion on whether his erectile dysfunction was incurred in or caused by his military service. See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 (Fed. Cir 2006). Therefore, any opinion by the Veteran regarding the etiology of his disability is not competent evidence. The Board finds the June 2023 VA medical opinion provided by a qualified medical professional, to be more probative regarding causation and is against a finding of a relationship to his service.

In summary, the evidence is neither evenly balanced nor approximately so with regard to whether entitlement to service connection for erectile dysfunction is warranted. Rather, the evidence persuasively weighs against such a finding. Therefore, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply, and the service connection claim must be denied. Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc) (only when the evidence persuasively favors one side or another is the benefit of the doubt doctrine not for application).

Increased Rating

Disability ratings are determined by applying the criteria set forth in the VA Schedule for Rating Disabilities, found in 38 C.F.R., Part 4. The rating schedule is primarily a guide in the evaluation of disability resulting from all types of diseases and injuries encountered as a result of, or incident to, military service. The ratings are intended to compensate, as far as can practicably be determined, the average impairment of earning capacity resulting from such diseases and injuries and their residual conditions in civilian occupations. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1.

The veteran's entire history is to be considered when making disability evaluations. 38 C.F.R. § 4.1; Schafrath v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 589 (1995). Where the question for consideration is the propriety of the initial rating assigned, evaluation of the medical evidence since the effective date of the grant of service connection and consideration of the appropriateness of the assignment of different ratings for distinct periods of time, based on the facts found is required. Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119 (1999); Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007).

Where there is a question as to which of two evaluations shall be applied, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria for that rating. Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7.

When all the evidence is assembled, VA is responsible for determining whether the weight of the evidence is in approximate balance. If the positive and negative evidence is evenly or approximately balanced, the claimant receives the benefit of the doubt. Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc) (only when the evidence persuasively favors one side or another is the benefit of the doubt doctrine not for application).

1. Entitlement to a compensable rating for bilateral hearing loss

The Veteran is currently in receipt of a noncompensable rating for service-connected bilateral hearing loss pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 4.85, Diagnostic Code 6100. The Veteran contends that his hearing is worse than currently contemplated by his assigned disability rating.

In evaluating hearing loss, disability ratings are derived by a mechanical application of the ratings schedule to the numeric designations assigned after audiometric evaluations are rendered. See Lendenmann v. Principi, 3 Vet. App. 345, 349 (1992). Hearing loss disability evaluations range from noncompensable (0 percent) to 100 percent based on organic impairment of hearing acuity. Audiological examinations used to measure impairment must be conducted by a state-licensed audiologist and must include both a controlled speech discrimination test (Maryland CNC) and a puretone audiometric test. 38 C.F.R. § 4.85(a).

The ratings schedule provides a table for ratings purposes (Table VI) to determine a Roman numeral designation (I for essentially normal acuity through XI for profound deafness) for hearing impairment, based upon a combination of the percent of speech discrimination and the puretone threshold average, which is the sum of the puretone thresholds at 1000, 2000, 3000 and 4000 hertz, divided by four. 38 C.F.R. § 4.85, Diagnostic Code 6100.

Table VII is then used to determine the percentage evaluation by intersecting the Roman numeral designations from Table VI for hearing impairment of each ear. The horizontal row represents the ear having the poorer hearing and the vertical column represents the ear having the better hearing.

The Board notes that the Veteran filed his claim for an increased rating for his bilateral hearing loss in April 2023; therefore, the following analysis considers the relevant evidence of record up to one year prior to the date of claim.

Turning to the relevant medical evidence of record, the Veteran underwent a VA audiology examination in June 2023. Upon audiometric testing, the Veteran's Maryland CNC Word List speech recognition score and pure tone thresholds, in decibels, were as follows:

?? 	HERTZ?? 

??? 	1000?? 	2000?? 	3000?? 	4000?? 	AVG.

RIGHT?? 	35	55	55	60	51

LEFT 	45	65	65	70	61

Speech discrimination scores on the Maryland CNC word list were 92 percent in the right ear and 92 percent in the left ear.

The June 2023 audiology examination findings, applied to Table VI, yield a numeric designation of Roman numeral I in the right ear on the basis of a 51 decibel puretone threshold average and 92 percent speech discrimination, and a numeric designation of Roman numeral II in the left ear on the basis of a 61 decibel puretone threshold average, and 92 percent speech discrimination. The numeric designation for the right ear, I, along with the numeric designation for the left ear, II, entered into Table VII, corresponds to a noncompensable (0 percent) rating for hearing impairment.

Upon examination, the Veteran described the impact of his hearing loss as can't hear normal conversations especially in background noise, ask people to repeat themselves.

Based on the evidence above, the Board finds that a compensable rating for the Veteran's bilateral hearing loss is not warranted at any time during the appellate period.

In making this finding, the Board is sympathetic to the Veteran's contention that he has difficulty understanding speech, particularly with background noise, due to his hearing loss disability. However, the Board must consider the Veteran's description of his service-connected disability in conjunction with the clinical evidence of record and the pertinent rating criteria. In this regard, the Board emphasizes that disability ratings are derived by a mechanical application of the rating schedule. Lendenmann v. Principi, 3 Vet. App. 345, 349 (1992). Thus, the Board has no discretion in this matter and must predicate its determination on the basis of the results of the audiology results of record. As described above, the audiological test results during the pendency of the appeal, when applied to the rating criteria, show that the Veteran is not eligible for an increased rating for either rating period on appeal.

The Board notes that in addition to dictating objective test results, a VA audiologist must fully describe the functional effects caused by a hearing disability in the final report. See Martinak v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 447 (2007). In this case, the VA examiners noted that the Veteran reported hearing difficulty which affected his daily activities. The Veteran's reported functional limitations are manifestations of decreased hearing acuity, which is already contemplated by the schedular rating criteria for hearing loss. A comparison between the level of severity and symptomatology of the Veteran's assigned ratings with the established criteria found in the rating schedule shows that the rating criteria reasonably describe the Veteran's disability level and symptomatology, including his difficulty hearing and understanding speech. The Board notes that this conclusion is consistent with the U.S. Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims' (Court) holding in Doucette v. Shulkin, 28 Vet. App. 366, 369-70 (2017) ("[W]hen a claimant's hearing loss results in an inability to hear or understand speech or to hear other sounds in various contexts, those effects are contemplated by the schedular rating criteria."). The Board further finds that other than difficulty hearing or understanding speech, the record contains no evidence of other symptoms attributable to the service-connected hearing loss.

Accordingly, the Board finds that entitlement to a compensable rating for bilateral hearing loss is not warranted.

The evidence persuasively weighs against the Veteran's claim for an increased disability rating for bilateral hearing loss. Therefore, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply, and the claim must be denied. 38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc).

REASONS FOR REMAND

Unfortunately, the Board finds that additional development of the issue on appeal must be undertaken to correct duty to assist errors that occurred prior to the September 2023 rating decision. The Board notes that under the modernized review system, remand is required to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802 (a).

Although the Board regrets the additional delay, it is necessary to ensure that there is a complete record upon which to decide these issues so that the Veteran is afforded every possible consideration.

1. Entitlement to service connection for hypertension is remanded.

The Veteran seeks entitlement to service connection for hypertension, which he contends was incurred in or caused by service, specifically as due to exposure to hazardous chemicals while performing his military occupational specialty as a Tank Commander during active duty. See April 2023 Claim for Benefits.

Furthermore, at the outset, the Board notes the rating decision on appeal included a favorable finding the Veteran has a diagnosis of hypertension during the pendency of his appeal.

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's hypertension in June 2023. On examination, as noted above, a diagnosis of hypertension was confirmed. However, the June 2023 VA examiner did not provide a nexus opinion.

Accordingly, an addendum opinion was obtained from a different VA examiner in August 2023. Following review of the evidence of record, the August 2023 examiner found it less likely than not caused by the indicated TERA after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all TERA of the Veteran.

However, in listing the relevant evidence of record, the August 2023 examiner stated "this is based upon claimed exposure(s) to UNKNOWN. The place of exposure is KOREA. The reported activity that resulted in exposure is described as unknown. The duration of exposure is described as UNKNOWN. The route of exposure is described as inhalation, oral. The frequency of exposure is reported as monthly. PPE was reportedly not used."

Though it is unclear if this is a technological error, it presents the possibility that the August 2023 VA examiner did not have the relevant information regarding the Veteran's toxic exposure activities with which to make an informed judgement. Here, the Board notes that other concurrent examinations specifically characterize the conceded daily toxic exposure both through inhalation and dermally to Acetone, Toluese, Isobutane, diesel fuel, exhaust gas and other petroleum distillates, while stationed at Camp Coiner in South Korea serving as a Tank Commander.  Therefore, the Board finds the examiner potentially relied on an incomplete factual premise in providing his negative nexus opinion. Reonal v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 458, 461 (1993) (holding that a medical opinion based upon an incomplete or inaccurate factual premise has no probative value).

In light of this, the Board finds the August 2023 opinion is inadequate, the Board finds that a pre-decisional duty to assist error occurred and the claim must be remanded so that an adequate medical opinion can be obtained prior to adjudication of the Veteran's claim. 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(f); 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

Accordingly, the matter is REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain an addendum VA medical opinion from a VA examiner of appropriate expertise to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's hypertension. The examiner must review the claims file in its entirety and that review must be noted in the report.

Thereafter, the examiner is asked to provide a fully articulated medical opinion addressing the following:

(a) Whether the Veteran's currently diagnosed hypertension, had its onset during active-duty service or was otherwise etiologically related to service, to include his conceded exposure to hazardous chemicals, lubricants, and solvents specifically Acetone, Toluese, Isobutane, diesel fuel, exhaust gas and other petroleum distillates while performing the duties of his military occupational speciality?

In forming this opinion, the examiner must consider (i) the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments; and (ii) the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities.

The examiner is advised that the Veteran is considered competent to report the events that occurred during service, as well as the symptoms he experienced, including when those symptoms were incurred and how long they have persisted.

It should be noted that the lack of documented treatment in service, while probative, cannot serve as the sole basis for a negative finding. The Veteran's lay contentions must be considered and weighed in making the determination as to whether a nexus exists between the claimed disability and military service.

Any conclusion or opinion offered must be accompanied by a complete medical rationale, citing to established medical principles and relevant medical evidence, such as examination findings, service treatment records, or other pertinent evidence in the record, when necessary, to support the conclusion reached. If an opinion cannot be reached without resorting to speculation, the examiner must fully explain why that is so.

 

 

DUSTIN L. WARE

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Rosenthal, Ariana

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.