Citation Nr: A25034012
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 240611-449579
DATE: April 11, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an initial 70 percent disability rating, but no higher, for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

Resolving any doubt in favor of the Veteran, throughout the entire period on appeal from April 19, 2023, the Veteran's PTSD manifested in symptoms suggesting occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, but has not resulted in gross impairment of thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living; disorientation to time or place; or memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name suggesting total occupational and social impairment.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to an initial 70 percent disability rating, but no higher, for PTSD have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.126, 4.130, Diagnostic Code (DC) 9411.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from April 2008 to June 2012.

This matter comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a September 2023 rating decision issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO), which was later reviewed in a January 2024 Higher-Level-Review (HLR) decision.

The Veteran appealed the decision in a June 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), electing the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the September 2023 AOJ decision subject to HLR.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

The Board has limited the discussion below to the relevant evidence required to support its finding of fact and conclusion of law, as well as to the specific contentions regarding the case as raised directly by the Veteran and those reasonably raised by the record.  See Scott v. McDonald, 789 F.3d 1375, 1381 (Fed. Cir. 2015); Robinson v. Peake, 21 Vet. App. 545, 552 (2008).

Entitlement to an initial 70 percent disability rating, but no higher, for PTSD is granted.

The Veteran contends he should be assigned a higher initial disability rating for PTSD.  He is currently rated 50 percent disabled from April 19, 2023, under DC 9411.  For the reasons that follow, the Board finds an initial 70 percent disability rating, but no higher, is warranted throughout the entire period on appeal.

Disability ratings are determined by applying the criteria set forth in the VA Schedule for Rating Disabilities, found in 38 C.F.R., Part 4.  The Rating Schedule is primarily a guide in the evaluation of disability resulting from all types of diseases and injuries encountered as a result of or incident to military service. 38 C.F.R. § 4.1.  The ratings are intended to compensate, as far as can practicably be determined, the average impairment of earning capacity resulting from such diseases and injuries and their residual conditions in civilian occupations. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1.  

Where there is a question as to which of two evaluations shall be applied, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria for that rating.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7.  The basis of disability evaluations is the ability of the body as a whole, or of the psyche, or of a system or organ of the body to function under the ordinary conditions of daily life including employment.  38 C.F.R. § 4.10.

Where the evidence contains factual findings that demonstrate distinct time periods in which the service-connected disability exhibits symptoms that would warrant different evaluations during the course of the appeal, the assignment of staged ratings is appropriate.  See Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119, 126-127 (1999); Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007); Francisco v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 55, 58 (1994). 

The evaluation of the same disability under several diagnostic codes, known as pyramiding, must be avoided; separate ratings may be assigned for distinct disabilities resulting from the same injury only where the symptomatology for one condition is not duplicative or overlapping with the symptomatology of the other condition.  See 38?C.F.R. §?4.14; see also Esteban v. Brown, 6?Vet. App.?259, 261-62 (1994). 

In making all determinations, the Board must fully consider the lay assertions of record.  A layperson is competent to report on the onset and recurrence of symptoms.  Layno v. Brown, 6?Vet. App.?465, 470 (1994) (a Veteran is competent to report on that of which he or she has personal knowledge).  The Veteran's entire history is reviewed when making disability evaluations.  See Schafrath v. Derwinski, 1?Vet. App.?589 (1995).  After careful consideration of the evidence, any reasonable doubt remaining is resolved in the Veteran's favor.  38?C.F.R. §?4.3.  

DC 9411 provides that PTSD should be rated under the General Formula for Mental Disorders (General Formula).  The Board must conduct a "holistic analysis" that considers all associated symptoms, regardless of whether they are listed as criteria.  Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 10, 22 (2017); 38 C.F.R. § 4.130.  The Board must determine whether unlisted symptoms are similar in severity, frequency, and duration to the listed symptoms associated with specific disability percentages.  Then, the Board must determine whether the associated symptoms, both listed and unlisted, caused the level of impairment required for a higher disability rating.  Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 114-118 (Fed. Cir. 2013). 

A 50 percent rating is assigned when symptoms such as flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; or difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships cause occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.

A 70 percent rating is assigned when symptoms such as suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant speech; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a worklike setting); or inability to establish and maintain effective relationships cause occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood.

A 100 percent rating is assigned for total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; or memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name.

Relevantly, the Veteran was first denied service connection for PTSD in a November 2014 rating decision.  The Veteran did not appeal or submit additional evidence within a year of the November 2014 rating decision.  As such, it became a final decision.  Thereafter, VA received an Intent to File on April 19, 2023, followed by a July 3, 2023, Supplemental Claim within a year thereof.  In response, the AOJ issued a September 2023 decision continuing the denial of service connection for PTSD.  The Veteran then requested HLR prompting the AOJ to issue a January 2024 decision wherein service connection for PTSD was granted and an initial disability rating of 50 percent was assigned from April 19, 2023.  The Veteran timely appealed the initial January 2024 AOJ decision.  Thus, the Board will consider the period on appeal beginning April 19, 2023, the date of the receipt of the Veteran's Intent to File, as a Supplemental Claim was received within a year thereof.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.400.

Turning to the relevant evidence of record, treatment records during the period on appeal lack specific treatment for PTSD which is consistent with the Veteran's statement during the 2023 VA examination wherein he denied any current mental health treatment.  In June 2023, the Veteran stated that he considered going to a psychiatrist last year but chose not to.  During the June 2023 appointment for an unrelated problem, the Veteran denied experiencing anxiety, depression, and sleep problems.  In an unrelated September 2023 appointment, the Veteran was noted to be alert and oriented. 

A nonVA provider completed an evaluation in June 2023 during which the provider opined that the Veteran's symptoms of depressed mood; anxiety; panic attacks more than once a week; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately, and effectively; chronic sleep impairment; impairment of short and long term memory, for example, mention of only highly learned material, while forgetting to complete tasks; flattened effect; disturbances of motivation and mood; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work like setting; and impaired impulse control, such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence, were productive of occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, and/or mood.  He was alert and oriented, dressed appropriately, had normal speech, and had fair eye contact.  

In the nonVA providers' June 2023 corresponding report, he was noted to be employed though he had 3 different employers between 2012 and 2019.  He endorsed difficulty dealing with co-workers, supervisors, and figures of authority.  The Veteran endorsed being able to fall asleep but has difficulty staying asleep.  He endorsed intermittent weekly intrusive and involuntary thoughts regarding service.  He denied flashbacks.  He endorsed becoming extremely upset around places, people, and events that remind him of the military.  The Veteran stated that he feels emotionally numb and void of feeling since service.  He has difficulty trusting others and only has one close friend.  He reported a history of being hospitalized for a panic attack in 2012.  The Veteran endorsed bouts of doom and negativity.  He also endorsed suicidal ideation in the past.  The Veteran stated that he has lost interest in things he previously enjoyed including snowboarding and socializing.  The Veteran has frequent bouts of irritability and angry outbursts.  He endorsed difficulty concentrating.  He explained that he has many unfinished projects.  He has an exaggerated startle response and has struck out at others in the past.  The provider stated that symptoms of bouts of difficulty concentrating, generalized anxiety with one to two panic attacks per week; short- and long-term memory loss; intrusive thoughts; sleep disturbance; overwhelming feelings of anger and sorrow; withdrawal; and bouts of moderate to moderately severe depression cause severe social, personal, and occupational impairment.  

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in August 2023 during which the examiner opined that his symptoms of anxiety, panic attacks more than once a week, chronic sleep impairment, and mild memory loss such as forgetting names, directions, or recent events were productive of occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.  During the examination, the Veteran reported intermittent sleep disruptions more than once a week where it is difficult to fall asleep and stay asleep.  He endorsed losing track of tasks or jobs during the day and struggling to recall what he did earlier in the day.  The Veteran was noted to be married for two years and has two stepchildren.  He described his marriage and relationship with stepchildren as good.  He endorsed having close friendships.  The Veteran endorsed being employed as an HVAC technician for the past 10 years.  The Veteran denied current treatment for his PTSD explaining that he has learned to deal with his symptoms.  He stated that at times, his symptoms are debilitating.  The Veteran endorsed difficulty managing his irritability.  He endorsed past physical altercations with roommates and ongoing road rage.  He denied acting violently but stated that his anger is "pretty bad" and "overwhelming."  The Veteran endorsed losing interest in activities such as snowboarding and going to the shooting range.   The examiner noted that the Veteran's affect was within normal limits, he arrived on time to the appointment, thought process was logical without evidence of psychosis, and he was alert/oriented.  The Veteran denied suicidal ideation.  

Based on the above, resolving any doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Board finds a 70 percent disability rating is warranted, but no higher, for PTSD from April 19, 2023.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.7 (where there is a question as to which of two evaluations shall be applied, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria for that rating).  During this limited period on appeal, the record contains two examinations assessing the severity of the Veteran's PTSD.  

On the one hand, the August 2023 VA examiner captured a symptom severity more nearly approximating the 50 percent disability rating assigned.  Indeed, the August 2023 VA examiner opined that his symptoms of anxiety, panic attacks more than once a week, chronic sleep impairment, and mild memory loss such as forgetting names, directions, or recent events were productive of occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.  The examiner did not mention any additional symptoms.  Although, the examiner did acknowledge that the Veteran reported his symptoms were sometimes debilitating, he had difficulty managing irritability, experiences road rage, has a history of physical altercations, and has lost interest in doing activities he previously enjoyed.

On the other hand, the June 2023 nonVA provider captured a symptom severity more nearly approximating a 70 percent disability rating.  That is, the June 2023 nonVA provider opined that his symptoms of depressed mood; anxiety; panic attacks more than once a week; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately, and effectively; chronic sleep impairment; impairment of short and long term memory; flattened effect; disturbances of motivation and mood; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work like setting; and impaired impulse control, such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence, were productive of occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, and/or mood.  The provider included significantly more listed symptoms under the General Rating Formula than the August 2023 VA examiner.  Moreover, the June 2023 nonVA provider also included many unlisted symptoms such as being emotionally numb and void of feeling, difficulty trusting, negativity and doom, lost interest in socializing, difficulty dealing with co-workers, supervisors, and authority figures, and withdrawal.

Upon review, the Board finds more probative the June 2023 nonVA provider's assessment regarding the severity of the Veteran's PTSD.  Significantly, the August 2023 VA examiner did not discuss, reconcile, or seemingly consider the June 2023 nonVA provider's assessment even though it was associated with the claims file prior to the August 2023 VA examination.  This is significant as the August 2023 VA examiner captured a less severe disability picture.  Rating the Veteran's PTSD during this period is challenging given a lack of associated treatment records.  Nonetheless, the Board resolves any doubt in favor of the Veteran and assigns an initial 70 percent disability rating throughout the entire appeal period from April 19, 2023, in consideration of both his listed and unlisted symptoms as captured within the June 2023 nonVA provider's assessment.

The Board finds the Veteran's disability is fully capable of evaluation under the rating schedule.  

The Board also concludes a higher 100 percent rating is not warranted at any point during the period on appeal because the Veteran has never demonstrated total occupational and social impairment or symptoms of similar severity, frequency, or duration as to those contemplated by the 100 percent criteria.  There has been no gross impairment of thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living; disorientation to time or place; or memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name of the severity contemplated by a 100 percent rating.  

The Board finds that the Veteran's disability is fully capable of evaluation under the rating schedule. 

Based on the aforementioned and resolving any doubt in favor of the Veteran, from April 19, 2023, the Board finds that the severity, frequency, and duration of the Veteran's PTSD symptoms resulted in the level of impairment required for a 70 percent rating, but no higher.  Thus, entitlement to an initial disability rating of 70 percent, but no higher, is warranted from April 19, 2023.

 

 

SHEREEN M. MARCUS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	A.C. Allen, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.