Citation Nr: A25034536
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 230308-329333
DATE: April 15, 2025

ORDER

The Veteran's request to revise or reverse a July 30, 2007, rating decision that denied service connection for lymphoid papulosis associated with T-cell lymphoma (claimed as atopic dermatitis), on the basis of clear and unmistakable error (CUE) pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 3.105, is denied. 

FINDING OF FACT

1. A July 30, 2007, rating decision denied service connection for lymphoid papulosis associated with T-cell lymphoma (claimed as atopic dermatitis). The Veteran was provided notice of the decision in an August 6, 2007, letter sent to her address of record which included notice of her procedural and appellate rights. 

2. The Veteran did not file a Notice of Disagreement challenging this determination, nor was additional evidence received within one year of the August 6, 2007, notice letter. VA treatment records issued during the appeal period do not contain additional information for her claim of service connection. Moreover, a review of all service treatment records (STRs) does not reveal any information additional and new to what was documented in the July 2007 rating decision.

3. The correct facts, as known at the time, were before the VA adjudicators in July 2007 and the statutory and regulatory provisions extant at the time were correctly applied. 

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The July 30, 2007, rating decision became final. 38 U.S.C. § 7105(c) (2006); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.104, 3.156, 20.302, 20.1103 (2007). 

2. The criteria for entitlement to revision of the July 30, 2007, rating decision on the basis of CUE are not met. 38 U.S.C. § 5109A; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.104, 3.105(a).

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty for training (ADT) from June 1995 to November 1995 and on active duty from September 1995 to March 2000 and from January 2003 to January 2005. 

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO)'s rating decision issued in March 2023; the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies. 

In the March 2023 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

The Veteran's request to revise or reverse a July 30, 2007, rating decision that denied service connection for lymphoid papulosis associated with T-cell lymphoma (claimed as atopic dermatitis), on the basis of CUE pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 3.105, is denied. 

The Veteran contends that the AOJ committed CUE in the July 30, 2007, rating decision in two ways. First, she alleges that the AOJ failed to apply the presumption of soundness even though "no clear and unmistakable evidence exists to show that the veteran had T-cell lymphoma prior to enlistment" and her "STRs clearly show worsening." Second, the AOJ "ignored and overlooked the clear evidence of record, actually and constructively before [it], that [the] Veteran manifested T-cell lymphoma of the skin (mycosis fungoides) during active duty... and that the military had misdiagnosed [the] Veteran during active duty with dermatitis and eczema, and that [the] Veteran actually had T-cell lymphoma during active duty." See November 2022 Appellant's Brief. In particular, the Veteran maintains that she only had vitiligo at enlistment and points out that a VA examiner opined that it is at least as likely as not that the condition existed during active duty but was misdiagnosed by the military at the time, ... calling the condition dermatitis, eczema, and other skin condition, when in-fact it was T-cell lymphoma during active duty. Id. 

A previous RO determination that is final and binding will be accepted as correct in the absence of CUE. 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(a). Here, a July 30, 2007, rating decision denied service connection for lymphoid papulosis associated with T-cell lymphoma (claimed as atopic dermatitis). The Veteran was provided notice of the decision in an August 6, 2007, letter sent to her address of record which included notice of her procedural and appellate rights. The Veteran did not file a Notice of Disagreement challenging this determination, nor was additional evidence received within one year of the August 6, 2007, notice letter. VA treatment records issued during the appeal period do not contain additional information for her claim of service connection. Moreover, a review of all STRs, although it is not clear in the claims file when those records were associated with the claims file, does not reveal any information additional and new to what was documented in the July 2007 rating decision. Thus, the July 30, 2007, rating decision became final. 38 U.S.C. § 7105 (c) (2006); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.104, 3.156, 20.302, 20.1103 (2007).  

In February 2009, the Veteran submitted correspondence noted as "Notice of Disagreement" to the decision made for her skin condition. The RO interpreted this untimely Notice of Disagreement as a request to reopen the claim of service connection for the skin disability and denied reopening of the claim in an April 29, 2009, rating decision because it found no new and material evidence was submitted, to include VA treatment records that are associated with the claim. 

Once a decision becomes final, it may only be revised by a showing of CUE. 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.104, 3.105. CUE is a very specific and rare kind of "error." It is the kind of error, of fact or of law, that when called to the attention of later reviewers compels the conclusion, to which reasonable minds could not differ, that the result would have been manifestly different but for the error. Simply to claim CUE on the basis that previous adjudications had improperly weighed and evaluated the evidence can never rise to the stringent definition of CUE. Similarly, neither can broad-brush allegations of "failure to follow the regulations" or "failure to give due process," or any other general, nonspecific claim of "error." Fugo v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 40, 43-44 (1993). In addition, failure to address a specific regulatory provision involves harmless error unless the outcome would have been manifestly different. Id. at 44.

Where evidence establishes CUE, the prior decision will be reversed or amended. 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(a). For the purpose of authorizing benefits, the rating or other adjudicatory decision which constitutes a reversal of a prior decision on the grounds of CUE has the same effect as if the corrected decision had been made on the date of the reversed decision.  Id.

CUE is established when the following conditions are met: (1) either (a) the correct facts in the record were not before the adjudicator, or (b) the statutory or regulatory provisions in existence at the time were incorrectly applied; (2) the alleged error must be "undebatable," not merely "a disagreement as to how the facts were weighed or evaluated"; and (3) the commission of the alleged error must have "manifestly changed the outcome" of the decision being attacked on the basis of CUE at the time that decision was rendered. Evans v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 180, 185 (2014), aff'd, 642 F. App'x 982 (Fed. Cir. 2016); Damrel v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 242, 245 (1994); Russell v. Principi, 3 Vet. App. 310, 313-14 (1992).  

The error must be of a type that is outcome-determinative, and subsequently developed evidence may not be considered in determining whether an error existed in the prior decision. See Porter v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 233, 235-36 (1993); Glover v. West, 185 F.3d 1328 (Fed. Cir. 1999). A manifest change in the outcome of an adjudication means that, absent the alleged CUE, the benefit sought would have been granted at the outset.  King v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 433, 441 (2014). The standard is not whether it is reasonable to conclude that the outcome would have been different. Id. at 442.  

Review for clear and unmistakable error in a prior final decision of an agency of original jurisdiction must be based on the evidentiary record and the law that existed when that decision was made. 38 C.F.R. § 3.105 (a)(1)(iii).

The benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine is not for application in claims of CUE. Andrews v. Principi, 18 Vet. App. 177, 186 (2004) (citing Russell, 3 Vet. App. at 313) (it is well established that the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine can never be applicable in assessing a CUE motion because the nature of such a motion is that it involves more than a disagreement as to how the facts were weighed or evaluated).

As a threshold matter, the Board finds that the arguments advanced by the Veteran allege CUE with the requisite specificity. See Simmons v. Principi, 17 Vet. App. 104 (2003). The Board will therefore adjudicate the merits of his claims.

The evidence available at the time of the July 2007 rating decision reflects the following. 

A June 1994 Report of Medical Examination at enlistment documents that the Veteran had "scattered large areas of pigmented macules over the upper body, abdomen, extremities, which was characterized as "vitiligo - generalized distribution" and "NCD."

A July 1995 consultation sheet indicates that the Veteran complained about dry skin for 18 months. The clinician noted that she stated having had symptoms before entering basic training. A July 1995 consultation report reflects an impression of atopic dermatitis and notes 2 year history of "dry skin." It further states that "[a]t entrance physical, physician felt the condition was vitiligo because of some discoloration of skin." 

A July 1995 VA treatment record indicates that the Veteran was counseled on possibilities of EPTS due to medical condition. The clinician documented that she understood and wanted to go to college. A physical examination revealed dry, scaly excoriated skin on arms, neck, legs, and trunk. Assessment was atopic dermatitis. 

A January 1997 consultation report by Dr. T.K.V., a dermatologist, notes that the Veteran "entered [active duty service] with this eruption, which began [about] 3 years ago and spread to its present extent over [about] one year ago." The condition was not pruritic and began on face. The assessment was that contact or atopic dermatitis was unlikely due to paucity of symptoms. The dermatologist further noted that mycosis fungoides must be ruled out. A biopsy was ordered. 

A March 1997 dermatology report reflects a result of biopsy, which showed "PLC." Light therapy was ordered. Another March 1997 treatment record by Dr. T.K.V. indicates that differential diagnoses included PLC and pre mycosis fungoides. UVB was started. 

A November 1997 dermatology note by Dr. T.K.V. reflects an assessment of "chronic eczema, atopic vs pre mycosis fungoides." 

A November 1997 acute medical care note reflects a complaint of peeling skin all over her hands for 3 days. 

A November 1999 STR indicates that the Veteran had complaint of dry skin. She reported that she was seen before for the problem and had been to the dermatology clinic before. The observation was "dry skin all over body" and she was on a steroid location before. But there were no pustules nor lesion. She was referred to the dermatology clinic. Assessment was atopic dermatitis. 

A November 1999 dermatology consultation note indicates that she was referred to the clinic with a complaint of worsening skin condition. The history notes that the Veteran had a history of atopic dermatitis for 8 years, treated with Vaseline. She had not been seen by dermatologist for 2 years. She was not using topical steroids any longer. Observation includes xerosis covering the entire body with eczematous plaques and widespread scaling about 60 percent of body surface area. The assessment was atopic dermatitis. 

A March 2002 treatment record reflects symptoms of chronic atopic dermatitis with draining lesion on the nose for one week. The assessment was infected lesion. 

A July 2004 Report of Medical Examination for retention notes papules squamous eruption on trunk and limbs. Summary of defects and diagnoses includes atopic dermatitis. 

A July 2004 Report of Medical History notes psoriasis. 

In December 2006, the Veteran's claim of service connection for atopic dermatitis was received. In the application, the Veteran stated that her skin condition began during basic training and saw a dermatologist at Fort Polk who issued a profile that limited her exposure to the sun. At Fort Carson, she began treatment again that included weekly light box treatments and also given several topical ointments. She further reported that at Fort Polk, she began treatment again and was given a profile that allowed her to wear PT uniform as duty uniform to lessen the irritation to the skin. 

In June 2007, the Veteran underwent a VA examination. The examiner summarized the medical evidence as follows: 

She has a multitude of dermatologic visits for her skin conditions, which she states actually began when she was age 15 with light colored spots on her face and arms. She received numerous diagnoses while in the service, ranging from ichthyosis and Xerosis to Atopic Dermatitis to Contact Dermatitis, to Lupus erythematosus on one occasion, having received multiple therapies from topical steroids and topical lubricant lotions such as Lac-Hydrin all the way to topical Protopic. 

Then, the examiner continued to report the dermatology notes by Dr. T.K.V. as noted above. In the medical history section, the examiner stated that the process began at age 15 with partial pigment loss on the face and arms and then she was seen by multiple doctors and called vitiligo by a doctor. Then about 2 years later, vitiligo was documented upon entry into service. The Veteran reported that during basic training, it changed to extremely dry and flakey skin and at that time, discharge based on the condition was discussed. Then in 2003, she was activated from the reserves with this process in place at that time. 

The examiner noted that the Veteran has been diagnosed as having T-cell lymphoma recently based on numerous tests and now she was on chemotherapy since April 2007. 

Based on the examination and review of the records, the examiner concluded that the condition for which she was seeing the dermatologist while in service was one and the same with the current diagnosis of T-cell lymphoma. The examiner continued that what she has is not eczema but was mycosis fungoides with 2 presentations, one in the form of patches of poikiloderma, and the other in lymphomatoid papules on her torse. The examiner noted that mycosis fungoides is T-cell lymphoma. 

The diagnosis provided at the examination was lymphomatoid papulosis associated with T-cell lymphoma of the skin (mycosis fungoides). The examiner opined that this was as likely as not the dermatosis that she has in service that was not correctly diagnosed at the time. 

In July 2007 rating decision, after summarizing its finding based on the evidence of record, the AOJ found that lymphoid papulosis associated with T-cell lymphoma (claimed as atopic dermatitis) existed prior to service and that there was no evidence that the condition permanently worsened as a result of service. The claim of service connection for lymphoid papulosis associated with T-cell lymphoma (claimed as atopic dermatitis) was denied. 

The law and regulation extant at the time of the July 2007 adjudication are as follows. 

With respect to the presumption of soundness, at the time of the July 2007 rating decision, a veteran was considered to have been in sound condition when examined, accepted, and enrolled for service except as to defects, infirmities, or disorders noted at entrance into service, or where clear and unmistakable (obvious or manifest) evidence demonstrated that an injury or disease existed prior thereto and was not aggravated by such service. 38 U.S.C. § 1111 (2006); 38 C.F.R. § 3.304 (b) (2007). A determination that a disability preexisted service was not to be made on medical judgment alone as distinguished from accepted medical principles, or on history alone without consideration of the clinical factors pertinent to the basic character, origin, and development of such injury or disease. 38 C.F.R. § 3.304 (b) (2007). 

Prior to Wagner v. Principi, 370 F.3d 1089, 1096 (Fed. Cir. 2004), the presumption of soundness only required clear and unmistakable evidence the disability existed prior to service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.304 (b) (1971); VAOPGCPREC 3-2003 (July 16, 2003); 70 Fed. Reg. 23,027-01, 23,028 (May 4, 2005) (amending § 3.304(b) to require evidence of both preexistence and no aggravation). The July 2007 rating decision was issued subsequent to the amendment. Thus, in the present case, the presumption of soundness requires clear and unmistakable evidence demonstrating that the disability existed prior to service and was not aggravated by such service. 

Also in Wagner v. Principi, 370 F.3d 1089, 1096 (2004), the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit held if a preexisting disorder is noted upon entry into service, the veteran cannot bring a claim for service connection for that disorder, but the veteran may bring a claim for service-connected aggravation of that disorder. In that case, 38 U.S.C. § 1153 applies and the burden falls on the veteran to establish an increase in disability during service. If the presumption of aggravation attaches, the burden shifts to the government to show by clear and unmistakable evidence that there has been no increase in the severity of the preexisting condition or that any increase was the result of natural progression. Id; see also 38 C.F.R. § 3.306(b).

"Clear and unmistakable evidence," as used in the governing statutes, has been interpreted to mean evidence that "cannot be misinterpreted and misunderstood, i.e., it is undebatable." Vanerson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 254, 258-59 (1999) (citing definition of "clear and unmistakable error" in Russell v. Principi, 3 Vet. App. 310, 313-14 (1992) (en banc)).

The first contention by the Veteran pertains to whether the AOJ failed to apply the presumption of soundness. She maintains that no clear and unmistakable evidence exists to show that the Veteran had T-cell lymphoma prior to enlistment and that her STRs clearly show worsening. 

In this case, implicit in the July 2007 rating decision is the AOJ's determination that the presumption of soundness does not attach to the Veteran's claim. Here, the AOJ found (1) that a review of STRs showed the skin condition that was originally noted as vitiligo on the entrance examination was, later while still in service, diagnosed as atopic dermatitis or pre-mycosis fungoides, and then back to atopic dermatitis and (2) that based on the June 2007 VA examination, it was the same diagnosis as the current disability, that is, atopic dermatitis later determined as T-cell lymphoma, for which she claimed service connection. Both findings are supported by the entrance examination, STRs, and a VA examiner's opinion in accordance with the requirement under 38 C.F.R. § 3.304. 

The Veteran disagrees with the AOJ's determination by contending that no clear and unmistakable evidence exists to show that she had T-cell lymphoma prior to enlistment and that she had only vitiligo, not T-cell lymphoma, noted on the entrance examination. This contention is not supported by the medical evidence of record. In fact, a review of the STRs indicates that the condition described as vitiligo on the June 1994 entrance examination was noted not accurate even while she was in service. Another military clinician provided a diagnosis of atopic dermatitis instead and also raised a possibility of EPTS (existed prior to service) in July 1995. Moreover, a January 1997 STR by a dermatologist documents the Veteran's report that the skin condition had begun sometime in 1994 and spread to the present extent over one year. Therefore, the competent and credible medical evidence from the service records indicates that the Veteran was complaining about the same skin condition that had begun in 1994 prior to service, which was noted as vitiligo at the entrance examination or later as atopic dermatitis or pre-mycosis fungoides, that is, precursor of T-cell lymphoma, while in service. As such, it cannot be said that there was no clear and unmistakable evidence that the Veteran's T-cell lymphoma did not exist prior to her service because competent and credible service medical evidence indicates the contrary. Additionally, a July 2007 VA examiner opined that the Veteran's skin condition clinically manifested as two presentations of mycosis fungoides (which the examiner clarified is T cell lymphoma) - poikiloderma and lymphomatoid papules. The AOJ's finding that the Veteran's T-cell lymphoma, claimed as atopic dermatitis, existed prior to service is supported by the entrance examination as well as other medical evidence and the Veteran's reported history. Accordingly, the AOJ correctly apply the regulation concerning the presumption of soundness in finding that the presumption does not attach to the claim. 

In such case of the evidence for pre-existence, under Wagner, the Veteran cannot bring the claim of service connection for that disorder, but the Veteran may bring a claim of service-connected aggravation for that disorder. In that case, the Veteran must establish an increase in disability during service. 

For this matter, the Veteran maintains, as her second contention, that the STRs clearly showed increase in service, and thus the presumption of aggravation attaches. This is in disagreement with the AOJ's finding in the July 2007 rating decision that there was no evidence that the condition permanently worsened as a result of service. 

Here, a review of the records available to the AOJ at the time of the July 2007 rating decision indicates that the Veteran had multiple occasions where her skin condition flared up resulting in worsened symptoms such as eruption, peeling, scaling, infected lesions, papules, plaques, etc., both locally or over greater surface area of the body and that they were treated by topical cream and lotions, topical steroids, as well as light box treatment while in service with no records for hospitalization or additional testing subsequent to the first biopsy in 1997. In her December 2006 VA Form 21-526, the Veteran reported that she was profiled for her skin condition to limit exposure to sun and another profile that allowed her to wear a different type of uniform to lessen irritation to the skin. Those profiles were to prevent further flareups or irritation to her skin and do not indicate that her skin disability had gotten severe enough to substantially interfere with her military work or activities of daily living for a long period of time. Symptoms such as dry skin, discoloration, eruptions/rash, and peeling skins reported by the Veteran while in service primarily consists of the symptoms of similar nature that she had experienced prior to service based on her report and observations by various healthcare provides, to include the VA examiner. As such, the evidence lacks in showing that her pre-existed skin condition permanently worsened. Therefore, the Veteran's contention that her skin disability worsened during service is at most a disagreement as to how the facts were weighed, and a disagreement as to how the evidence was weighed or evaluated does not constitute CUE. See Russell v. Principi, 3 Vet. App. 310, 313-14 (1992). As the Federal Circuit held, the evidence of temporary flareups symptomatic of an underling preexisting condition, alone, is not sufficient for a non-combat veteran to show increased disability under 38 U.S.C. § 1153 unless the underlying condition is worsened. Davis v. Principi, 276 F.3d 1341, 1346-47 (Fed. Cir. 2002). 

For the foregoing reasons, the Board finds that the AOJ did not commit an error of fact nor of law in the July 2007 rating decision as the Veteran alleges because the AOJ correctly found that neither the presumption of soundness nor the presumption of aggravation attached to her claim based on findings of facts supported by the evidence of record. Even if some evidence is favorable to the Veteran, as she alleges, "[i]t is the prerogative of the factfinder... to interpret the evidence and draw reasonable inferences from it." Evans v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 180, 187 (2014), aff'd, 642 F. App'x 982 (Fed. Cir. 2016). 

Accordingly, the request to revise or reverse the July 2007 rating decision that denied service connection for lymphoid papulosis associated with T-cell lymphoma (claimed as atopic dermatitis) on the basis of CUE must be denied. 

 

 

Emily Tamlyn

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Y. Taylor, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.