Citation Nr: A25034923
Decision Date: 04/16/25	Archive Date: 04/16/25

DOCKET NO. 240916-473318
DATE: April 16, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea, to include on a secondary basis, is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from December 1981 to November 1984 and from December 1986 to April 1992, to include service in Southwest Asia.

In January 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR), and requested review of a December 2022 decision, which had denied service connection for sleep apnea. Although the Veteran initially requested Higher-Level Review, the Higher-Level Reviewer determined that there was a duty to assist error and transferred the claim to the Supplemental Claim decision review option for additional development.  See April 2023 rating decision. Thereafter, in August 2024 rating decision, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the supplemental claim decision on appeal, which found that new and relevant evidence had been received and denied the claim of service connection for sleep apnea based on the evidence of record at the time of that decision.  

In September 2024, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 10182 Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) to appeal his claim to the Board and selected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the August 2024 rating decision. However, because the Board is remanding the claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the readjudication of that claim. 38 C.F.R. ยง 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Finally, the Board is cognizant of the recent decision issued by the U.S. Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) in the case of Williams v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 305 (2024). There, the Court held, in essence, that the Board must refrain from deciding a case until the case proceeds to the point where a docket switch is no longer permitted under the terms of 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.202(c)(2) unless a docket switch waiver is provided by the Veteran. In this case, the Veteran has until August 2025 (one year from the issuance of the rating decision on appeal) to request to change from the Direct Review docket to another Board docket under the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA). Although the Veteran has not provided a docket switch waiver, as the Board has determined that a remand of the Veteran's claim is warranted, he is not prejudiced by the Board proceeding to adjudicate his claim without delay. See 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.800. 

Service Connection for Sleep Apnea

The Veteran seeks service connection for sleep apnea on the basis that he believes it is secondary to his service-connected posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD). See October 2022 VA Form 21-526EZ, January 2023 VA Form 20-0996 Request for Higher Level Review, and September 2024 VA Form 21-4128, Statement in Support of Claim. 

February and April 2022 private sleep studies show a current diagnosis of obstructive sleep apnea. 

In support of his claim the Veteran submitted an August 2022 private medical opinion from a psychologist who opined that the Veteran's sleep apnea was "due to the psychiatric difficulties from his military service" and was "substantially aggravated by his service-connected PTSD." The opinion states that the Veteran's "mental health concerns" create hyperarousal and a "risk for weight gain and obesity" which in turn cause and aggravate his sleep apnea. The opinion cites to studies about non-obese patients with sleep apnea that suggest a contributing psychological factor. However, this medical opinion is not adequate for adjudication purposes because the psychologist does not address the other potential causes of weight gain noted in the treatment records, to include genetics, lack of exercise due to gout, psychiatric disabilities other than PTSD, and leg, knee, and back pain. Additionally, while excerpts and citations to treatises and studies are noted, the actual source material in its entirety is not included with the opinion.

VA secondary service connection and aggravation medical opinions were obtained in November 2022 and October 2023; however, these are also inadequate for adjudication purposes. The November 2022 opinion does not address the private medical opinion and does not include an opinion as to aggravation. The October 2023 opinion notes an agreement with the 2022 private opinion that "weight gain" was not due to the Veteran's low back disability and tinnitus "diagnosed prior to service." However, the record does not include any such statement from the private examiner, nor does it show the Veteran was diagnosed with any disabilities prior to service.

In light of the inadequacies identified above, the Board finds that remand for an addendum opinion is warranted to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error. 

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Obtain a VA medical opinion from a qualified examiner that addresses the Veteran's claim of service connection for sleep apnea. The claims file must be made available to the examiner. The examiner is requested to review all pertinent records associated with the claims file, including the Veteran's service treatment records, post-service medical records, VA and private medical opinions, and the Veteran's assertions. A clear explanation for all opinions based on specific facts for the case as well as relevant medical principles is needed. 

The Veteran is competent to attest to matters of which he has first-hand knowledge, including observable symptoms. If there is a medical basis to support or doubt the history provided by the Veteran, the examiner should provide a fully reasoned explanation.

For the Veteran's diagnosed obstructive sleep apnea, the examiner should provide an opinion as to the following questions:

(a)	 Is it at least as likely as not that the Veteran's sleep apnea is caused or aggravated by his service-connected PTSD?

For the purposes of secondary service connection, the examiner is advised that aggravation is defined as "any increase in disability." See Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439, 448 (1995).

(b)	The examiner should also address whether any weight gain noted in the Veteran is an intermediate step between his current sleep apnea and his service-connected PTSD. Specifically, the examiner should provide an opinion as to whether the Veteran's sleep apnea would not have occurred but for any weight gain caused or aggravated by his service-connected PTSD (to include from any medications taken to treat the PTSD).

The examiner should address the August 2022 opinion from a private psychologist noted above.

A complete rationale must be provided for all opinions presented. If the examiner cannot provide the requested opinion without resorting to speculation, he or she should provide an explanation stating why this is so. In so doing, the examiner should explain whether the inability to provide a more definitive opinion is the result of a need for additional information or that he or she has exhausted the limits of current medical knowledge in providing an answer to that particular question.

If the examiner determines that the requested opinion may not be provided without a physical examination of the Veteran, then such should be scheduled.

 

 

A. ISHIZAWAR

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Fletcher, Kathleen

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.1303.