Citation Nr: A25034140
Decision Date: 04/14/25	Archive Date: 04/14/25

DOCKET NO. 240227-421157
DATE: April 14, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an increased disability rating of 100 percent for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is granted.

Entitlement to a total disability rating based on individual unemployability (TDIU) due to service-connected disabilities is dismissed as moot.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. Resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, throughout the appeal period, the symptoms and overall impairment caused by the Veteran's PTSD more nearly approximated total occupational and social impairment.

2. The award of a rating of 100 percent for the Veteran's PTSD throughout the appeal period renders the issue of entitlement to a TDIU moot. 

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for an increased disability rating of 100 percent for PTSD have been met. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1-4.10, 4.125, 4.126, 4.130, DC 9411. 

2. The award of a rating of 100 percent for PTSD throughout the period on appeal renders the issue of entitlement to a TDIU moot and it is dismissed. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.340, 3.341, 4.16.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty with the United States Army from August 1969 to October 1969. 

This appeal is being processed under the modernized review system, commonly referred to as the "AMA," as established by the Veterans Appeals Improvement and Modernization Act of 2017. 115 Pub. L. No. 55, 131 Stat. 1105.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal of a February 2024 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) regional office, an agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ).  

The Veteran timely appealed the rating decision in a February 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) and elected the Hearing docket. A Board hearing was held in January 2025 before the undersigned Veterans Law Judge. A copy of the transcript of that hearing has been associated with the claims file. 

In view of the above, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the issuance of the February 2024 AOJ decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or his representative at the hearing or within 90 days following the hearing (i.e. until April 7, 2025. 38 C.F.R. § 20.302(a)). 

Evidence was added to the claims file during a period of time when new evidence was not allowed. As the Board is adjudicating the claims herein, it may not consider this evidence in its decision. 38 C.F.R. § 20.300. If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

Increased Rating

Disability evaluations are determined by comparing a Veteran's present symptoms with criteria set forth in VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities (Rating Schedule), which is based on average impairment in earning capacity. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. Part 4. In order to evaluate the level of disability and any changes in condition, it is necessary to consider the complete medical history of the Veteran's condition. Schafrath v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 589, 594 (1991). If the disability more closely approximates the criteria for the higher of two ratings, the higher rating will be assigned; otherwise, the lower rating is assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7. In general, it is not expected that all cases will show all the findings specified; however, findings sufficiently characteristic to identify the disease and the disability therefrom and coordination of rating with impairment of function will be expected in all instances. 38 C.F.R. § 4.21. 

"Staged" ratings are appropriate for an increased-rating claim when the factual findings show distinct time periods when the service-connected disability exhibits symptoms warranting different ratings irrespective of whether an initial or established rating. Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119 (1999); Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007). The effective date of an award of increased compensation should not be assigned mechanically based on the date of an examination. Rather, all of the facts should be examined to determine the earliest date that it is ascertainable that an increase in disability first manifested. Swain v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 219, 224 (2015).

DC 9411 provides that PTSD is to be rated under the General Rating Formula (General Formula) for evaluating psychiatric disabilities other than eating disorders. 

A noncompensable, or zero percent, rating is assigned when a condition has been formally diagnosed, but symptoms are not severe enough either to interfere with occupational and social functioning or to require continuous medication.

A 10 percent rating is assigned when occupational and social impairment is due to mild or transient symptoms which decrease work efficiency and ability to perform occupational tasks only during periods of significant stress, or symptoms controlled by continuous medication. 

A 30 percent rating is assigned when symptoms such as depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks (weekly or less often), chronic sleep impairment, or mild memory loss (such as forgetting names, directions, or recent events), cause occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks (although generally functioning satisfactorily, with routine behavior, self-care, and normal conversation).

A 50 percent rating is assigned when symptoms such as flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; or difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships cause occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.

A 70 percent evaluation is warranted where there is objective evidence demonstrating occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately, or effectively; impaired impulse control, such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence; spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work-like setting; and the inability to establish and maintain effective relationships. Id.

A maximum 100 percent rating is assigned for total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; or memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation or own name. Id. 

Under the General Formula, the Board must conduct a "holistic analysis" that considers all associated symptoms, regardless of whether they are listed as criteria. Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 10, 22 (2017); 38 C.F.R. § 4.130. The Board must determine whether unlisted symptoms are similar in severity, frequency, and duration to the listed symptoms associated with specific disability percentages. Then, the Board must determine whether the associated symptoms, both listed and unlisted, caused the level of impairment required for a higher disability rating. Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 114-118 (Fed. Cir. 2013). 

Ordinarily, a lay person is competent to report symptoms and experiences observable by their senses; however, usually, they are not competent to prove a matter requiring medical expertise. See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 (Fed. Cir. 2007); Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 470 (1994).

Reasonable doubt as to the degree of the disability will be resolved in the veteran's favor. 38 C.F.R. § 4.3.

Entitlement to an increased disability rating of 100 percent for PTSD. 

The Veteran contends that he is entitled to a 100 percent disability rating for his PTSD. As this claim stems from the February 2024 rating decision, which granted service connection for PTSD and assigned an initial 70 percent rating, the evidence to be considered is that covering the entirety of the period on review and is not limited to the present level of the Veteran's disability. See Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119, 126 (1999).

The Board finds that throughout the appeal period, the Veteran's PTSD did more nearly approximate the level of impairment required for a 100 percent disability rating. Throughout this period, record evidence shows that the Veteran posed a persistent danger of hurting self or others, a symptom associated with a total disability evaluation.

Medical evidence of record includes a December 2023 VA examination for PTSD. During the examination, the Veteran reported difficulties in his marriage, describing his dynamic with his wife as toxic due to his PTSD symptoms. He reported socially isolating and maintaining few friendships. He reported difficulty working because of his inability to handle stress and his difficulty with authority. The Veteran endorsed symptoms of depression, anxiety, anger issues, difficulty trusting others, panic attacks, and sleep disturbances.  

The examiner noted symptoms for VA rating purposes including depressed mood; anxiety; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; chronic sleep impairment; flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory or stereotyped speech; disturbances of motivation and mood; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a worklike setting; and inability to establish and maintain effective relationships. The examiner observed the Veteran's mood as indicative of depression, with a flattened affect and a dysphoric emotional state. Notably, the examiner indicated the Veteran experienced intrusive symptoms including dissociative reactions (e.g., flashbacks) in which the Veteran feels or acts as if the traumatic event(s) were recurring. Additionally, the examiner noted marked alterations in arousal and reactivity associated with the traumatic events, including irritable behavior and angry outbursts (with little or no provocation) typically expressed as verbal or physical aggression toward people or objects and reckless or self-destructive behavior. The examiner stated that the Veteran's symptoms result in occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking and/or mood.  

In a November 2024 CEH private treatment record, Dr. J.S., M.D., diagnosed the Veteran with PTSD and depression and reported that he experienced symptoms such as waking up in panic, difficulty remembering names, and anger and rage. The Veteran's family was reportedly afraid of him at times. The Veteran's symptoms included depressed mood; anxiety; crying spells; panic attacks 3-4 days weekly; suspiciousness; paranoia; flashbacks; obsessive ritualistic behavior; extreme hypervigilance; chronic sleep impairment; nightmares; night sweats; waking up disoriented; feeling detached from others; constricted; quick to anger; difficulty refraining from engaging in road rage situations; guilt; low motivation; unprovoked irritability; poor concentration; excessive worry; racing thoughts; pressured speech; loss of interest in activities; suicidal ideations; fatigue; difficulty adapting to stressful situations and circumstances, which include a work or a work like setting; inability to establish and/or maintain personal relationships; mood disturbances; fleeting eye contact; gross impairment in thought processes and/or communication; impaired judgment; social isolation; increased risky behavior; avoidance; and feeling always on edge. 

A December 2024 CEH private treatment record reported the Veteran contemplated suicide many times over a period of years. 

A January 2025 CEH private treatment record reported the Veteran had intermittent suicidal ideations. 

In a January 2025 private medical record from CEH, Dr. J.S., M.D., reported that the Veteran's PTSD has led to significant social and occupational impairment, hindering his ability to adapt to stressful situations and complete work-related tasks effectively. Dr. J.S. opined that the severity of the Veteran's symptoms aligns with the criteria under the 100 percent disability rating. He reported the Veteran struggled with symptoms such as nightmares; anxiety; depression; years of skepticism; depressed moods; anxiety; crying spells; panic attacks; suspiciousness;  paranoia; flashbacks; obsessional ritualistic behaviors (frequently checking door locks, and windows, sitting where he can see the majority of the room including the exits, and/or taking different routes home); extreme hypervigilance; chronic sleep impairment; nightmares; night sweats; waking up disoriented; feeling detached from others; quick to anger; difficulty refraining from engaging in road rage situations; guilt; low motivation; unprovoked irritability; poor concentration; excessive worry; racing thoughts; loss of interest in activities; suicidal ideations; fatigue; difficulty adapting to stressful situations and circumstances (which include work or a worklike setting); inability to establish and/or maintain personal relationships effectively; mood disturbances; gross impairment in thought processes and/or communication; impaired judgment; social isolation; increased risky behavior; avoidance; and constantly feeling on edge. Dr. J.S. concluded that the Veteran's symptoms rendered him as having a level of impairment that is total occupational and social impairment.

In the January 2025 Board hearing, the Veteran's wife, D.L., competently and credibly testified regarding the severity and breadth of the Veteran's PTSD symptoms. She described his anger issues and reported that there is "some kind of incident" almost every place they go because of how quickly he is to anger. She also described feeling fearful when riding in the car with the Veteran because of how quickly his anger escalates over a seemingly normal conversation, stating that "all of [a] sudden, he just acts like he's had it, he just wants to drive off in the woods and never come back again." In response to the Veteran's anger, there have been times where she has felt unsafe and asked to be let out of the car. D.L. described the Veteran's history of suicidal ideations and stated that there have been times where he acted towards suicide by "putting something around his neck." She is afraid that he will overdose on pills. 

Additionally, D.L. testified regarding the Veteran's employment. He works with D.L. running a fashion jewelry business, but D.L. handles most of the operation functions of the business due to the Veteran's limitations. She stated that if she was not holding the operations together, it would be functionally difficult, if not impossible, for the Veteran to be able to run everything on his own. Keeping track of multiple, competing priorities would be difficult for him. Frequent customer interactions would also prove difficult for the Veteran because of his irritability and anger issues. D.L. explained that she mostly handles customer interactions because of this fact. D.L. reported that the Veteran does not sleep well at night due to his PTSD and sleep apnea, which result in him often feeling exhausted. He also falls asleep sitting in a chair, wakes up at the very last minute to prepare for work, and goes to bed as soon as he finishes work. 

The Board finds the frequency and severity of the Veteran's symptoms more closely approximate the criteria for a 100 percent rating. The evidence of the Veteran's total disability picture supports a finding that the Veteran experienced total occupational and social impairment throughout the appeal period primarily due to his persistent danger of hurting self or others. As noted above, the evidence reflects that the Veteran experiences consistent anger, including towards others in public settings. See November 2024 CEH private treatment record; see also January 2025 hearing transcript. He exhibits irritable behavior and angry outbursts (with little or no provocation) typically expressed as verbal or physical aggression toward people and reckless or self-destructive behavior. See December 2023 VA PTSD examination; see also January 2025 hearing transcript. His unprovoked irritability, coupled with increased risky behavior and impaired judgment cause his family to occasionally fear him and to fear for their own safety. Lastly, the Veteran has a history of suicidal ideations with intent or plan. Additionally, Dr. J.S. reported that the Veteran had difficulty remembering names. See November 2024 CEH private treatment record. Memory loss is a symptom associated with the 100 percent rating criteria. 

Based on the above, the Board resolves any reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor and finds that the maximum 100 percent rating is warranted throughout the appeal period for service-connected PTSD. 

TDIU

A TDIU may be granted where the schedular rating is less than 100 percent and the veteran is unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation as a result of service-connected disabilities, provided that, if there is only one such disability, this disability shall be ratable at 60 percent or more. If there are two or more disabilities, there shall be at least one disability ratable at 40 percent or more and the combined rating must be 70 percent or more. Disabilities resulting from common etiology or a single accident or disabilities affecting a single body system will be considered as one disability for the above purposes of one 60 percent disability or one 40 percent disability. 38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a). 

The United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) has recognized that a 100 percent rating under the Schedule for Rating Disabilities means that a Veteran is totally disabled. Holland v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 443, 446 (1994). Thus, if VA has found a veteran to be totally disabled as a result of a particular service-connected disability or combination of disabilities pursuant to the rating schedule, there is no need, and no authority, to otherwise rate the veteran totally disabled on any other basis. See Herlehy v. Principi, 15 Vet. App. 33, 35 (2001) (finding a request for TDIU moot where 100 percent schedular rating was awarded for the same period).

However, a grant of a 100 percent disability does not always render the issue of TDIU moot. VA's duty to maximize a claimant's benefits includes consideration of whether his disabilities establish entitlement to special monthly compensation (SMC) under 38 U.S.C. § 1114. See Buie v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 242, 250 (2011); Bradley v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 280, 294 (2008). Specifically, SMC may be warranted when a veteran "has a service-connected disability rated as total, and (1) has additional service-connected disability or disabilities independently ratable at 60 percent or more, or (2) by reason of service-connected disability, or disabilities, is permanently housebound." 38 U.S.C. § 1114(s); 38 C.F.R. § 3.350(i)(2); see also Bradley, 22 Vet. App. 280.

Entitlement to a TDIU. 

The Veteran was granted a 100 percent evaluation for his service-connected PTSD in this decision, and thus he is in receipt of a combined schedular 100 percent disability rating for his service-connected disability. He does not have other service-connected disabilities independently ratable at 60 percent or more. 

There is also no evidence of record that the Veteran was permanently housebound due to his service-connected disability. Therefore, there is no basis for assignment of SMC pursuant to 38 U.S.C. § 1114.

(Continued on the next page)

?

Accordingly, the Board finds that the issue of entitlement to a TDIU is moot and will be dismissed.

 

 

Marcus N. Fulton

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Cress, L., Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.