Citation Nr: A25034692
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 240625-450752
DATE: April 15, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to an increased rating in excess of 10 percent for service-connected right ankle sprain residuals is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served honorably on active duty from September 1975 to March 1997. 

This matter comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal of a June 2024 rating decision issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) regional office, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ).

In the June 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the November 2023 rating decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of this claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Entitlement to an increased rating in excess of 10 percent for service-connected right ankle sprain residuals is remanded.

During the pendency of this claim, the Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims decided Ingram v. Collins, in which the Court stated: "because the applicable diagnostic codes (DCs) and special musculoskeletal regulations do not reference medication, the Board must discount beneficial medication effects when assigning an evaluation." No. 23-1798, 2025 U.S. App. Vet. Claims LEXIS 327 (Vet. App. Mar. 12, 2025); see also Jones v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 56 (2012).

As a general matter, rules announced in judicial decisions apply retroactively to all cases still open on review when the new rule is announced. VAOGCPREC 7-03; see also Brewer v. West, 11 Vet. App. 228, 234 (1998). As such, remand is appropriate. 38?C.F.R. §?20.802(a).

During his October 2023 VA examination, the Veteran reported that he takes acetaminophen for his ankle sprain residuals. The Board must therefore remand this matter for a medical opinion as to the ameliorative effects, if any, of the medication that the Veteran takes for his right ankle sprain residuals. Consideration must also be given to less movement than normal, more movement than normal, weakened movement, excess fatigability, incoordination, and pain on movement. See DeLuca v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 202 (1995).  

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

1. Afford the Veteran a VA examination to assess the nature and severity of his service-connected right ankle strain residuals. The entire claims file must be provided to, and reviewed by, the examiner, and any indicated tests, studies, or evaluations should be performed.

2. After review of the claims file, and examination of the Veteran, the examiner is asked to provide a full description of the disability and report all signs and symptoms necessary for evaluating the Veteran's right ankle strain residuals under the applicable DC. The examiner must attempt to elicit information regarding the severity, frequency, and duration of symptoms during the appeal period. To the extent possible, the examiner should identify any symptoms and impairments due to the service-connected disability being assessed, including the impact on occupational functioning and activities of daily living.

3. In addressing the severity of the Veteran's right ankle disability, the examiner is instructed to consider and specifically address: 

whether any medications the Veteran uses or has used during the appeal period affect or affected the severity of his right ankle sprain residuals. If so, please identify each medication and clearly explain how such medication affects the condition, and 

if any such medication is productive of ameliorative effects, clearly identify such effects and opine as to the severity of the condition absent such medication.

4. The examiner should opine, pursuant to DeLuca v. Brown, whether the Veteran would have further reduced functional limitation without the ameliorative effect of medication. If so, the examiner should estimate as to what the functionally equivalent ROM is to the Veteran's functional limitations. In other words, the medical examiner should determine whether the Veteran's ankle would exhibit weakened movement, excess fatigability, or incoordination, in the absence of medication. These determinations should, if feasible, be expressed in terms of the degree of additional range-of-motion loss due to any weakened movement, excess fatigability, or incoordination

5. A complete rationale must be given for all opinions and conclusions expressed. If it is not possible to provide a specific measurement without resorting to mere speculation, the examiner must state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training).

 

 

KRISTI L. GUNN

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Devin White

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.