Citation Nr: A25034264
Decision Date: 04/14/25	Archive Date: 04/14/25

DOCKET NO. 240816-464062
DATE: April 14, 2025

ORDER

For the entire appeal period, a rating of 70 percent, but no higher, for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) with unspecified depressive disorder (UDD) is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

For the entire appeal period, the severity, frequency, and duration of the Veteran's psychiatric symptoms more closely approximated occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas but did not more closely approximate total occupational and social impairment.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for a rating of 70 percent, but no higher, for the entire appeal period, for PTSD with UDD have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.126, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9435-9411.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served in the Army from February 2002 to June 2009. His medals include the Iraq Campaign Medal with a Campaign Star. This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a rating decision issued in September 2023 by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) under the modernized appeals system known as the Appeals Modernization Act.

Although the Veteran initially requested Higher-Level Review when submitting the August 2022 VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review, the Higher-Level Reviewer determined that there had been a duty to assist error and transferred the claim to the Supplemental Claim decision review option for additional development. 

In the August 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the September 2023 AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 50 percent for PTSD with UDD.

In May 2022 correspondence, the Veteran contends through his representative that he is entitled to a 70 percent rating.

In August 2022 correspondence, the Veteran contends through his representative that the VA did not explain why it discounted favorable evidence provided by the Veteran and reiterates that a 70 percent rating is warranted.

In the August 2024 VA Form 10182, the Veteran contends that a 70 percent rating is warranted for the pendency of the claim. The Veteran states that he is capable of describing his symptoms and his statements must be taken as credible and competent unless the Board determines them to be otherwise. He contends that the VA erred when it did not review the evidence he submitted and by not providing any reasons or bases for denying the persuasiveness of the evidence. He contends that further development of the claim is required. Finally, he maintains that a rating of 70 percent is warranted for the pendency of the claim.

A disability rating is determined by the application of VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities (Rating Schedule), 38 C.F.R. Part 4. The percentage ratings contained in the Rating Schedule represent, as far as can be practicably determined, the average impairment in earning capacity resulting from diseases and injuries incurred or aggravated during military service and their residual conditions in civil occupations. Separate diagnostic codes identify the various disabilities. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1. VA has a duty to acknowledge and consider all regulations that are potentially applicable through the assertions and issues raised in the record, and to explain the reasons and bases for its conclusions. Schafrath v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 589 (1991).

Where there is a question as to which of two evaluations shall be applied, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria for that rating. Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7. Where entitlement to compensation has already been established and an increase in the disability rating is at issue, the present level of disability is of primary importance. Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119, 126-27 (1999). However, separate ratings may be assigned for separate periods of time based on the facts found. This practice is known as "staged" ratings. Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007).

The period on appeal begins on September 22, 2020, the date VA received the Veteran's intent to file a claim since a June 25, 2021, increased rating claim was timely received, plus the one-year look-back period. See Gaston v. Shinseki, 605 F.3d 979, 982 (Fed. Cir. 2010). For the entire appeal period, the Veteran has been in receipt of a 50 percent rating pursuant to Diagnostic Code 9435-9411.

The Board notes that Diagnostic Code 9435-9411 is subject to the criteria listed under the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders. 38 C.F.R. § 4.130. Under the General Formula for Mental Disorders (General Formula), the Board must conduct a "holistic analysis" that considers all associated symptoms, regardless of whether they are listed as criteria. Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 10, 22 (2017); 38 C.F.R. § 4.130.

In relevant part, a 50 percent rating is warranted where there is occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to such symptoms as: flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short and long term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships.

A 70 percent rating is warranted when there is occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a work-like setting); inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.

A 100 percent rating is warranted for total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name.

The psychiatric symptoms listed in the above rating criteria are not exclusive but are examples of typical symptoms for the listed percentage ratings. Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436 (2002). The Board must determine whether unlisted symptoms are similar in severity, frequency, and duration to the listed symptoms associated with specific disability percentages. Then, the Board must determine whether the associated symptoms, both listed and unlisted, caused the level of impairment required for a higher disability rating. Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 114-18 (Fed. Cir. 2013).

After considering all of the evidence of record, the Board finds that a 70 percent rating, but no higher, is warranted for the Veteran's PTSD with UDD.

In May 2022 correspondence, the Veteran states that he experiences suicidal ideation, obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities, speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant, near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately, and effectively, impaired impulse control, spatial disorientation, neglect of personal appearance and hygiene, difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances, and an inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.

Further, the Veteran contends that his anger symptoms and hypervigilance require medication or constant checking by him in order to stay in alone. He also contends that he exhibits strong signs of anxiety, depression, and obsessive and compulsive behavior.

In separate May 2022 correspondence, the Veteran states that his symptoms include anger, anxiety, chronic sleep problems, confusion, depression, difficulty coping with stress, difficulty thinking straight, distractibility, drug or alcohol abuse, emotional numbing, guilt, hypervigilance or obsessively checking if things are safe, inappropriate behavior, intrusive thoughts, lack of emotion, low motivation, mania (periods of extreme high energy), memory problems, negative thoughts about yourself, others, or the world, neglect of chores or tasks, obsessive rituals, paranoia, poor concentration, problems at work, sense of helplessness, sexual dysfunction, flattened affect, suicidal thoughts or feelings, or not caring if you live or die, suspiciousness, and an inability to share feelings.

The Veteran states that he has a serious dislike for management due to their lack of concern for the employees. He believes that they are in the position they are in not due to merit but due to their ability to say "yes." The Veteran contends that the people who taught him in college were incompetent at their job. The Veteran contends that it is difficult for him to let people in. He states that his mother passed in 2018 and that he has no good or bad feelings towards this. Specifically, he states that it is like she never existed. His father was divorced from his mother and the Veteran contends that he was unable to console his father when he cried at his mother's passing.

The Veteran states that he has only acquaintances outside of his military friends as he cannot trust anyone else fully. The Veteran states that he is constantly concerned with locking doors including car doors, house doors, and shed doors. He contends that he finds public or group settings physically and mentally exhausting. The Veteran finds himself becoming worked up over most things and reports that his hobbies include hunting, fishing, reading, carpentry, and mechanic work.

The Veteran's treatment records reflect that in September 2019 he was referred for psychiatric treatment due to reports of stress with a history of depression and anxiety. He reported the recent loss of his mother and having started drinking alcohol to help deal with stress. He stated that he also went through a divorce at the beginning of 2019 after a 10-year marriage. The Veteran stated that he feels that he has not mourned his mother's passing. He reported previously being on medication but that he was so "zombiefied" that he felt that "the house could be on fire, and [he] wouldn't care."

The Veteran reported symptoms that may be consistent with major depression, moderate to severe anxiety, and PTSD. The Veteran indicated that he has poor social interactions with others and describes life as being unhappy with a lack of importance. He denied suicidal and homicidal ideation and clarified that being active in the military gave him a sense of purpose and responsibility of serious life situations. He minimized conflicts that are presently experienced from day-to day interaction with patients while at his job and with co-workers. The Veteran self-reported only being able to tap into emotions when watching heart felt movies that are not a reality. Specifically, the Veteran stated that "I feel I can allow myself to go there because I know it's acting and it's not real."

The Veteran described his daily routine as having no life. Specifically, he stated that he goes home, rests, gets back up, and goes to work again. He reported not having a consistent routine and identified with feelings of going through the motion of living. The Veteran reported struggling with grief and loss related to his mother's passing and denies himself of feeling emotions due to masking his pain.

The Veteran's mood was euthymic with a restricted, emotionless affect. He exhibited fidgety behavior as he continued to cross his legs back and forth and showed a flight of ideas and tangential speech. The Veteran reported being recently divorced due to infidelity in the marriage and being presently employed at a hospital for two years working in computed tomography (CT). The Veteran reports that he hates his job and finds no excitement in work. Specifically, he stated that "I have never enjoyed a job outside of the military."

The Veteran reported a flat emotional response towards others and lacking empathy, and he reports his depression is now resulting in him sleeping excessively. The Veteran states he has not been very disciplined and lacks motivation to change, and previous coping skills he used included working out 5 times per week. The Veteran had discontinued exercising for several weeks at the time of the medical appointment. The VA medical provider stated that the Veteran is out of touch with his emotions due to mental detachment from trauma exposure.

The Veteran had several self-deprecatory thoughts in regard to his outlook on life. Specifically, the Veteran indicated that "it's too late to change, I need a career, I hate my job, and I desire to have a healthy relationship." The Veteran disclosed that he has a close relationship with his former spouse as a friend, however the Veteran states that the privilege has been abused with intimacy.

The VA medical provider indicated that the exacerbation of the symptoms became more severe when the Veteran's divorce was finalized in January 2019. The Veteran reported becoming more depressed in regard to loneliness as he now resides alone but does not regret the divorce. He stated that he is a father of a three-year-old which he acknowledges assisted in altering his mood. Specifically, prior to the birth of his child Veteran reports he was beginning to feel free without the responsibility of anyone as he had while in active service.

In October 2019, the Veteran reported feeling better on the current medication regime but reported that some problems continue to be persistent including a lack of sleep. The Veteran's affect was more energetic including his facial expressions. His mood was euthymic, his thought process was more positive, and goal directed, and the destructive behavioral pattern with his former spouse had been resolved and provided some relief.

In August 2020, the Veteran complained of depressed mood but denied suicidal and homicidal ideations. A May 2021 medical note reflects that the Veteran reported experiencing sleep disturbances and denied suicidal intent. He also reported working full time as a CT tech in a hospital, living with his girlfriend, and going through a divorce 2 years prior.

At the July 2021 VA examination, the Veteran reported divorcing his spouse after 8 years of marriage to which the Veteran attributes the divorce primarily to his PTSD symptoms. He stated that they have joint custody of their son. The Veteran reported that his former spouse has domiciliary custody, but that they separated amicably and have no problems with regard to parenting. The Veteran stated that he resides with his girlfriend of approximately 1 year. He reported that he occasionally talks to a few individuals he served with but that otherwise he has no friends. 

The Veteran reported working at a hospital as a CT Tech since 2018. He stated that prior to this he worked at another local hospital from 2013 until 2018. The VA examiner noted that the Veteran arrived promptly for his scheduled appointment and displayed adequate grooming/hygiene and was dressed in appropriate attire. His affect was anxious and dysthymic, and his thought process was linear, with no evidence of loose associations, delusions, or hallucinations. The Veteran's speech was goal directed, with no evidence of loose associations, delusions, or hallucinations.

The VA examiner concluded that the Veteran's PTSD with UDD results in occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks, although generally functioning satisfactorily, with normal routine behavior, self-care and conversation. The VA examiner indicated that the Veteran's symptoms include depressed mood, anxiety, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss, disturbances of motivation and mood, and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships. The VA examiner noted that the Veteran's suicide risk level is low acute and that the Veteran acknowledged a history of passive suicidal ideation, but never any plan or intent to act. The Veteran denied any recent suicidal ideation.

At the January 2023 VA examination, the Veteran reported residing with his girlfriend of 2 years and having regular contact with his son. The Veteran reported that he stays in touch with friends that he served with in the military, but that he has no friends locally. He stated that he works the night shift at work to avoid interacting with others as much as possible.

The Veteran works in the x-ray department of a hospital where he has been employed there for approximately 1 year. He reported previously working at another local hospital for about 5 years and changed employment due to conflicts with management. He reported that, at both of these places of employment, he started working on the day shift but had to transition to the night shift to minimize interactions with coworkers and supervisors.

The VA examiner noted that the Veteran arrived approximately 30 minutes prior to his scheduled appointment and displayed adequate grooming/hygiene and was dressed in appropriate attire. The Veteran's affect was blunted, dysthymic, and anxious and his thought process was linear, with no evidence of loose associations, delusions, or hallucinations. The Veteran's speech was goal directed and adequate with regard to rate, volume, amount, prosody, and articulation.

The VA examiner indicated that the Veteran's PTSD with UDD results in occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity. The VA examiner indicated that the Veteran's symptoms include depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, mild memory loss, flattened affect, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, and suicidal ideation. The VA examiner noted that the Veteran's suicide risk level is low acute and that the Veteran acknowledged a history of passive suicidal ideation, but never any plan or intent to act. The Veteran denied any recent suicidal ideation.

In this regard, the VA examination report, the Veteran's medical records, and the lay statements of record show that the Veteran's PTSD with UDD has been manifested by depressed mood, anxiety, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, suspiciousness, flattened affect, suicidal ideation, obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities, speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant, near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately, and effectively, impaired impulse control, spatial disorientation, neglect of personal appearance and hygiene, difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances, and an inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.

The Veteran's psychiatric disability has also been manifested by anger, anxiety, chronic sleep problems, confusion, depression, difficulty coping with stress, difficulty thinking straight, distractibility, drug or alcohol abuse, emotional numbing, guilt, hypervigilance or obsessively checking if things are safe, inappropriate behavior, intrusive thoughts, lack of emotion, low motivation, mania (periods of extreme high energy), memory problems, negative thoughts about yourself, others, or the world, neglect of chores or tasks, obsessive rituals, paranoia, poor concentration, problems at work sense of helplessness, sexual dysfunction, flattened affect, suicidal thoughts or feelings, or not caring if you live or die, suspiciousness, an inability to share feelings, and strong signs of anxiety, depression, and obsessive and compulsive behavior.

The record does not reflect that the Veteran experiences symptoms contemplated by a 100 percent rating such as gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living; disorientation to time or place; or memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name. The Board notes that the Veteran expressed suicidal ideation, which is consistent with a 70 percent rating. There is no indication that the severity, frequency, and duration has risen to the level to be considered persistent danger of self-harm and no indication of any plans or intent by the Veteran, which is contemplated by the 100 percent criteria. Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 10, 19 (2017).

The Board acknowledges that the Veteran experiences symptoms that are not listed in the rating schedule. Thus, the Board finds that the Veteran's symptoms of anger, anxiety, chronic sleep problems, confusion, depression, difficulty coping with stress, difficulty thinking straight, distractibility, drug or alcohol abuse, emotional numbing, guilt, hypervigilance or obsessively checking if things are safe, inappropriate behavior, intrusive thoughts, lack of emotion, low motivation, mania (periods of extreme high energy), memory problems, negative thoughts about yourself, others, or the world, neglect of chores or tasks, obsessive rituals, paranoia, poor concentration, problems at work, sense of helplessness, sexual dysfunction, suicidal thoughts or feelings, or not caring if you live or die, suspiciousness, and an inability to share feelings, are similar to and contemplated by the enumerated symptoms of impaired judgment, chronic sleep impairment, suicidal ideation, disturbances of motivation and mood, impairment of short and long term memory, impaired impulse control, obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships. Additionally, as some of these symptoms affect the Veteran's ability to complete employment tasks and his social functioning, these symptoms are also contemplated under the occupational and social impairment evaluations. Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436 (2002).

Concerning occupational impairment, the July 2021 VA examiner concluded that the Veteran's PTSD with UDD results in occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks, although generally functioning satisfactorily, with normal routine behavior, self-care and conversation. In contrast, the January 2023 VA examiner concluded that the Veteran's PTSD with UDD results in occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity. 

Notably, the Veteran does not contend, nor does the evidence of record reflect, that his psychiatric disability has prevented him from working or that he suffers from total occupational impairment. The evidence reflects that the Veteran worked during the appeal period at hospitals as a CT tech. In this regard, the Veteran has been able to maintain various CT tech positions despite his conflicts with management. Similarly, the Veteran's treatment records are silent as to total occupational impairment. The Veteran has not contended, and the evidence does not reflect, that his PTSD with UDD has prevented him from successfully performing his job duties and working with his fellow co-workers, when necessary, despite switching to the night shift to minimize interactions with others. Notably, the Veteran has not contended that he was fired or removed from his previous position due to his psychiatric symptomology. The evidence reflects the Veteran was able to maintain his previous position for 5 years and maintain his current position for 1 year despite conflicts with management and the occupational impairment he experiences. Further, the severe occupational impairment caused by the Veteran's psychiatric symptoms is contemplated by a 70 percent rating. Thus, the evidence does not reflect that the Veteran experiences total occupational impairment.

Concerning social impairment, as noted above the July 2021 VA examiner concluded that the Veteran's PTSD with UDD results in occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks, although generally functioning satisfactorily, with normal routine behavior, self-care and conversation and the January 2023 VA examiner concluded that the Veteran's PTSD with UDD results in occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.

The evidence reflects the Veteran experiences severe social impairment but weighs against a finding that the Veteran suffers from total social impairment. The Veteran has been able to maintain friendships with those he served with and participate in social interactions with acquaintances outside of his military friend group. While the Veteran reports changing to the night shift to minimize interactions with management and co-workers, the evidence does not reflect that the Veteran's social impairment has caused total inability to work with co-workers on the night shift. Similarly, the Veteran's treatment records are silent as to total social impairment. Thus, the evidence does not reflect that the Veteran experiences total social impairment.

Taken as a whole, the Board finds that the Veteran's symptoms, occupational impairment, and social impairment, have more nearly approximated the criteria for a 70 percent rating.

The Veteran has not displayed a level of psychiatric impairment as indicated by symptoms contemplated by a 100 percent rating. Furthermore, neither VA examiner concluded, nor does the evidence of record reflect, that the Veteran's symptoms result in total occupational and social impairment.

After resolving reasonable doubt in favor of the Veteran, the Board finds that a 70 percent rating is warranted for the entire appeal period. The Board is cognizant that the July 2021 and January 2023 VA examination reports reflect symptomology consistent with a lower rating, however, given that a VA medical provider indicated in September 2019 that the Veteran's symptoms became more severe when his divorce was finalized in January 2019, the Board finds that the VA treatment record is the first indication of such severe symptoms that warrant a 70 percent rating. Swain v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 219 (2015). Thus, given that the medical records indicate that the Veteran had experienced an increase in symptoms more than one year prior to the intent to file, the date VA received the Veteran's intent to file is the appropriate date of assignment of the 70 percent rating. Gatson v. Shinseki, 605 F.3d 979, 982 (Fed. Cir. 2010).

Accordingly, the Board finds that, the severity, frequency, and duration of the Veteran's symptoms more closely approximate the symptoms contemplated by a 70 percent rating, which are less severe, less frequent, and shorter in duration than those contemplated by a 100 percent rating. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.126. The Veteran does not experience symptoms, either listed in the schedule or similar to those listed, that result in total social impairment.

The Board has also considered whether staged ratings are appropriate for the Veteran's service-connected PTSD with UDD; however, the Board finds that his symptomatology has been stable throughout the entire appeal period. Therefore, assigning staged ratings for such disability is not warranted.

Further, neither the Veteran nor his representative have raised any other issues, nor have any other issues been reasonably raised by the record, with regard to the increased rating claim adjudicated herein. See Doucette v. Shulkin, 28 Vet. App. 366 (2017).

Continued on the next page

 

In sum, the Board finds that a 70 percent rating, but no higher, is warranted. To the extent that the Veteran contends entitlement to a higher rating, the most probative evidence of record persuasively weighs against the claim, the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine does not apply, and any further increased rating is not warranted. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7. Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc). 

 

S. Sorathia 

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Metoyer, D'Audra I.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.