Citation Nr: A25034192
Decision Date: 04/14/25	Archive Date: 04/14/25

DOCKET NO. 240527-443008
DATE: April 14, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea is granted, on a direct basis.

Entitlement to service connection for a back disability, diagnosed as lumbosacral strain, is granted, on a direct basis.

From January 31, 2023, an initial 10 percent rating, but no higher, for the Veteran's migraines, is granted, subject to the laws and regulations governing the award of monetary benefits.

From August 25, 2022, an increased rating of 100 percent, the maximum schedular rating, is warranted for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), major depressive disorder (MDD), alcohol use disorder (AUD) and traumatic brain injury (TBI), subject to the laws and regulations governing the award of monetary benefits.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The evidence is at least evenly balanced as to whether the Veteran's sleep apnea had onset in service.

2. The evidence is at least evenly balanced as to whether the Veteran's back disability had onset in service.

3. From January 21, 2023, applicable evidence of record reflects that the Veteran's migraine headaches manifest as characteristic prostrating attacks averaging one in 2 months over the last several months.

4. From August 25, 2022, the Veteran's PTSD, MDD, AUD, and TBI have more nearly approximated complete occupational and social impairment.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. With reasonable doubt resolved in favor of the Veteran, the criteria for entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

2. With reasonable doubt resolved in favor of the Veteran, the criteria for entitlement to service connection for a back disability have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

3. From January 21, 2023, the criteria for an initial rating of 10 percent, but no higher, rating for migraine have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8100; Ingram v. Collins, __ Vet. App. __, No. 23-1798, 2025 U.S. App. Vet. Claims LEXIS 327, *1 (Mar. 12, 2025).

4. From August 25, 2022, the criteria for a 100 percent rating for PTSD, MDD, AUD, and TBI have been met.  5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.321, 4.1-4.3, 4.7, 4.10, 4.21, 4.125, 4.126, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 8045-9411.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran had active duty service in the United States Army from October 12008 to December 2011 and from March 2014 to April 2015,

These matters come before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from appeals of February 2024 and two March 2024 rating decisions of the Department of Veterans Affairs.  In the former rating decision, the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) indicated that a special review had been mandated on October 24, 2023.  Based upon this review, the AOJ readjudicated the Veteran's claims for service connection for sleep apnea and a back disability based upon receipt of new and relevant evidence.  The Board is bound by these favorable findings (38 C.F.R. §3.104(c)) and proceeds to decide these two service connection claims on the merits.  In the latter two rating decisions, the AOJ continued a noncompensable rating for migraines and continued a 70 percent rating for PTSD.

In his May 2024 VA Form 10182, the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. As the Veteran has selected the Direct Review docket, the Board may consider only the evidence of record at the time of the AOJ rating decision, as qualified above, on appeal.  

If the Veteran wishes to have VA consider any evidence that was not considered, he may at any time file a supplemental claim with the AOJ after receiving this decision and the additional evidence will be considered in connection with the supplemental claim.  38 U.S.C. §§ 5104C(a)(1)(B), (b); 5108; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.2501, 20.1105(a).  If filed within one year, this supplemental claim will preserve the date of the claim denied herein as the effective date of the grant of the benefit or benefits sought.  38 U.S.C. § 5104C(a)(2)(B); 38 C.F.R. § 3.2500(h)(1).

Service Connection

Service connection will be granted if the evidence demonstrates that current disability resulted from an injury or disease incurred in active military service.  38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a).  Establishing service connection generally requires competent evidence of three things: (1) current disability; (2) in-service incurrence of a disease or injury; and (3) a relationship between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury.  Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F. 3d 1356, 1361 (Fed. Cir. 2018).  Consistent with this framework, service connection is warranted for a disease first diagnosed after discharge when all of the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).

Sleep Apnea and Back Disability

The Veteran has raised entitlement based upon secondary causation, Gulf War presumptions and toxic exposure.  However, in light of the instant favorable decision to grant service connection on a direct basis for these two claims, as explained below, a discussion of any other theory of entitlement is not necessary, as such would not result in an earlier effective date.  Cf. Johnson v. Collins, __ Vet. App. __, No. 23-7589, 2025 U.S. App. Vet. Claims LEXIS 383 (Mar. 26, 2025) (indicating that effective date consequences can be considered by the Board in cases in which the issue before it is entitlement to service connection); Stender v. Wilkie, No. 19-0068, 2020 U.S. App. Vet. Claims LEXIS 520, *5-*7 (Mar. 27, 2020) (mem dec) (Falvey, J.) (the Board erred in granting service connection based on the Camp Lejeune Contaminated Water (CLCW) presumption without considering other theories of entitlement that could warrant an earlier effective date because of the effective date of the CLCW presumption); Bethea v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 252, 254 (1992) (single judge decisions may be relied upon for any persuasiveness or reasoning they contain).

For the following reasons, entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea and the Veteran's back disability is warranted, on a direct basis.

In a December 2022 VA opinion, a VA clinician indicated that the Veteran had a diagnosis of sleep apnea.  In a November 2023 VA thoracolumbar spine conditions examination report, a VA clinician provided a diagnosis of lumbosacral strain.  Consequently, the current disability requirement for both disabilities has been met.

The Veteran is competent to report to report discernable and on-going symptoms, to include excruciating back pain that began in service while carrying 120 pounds of gear plus 240 Bravo machine guns and has been on-going through the present day.  Likewise, the Veteran is competent to report disruptive sleep patterns in service and daytime exhaustion.  Moreover, as to discernable symptoms of sleep apnea, both the Veteran's spouse and another service member reported that they each observed/heard the Veteran snoring and gasping for breath from service through diagnosis and to the present day.  Stated directly, the discernable symptoms of the Veteran's sleep apnea and back disability had their genesis is service and have been on-going ever since.  Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F. 3d 1372, 1377 (Fed. Cir. 2007) (a veteran is competent to testify regarding observations); Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F. 3d 1331, 1337 (holding lay evidence concerning continuity of symptoms after service, if credible, is ultimately competent, regardless of the lack of contemporaneous medical evidence).  The Board finds that the Veteran's lay accounts (and the lay accounts of the other lay informants) are consistent with the places, types, and circumstances of service, and there is nothing of equal or greater probative weight in the evidence of record to contradict these credible lay accounts discernable and ongoing symptoms culminating in the above noted diagnosis.  See 38 U.S.C. § 1154(a); 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a) (each disabling condition for which a veteran seeks service connection must be considered based on factors including the basis of places, types, and circumstances of service as shown by service records).   Moreover, as to sleep apnea particularly, the Court reasoned in Maples v. Wilkie, No. 18-2016, 2019 U.S. App. Vet. Claims LEXIS 199 (Feb. 11, 2019) (mem dec) (Falvey, J.), given the observable nature of its symptoms, sleep apnea is the type of disability for which lay evidence can be sufficient to support a claim for service connection.  The Board finds this reasoning persuasive.  Bethea, 2 Vet. App. 252.  Therefore, the in-service disease or injury requirement for both sleep apnea and a back disability has been met and continuous symptoms since service have been shown. 

Both a December 2022 and a November 2023 VA clinician rendered a negative etiological opinion as to sleep apnea.  The clinician focused exclusively on whether the disability had an association with the Veteran's service-connected PTSD.  While the Board recognizes the clinician's findings as to secondary causation, it finds that the clinician completely discounted the credible lay evidence in the calculus of the negative opinion.  As to the Veteran's back disability, the November 2023 VA clinician also rendered a negative etiological opinion. In this instance, the clinician included references to the Veteran's competent and credible account of excruciating back pain that began in service whilst carrying 120 pounds of gear plus 240 Bravo machine guns and has been on-going through the present day.  Instead of addressing this competent and credible lay evidence, the clinician emphasized that this disability had no relationship to toxic exposures or consideration based on the presumptions for Persian Gulf veterans.  Due to the lack of consideration of the competent, consistent, and credible lay evidence, the Board finds that these negative etiological opinions are inadequate.  Buchanan, 451 F. 3d at 1336, n. 1 (the VA's clinician's opinion, which relied on the absence of contemporaneous medical evidence, "failed to consider whether the lay statements presented sufficient evidence of the etiology of [the veteran's] disability such that his claim for service connection could be proven without contemporaneous medical evidence").

While the Board could remand for addendum opinions (to consider the credible lay evidence), such a remand might well be interpreted as an attempt to develop evidence with the intent of denying the Veteran's service connection claims, especially in light of the Veteran's competent, plausible, internally consistent, and credible accounts of his discernable symptoms from service through the present day.  38 C.F.R. § 3.304(c) ("The development of evidence in connection with claims for service connection will be accomplished when deemed necessary but it should not be undertaken when evidence present is sufficient for this determination"); Andrews v. McDonough, 34 Vet. App. 216, 225 (2021) ("Remand is inappropriate where the predominant purpose is not to allow the Board to make a fully informed decision unencumbered by error but to allow VA to obtain more evidence so that it can properly deny the claim").  

To the extent that these grants of service connection are based upon credible lay evidence rather than positive medical opinions, "nothing in the regulatory or statutory provisions [relating to evidence to be considered] requires both medical and competent lay evidence; rather, they make clear that competent lay evidence can be sufficient in and of itself."  Buchanan, 451 F. 3d at 1335.

For the foregoing reasons, the evidence is sufficient to decide these service connection claims, as it is at least evenly balanced as to whether the Veteran's sleep apnea and back disability had onset in service.  As the reasonable doubt created by this relative equipoise in the evidence must be resolved in favor of the Veteran, entitlement to service connection for both sleep apnea and the Veteran's back disability is warranted.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F. 4th 776, 781-82 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc) (only when the evidence persuasively favors one side, or the other is the benefit of the doubt doctrine not for application).

Higher Ratings

Disability evaluations are determined by the application of VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities, which is based on average impairment of earning capacity.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. Part 4.

In order to evaluate the level of disability and any changes in condition, it is necessary to consider the complete medical history of the Veteran's condition. Schafrath v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 589, 594 (1991).  

Staged ratings are appropriate for any rating claim when the factual findings show distinct time periods during the appeal period where the service-connected disability exhibits symptoms that would warrant different ratings.  Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505, 510 (2007).  Here, as explained below, the uniform ratings are proper.

In evaluating a disability, the Board considers the current examination reports in light of the whole recorded history to ensure that the current rating accurately reflects the severity of the condition.  The medical as well as industrial history is to be considered, and a full description of the effects of the disability upon ordinary activity is also required.  38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.10.

Where there is a question as to which of two evaluations shall be applied, the higher rating will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating.  Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7.

Migraine

VA received that Veteran's VA Form 21-526EZ on January 31, 2023.  The AOJ awarded service connection in a June 2023 rating decision, assigning a noncompensable rating effective from January 31, 2023.  In turn, the Veteran received a VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request - Supplemental Claim on April 29, 2023, which led to the March 2024 rating decision in the instant appeal (as discussed in the introduction.  Thus, the Veteran has continuously pursued his claim under the procedures of the AMA.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2500.  Consequently, the Board will assess the appropriate rating for the entire appellate period.

Under Diagnostic Code 8100, a noncompensable rating is warranted for migraines with less frequent attacks.  A 10 percent rating is warranted for migraines with characteristic prostrating attacks averaging one in 2 months over the last several months.  A 30 percent rating is warranted for migraines with characteristic prostrating attacks occurring on an average once a month over the last several months.  A 50 percent rating is warranted for migraines with very frequent completely prostrating and prolonged attacks productive of severe economic inadaptability.  A 50 percent rating is the highest schedular rating under Diagnostic Code 8100.

The rating criteria of Diagnostic Code 8100 are considered successive, meaning that a claimant cannot fulfill the criteria of the higher rating without fulfilling those of the next lower rating.  Johnson v. Wilkie, 30 Vet. App. 245, 252 (2018).  This renders 38 C.F.R. §§4.7 and 4.21 inapplicable.  Id. 

Even with successive ratings, "the Board may not deny entitlement to a higher rating on the basis of relief provided by medication when those effects are not specifically contemplated by the rating criteria."  Jones v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 56, 63 (2012). In other words, the Board cannot consider the ameliorative effects of medication unless medication is referenced in the applicable Diagnostic Code.  Medication is not referenced in Diagnostic Code 5237.  In a recent case, the Court emphasized that the Board is required "to discount beneficial medication effects when relevant rating criteria do not specifically contemplate medication use."  Ingram v. Collins, __ Vet. App. __, No. 23-1798, 2025 U.S. App. Vet. Claims LEXIS 327, *1 (Mar. 12, 2025).

The phrase "characteristic prostrating attacks" is used in the criteria corresponding to 10 percent and 30 percent ratings under Diagnostic Code 8100 to describe the nature and severity of migraines, but it is not defined in the regulation.   Pursuant to Dorland's Illustrated Medical Dictionary 1531 (32d ed. 2012), prostration is defined as "extreme exhaustion or powerlessness".  The Court in Johnson v. Wilkie, 30 Vet. App. 245, 252 (2018) defined "prostrating" as "lacking in vitality or will: powerless to rise: laid low" (citing Webster's Third New International Dictionary of The English Language Unabridged 1822 (1966)).

The rating criteria for a 50 percent rating contains several undefined phrases.  The descriptive phrase "very frequent" connotes a frequency at least greater than once a month, as is required by the rating criteria corresponding to a lesser 30 percent rating.   Johnson, 30 Vet. App. At 345.  The phrase "completely prostrating" generally means that the migraines attack must render the veteran entirely powerless.  Id.  The completely prostrating attacks must also be "prolonged," which is defined as "to lengthen in time: extend duration: draw out: continue, protract."  Id. (internal citation omitted).   Lastly, the 50 percent rating criteria requires that the very frequent completely prostrating and prolonged attacks be "productive of severe economic inadaptability."   Productive can be interpreted as having either the meaning of "producing" or "capable of producing," and, with regard to severe economic inadaptability, nothing in Diagnostic Code 8100 requires that the claimant be completely unable to work in order to qualify for a 50 percent rating.  Pierce v. Principi, 18 Vet. App. 440 (2004).

In April 2023, the Veteran reported for a VA headache (migraine) examination, a clinician indicated review of the extant evidence of record, to include medical and lay evidence.  The clinician rendered a diagnosis of headache disability.  The clinician recapitulated the medical history.  As to current symptoms, the clinician reported pulsating or throbbing head pain and pain on both sides of the head.  The Veteran reported that he took Excedrin, on an as needed basis (PRN) to treat his symptoms.  Non-headache symptoms included nausea and sensitivity to light and sound.  Typically, head pain persisted for less than one day, at both sides of the head.  There was no affirmative evidence of characteristic prostrating attacks of headache pain, and, correlatively, an absence of completely prostrating and prolonged attacks of migraine.  The clinician indicated that there was no affirmative evidence of pertinent signs or symptomatology.  As to functional impact on the Veteran's ability to work, the clinician wrote:

[The] Veteran reports the headaches impact his ADLs by causing difficulty focusing and completing tasks when symptoms are present.

Lastly, the clinician remarked that the Veteran lost zero to one week of work time due to this disability over the last 12 months.

Contemporaneous VA treatment records and progress notes reflect that headache was an on-going active problem.

In October 2023, the Veteran reported for a VA headache (migraine) examination, a clinician indicated review of the extant evidence of record, to include medical and lay evidence.  The Veteran now indicated a diagnosis of migraine.  The clinician recapitulated the medical history.  The Veteran reported that his family physician recommended OTC Excedrin for migraine symptoms.  As to symptoms, the clinician reported pulsating or throbbing head pain and pain on both sides of the head and constant head pain.  Non-headache symptoms included nausea, sensitivity to light and sound, and changes in vision.  Typically, head pain persisted for less than one day, at both sides of the head.  There were characteristic prostrating attacks of migraine pain, with "less frequent attacks".  However, there was an absence of completely prostrating and prolonged attacks of migraine.  As to functional impact on the Veteran's ability to work, the clinician wrote:

The [Veteran's] Has (headaches) are severe, accompanied by Nausea and vomiting, and scotomata, and inability to tolerate light and sound.  Activity worsens the HAs.

Lastly, the clinician remarked that the Veteran lost 2-4 weeks of work time over the past 12 months.

Neither VA clinician reported that the Veteran has experienced characteristic migraine prostrating attacks averaging one in 2 months over the last several months.  However, the October 2023 VA clinician reported that the Veteran experiences characteristic prostrating attacks of migraine pain, with "less frequent attacks".  Even though Diagnostic Code 8100 is successive, as explained above, the Board must consider whether the frequency and severity of the Veteran's prostrating attacks are more severe because the Veteran's attacks are ameliorated by the physician-recommended OTC Excedrin for migraine symptoms.  See Ingram, No. 23-1798, 2025 U.S. App. Vet. Claims LEXIS 327, *1 (Mar. 12, 2025).  While the Court has not provided clear guidance as to the application of its holding in Ingram, the Board finds that based on the nature and frequency of use of the medication the characteristic prostrating attacks of migraine pain would average one in 2 months over the last several months if the physician- recommended OTC Excedrin were not used.  A 10 percent rating is therefore warranted under DC 8100.

Nevertheless, the evidence of record, when with consideration of the physician- recommended OTC Excedrin, fails to reflect that the Veteran's migraines manifest as characteristic prostrating attacks occurring on an average once a month over the last several months.  Here, the Board notes that the Veteran first (at the April 2023 VA examination) articulated that he took Excedrin on a PRN, i.e., as needed, basis, rather than daily or with a regular frequency.  Moreover, the Veteran reported that his physician recommended OTC Excedrin, rather than a prescribed medication.

For the above reasons, an initial 10 percent rating for migraines is warranted.  However, the evidence is neither evenly balanced nor approximately so with regard to whether migraine headaches manifest as characteristic prostrating attacks occurring on an average once a month over the last several months, the successive criteria for a 30 percent rating.  Rather, the evidence of record persuasively weighs against assigning a 30 percent rating.  The benefit of the doubt doctrine, 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b0; 38 C.F.R. § 4.3, is therefore not for application in this regard.  Lynch, 21 F. 4th 776, 781-82.

PTSD with MDD, AUD, and TBI

In this instant VA received the Veteran's VA 21-0966 (Intent to File) on August 25, 2022.  In turn, VA received a VA Form 21-526 EZ on September 16, 2022, seeking an increased rating for PTSD, thus filing a complete application form pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 3.155(b).  Thus, the Board can consider whether it was factually ascertainable that the Veteran's disability increased in severity within the one-year period preceding the Veteran's August 25, 2022, intent to file.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.400(o)(2); Gaston v. Shinseki, 605 F. 3d 979, 982 (Fed. Cir. 2010) (referencing the "one-year look-back period").  However, upon review of the evidence of record, there is no evidence that reflects a factually ascertainable worsening in severity from the one-year look back period. 

The AOJ has rated the Veteran's PTSD with MDD, AUD, and TBI under Diagnostic Code 8045-9411.  Hyphenated Diagnostic Codes are used when a rating under one code requires use of an additional diagnostic code to identify the basis for the evaluation assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.27.  In this case, the use of Diagnostic Code 8045-9411 reflects that the Veteran's PTSD with TBI residuals is partially described as a TBI under Diagnostic 8045 and that the rating assigned is based on PTSD under Diagnostic Code 9411.

Under the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders, a 70 percent disability rating is warranted when there is occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a work like setting); and inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.  38 C.F.R. § 4.130.

A 100 percent disability rating is warranted when there is total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; and memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name. Id.

Under the General Rating Formula, the Board must conduct a "holistic analysis" that considers all associated symptoms, regardless of whether they are listed as criteria.  Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 10, 22 (2017); 38 C.F.R. §4.130.  The Board must determine whether unlisted symptoms are similar in severity, frequency, and duration to the listed symptoms associated with specific disability percentages. Then, the Board must determine whether the associated symptoms, both listed and unlisted, caused the level of impairment required for a higher disability rating.  Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F. 3d 112, 114-118 (Fed. Cir. 2013). 

The symptoms under the rating criteria are meant to be examples of symptoms that would warrant the rating, but are not meant to be exhaustive, and the Board need not find all or even some of the symptoms to award a specific rating. On the other hand, if the evidence shows that the Veteran suffers symptoms or effects that cause occupational or social impairment equivalent to what would be caused by the symptoms listed in the diagnostic code, the appropriate equivalent rating will be assigned.  Sellers v. Principi, 372 F. 3d 1318, 1326 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

During an October 2020 VA PTSD examination, the Veteran reported depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss, disturbances in motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work relationships, difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, and suicidal ideation.  The Veteran reported that he has maintained his marriage, but PTSD negatively impacted it.  The Veteran did have positive relationships with his two young children and father-in-law; however, he maintained no contact with his family of origin.  Also, the Veteran reported that he did have some friends.  The Veteran indicated that he worked as a narcotics officer and periodically suffered from panic attacks at work.  The Veteran emphasized his anger, hypervigilance, decreased appetite, diminished motivation, concentration impairment, and sense of self-loathing and worthlessness.  The VA psychologist reported that the Veteran was not homicidal and felt protective of his children.  Other symptoms, according to the psychologist's emphasis in the report, included:

Intrusive memories and distressing dreams related to stressors, avoidance of reminders of stressors, negative thoughts about the world, decreased interest in activities, feelings of detachment/isolation, irritability, hypervigilance, exaggerated startle response, difficulty concentrating, fatigue, feelings of worthlessness, difficulty concentrating,  decreased appetite, strong urge to use alcohol, great deal of time spent using alcohol, continued alcohol use despite related interpersonal problems, tolerance.

In an April 2023 VA mental health report, a VA psychologist reported that the Veteran met the DSM-5 criteria for panic disorder.  The psychologist reported that this diagnosed disability was a result of the Veteran's PTSD.  Despite this, the psychologist rendered a negative etiological opinion.  Despite the opinion, "panic" was reported and underscored at the previous PTSD examination.   Here the attribution of panic disorder and panic symptoms appear ambiguous.  In Mittleider v. West, the Court found that when it is not possible to separate the effects of the service-connected disability from a nonservice-connected condition, then 38 C.F.R. § 3.102, which requires the Board to employ reasonable doubt, dictates that such signs and symptoms be attributed to the service-connected disability.  Mittleider, 11 Vet. App. 181 (1998).  

In April 2023, the Veteran reported for another PTSD examination.  The VA psychologist stated that the disability was productive of occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking and/or mood.  The Veteran reported symptoms of reported depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss, disturbances in motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work relationships, flattened affect, impaired judgment, impaired abstract thinking, and suicidal ideation.  The Veteran maintained competence.  The Veteran indicated that he was still employed but his life at home has fallen apart.  Panic attacks have become ubiquitous.  His relationship with his wife and children had decayed and the Veteran endorsed isolation and amotivation.  The Veteran indicated that he consumed 8 to 10 alcoholic beverages every day to dull his pervasive self-loathing, depression, and panic.  

In October 2023, the Veteran reported for a TBI examination, the VA psychiatrist found that the Veteran complained of mild memory loss, mildly impaired judgment, frequently inappropriate to one of the factors of social interaction, occasional disorientation to person, time, place, and situation, mildly impaired spatial orientation.  As to subjective symptoms, the Veteran indicated,

Three or more subjective symptoms that mildly interfere with work; instrumental activities of daily living; or work, family, or other close relationships. (Examples of findings that might be seen at this level of impairment are intermittent dizziness, daily mild to moderate headaches, tinnitus, frequent insomnia, hypersensitivity to sound, hypersensitivity to light.

Neurobehaviorally, the Veteran evinced one or more effects that frequently interfere with workplace interaction, social interaction, or both but do not preclude them.  However, the Veteran's communication was only occasionally impaired.  As to residuals, the psychiatrist mentioned migraines (as discussed as a separate disability above) and memory deficits. Functional impact on the Veteran's ability to work was reported as:

Irritability and recent memory problems and other cognitive deficits from the TBIs affect him at work.

In January 2024, the Veteran reported for another VA PTSD examination.  The Veteran reported daily intrusive feeling, distressing dreams almost daily, night sweats, excessive alcohol use, reclusiveness, consuming depression, suicidal ideation, and a suicide attempt with a gun.  The Veteran indicated that he was recently divorced because of his irascible nature and rage towards his wife.  While the Veteran did not report occupational issues (according to the psychologist), his rage, panic attacks, and suicidality clearly speak to the almost impossible work situation, should such have existed at the time of the examination.  Symptoms included impaired judgment, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, suicidal ideation and attempt, and impaired impulse control, such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence.  While the psychologist reported occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking and/or mood, the Veteran's distressing dreams almost daily, night sweats, excessive alcohol use, reclusiveness, consuming depression, suicidal ideation, and a suicide attempt with a gun certainly reflect a greater degree of significant impairment in all interactions with other people and the environment around him.  While every feature of iterated in the criterial of a 100 percent rating were not disclosed at the examination, the profound symptoms of a divorce (attributable to associated rage), hermit-like isolation, and suicide attempt with a firearm, conjunctively, reflect the level of impairment required for a higher 100 disability rating.  Vazquez-Claudio, 713 F. 3d 112, 114-118. 

For the following seasons, the symptoms and impairment of the Veteran's PTSD with MDD, AUD, and TBI more nearly approximate the criteria for a 100 percent from August 25, 2022.

The Veteran endorsed symptoms throughout the appeal period of depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss, disturbances in motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work relationships, difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, and suicidal ideation.  The symptoms of this disability also manifested as isolation, amotivation, consumption of 8 to 10 alcoholic beverages every day to dull his pervasive self-loathing, ubiquitous pain, a failed marriage, rage, and a suicide attempt with a firearm.  The impairment caused by this constellation of symptoms, with the Veteran socially isolated and significant difficulties working, more nearly approximates total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; disorientation to time or place; and memory loss. 

In reaching the above conclusions, the Board is mindful that the symptoms listed in the rating schedule are essentially examples of the type and degree of symptoms indicative of the level of impairment required for each such rating, and that the Veteran need not demonstrate those exact symptoms to warrant a higher rating.  Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436 (2002).  As explained above, the Board has found that that the evidence of record shows that the Veteran has manifested sufficient symptoms of the type and extent, frequency, or severity (as appropriate) to result in total occupational or social impairment required for the disability rating of 100 percent for disability rating of 70 percent throughout the appeal period. 38 C.F.R. § 4.130.

While the Board is conscious of the fact that the Veteran's PTSD with MDD, AUD, and TBI symptoms varied in the different examinations of record, the Board notes that the Court has held that "the Board errs when it reflexively assigns the date of a VA examination as the date of an increased evaluation; instead, the Board must analyze the examination report alongside the other lay and medical evidence of record to determine when an increase in disability actually occurred." Estevez v. McDonough, 36 Vet. App. 157, 175 (2023) (citing Swain v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 219, 224-25 (2015) (rejecting the mechanical assignment of an effective date based on the date of examination and explaining that, for staged evaluation purposes, VA must examine all relevant facts to determine when an increase in a veteran's disability manifests); DeLisio v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 45, 58 (2011) ("[A]n effective date should not be assigned mechanically based on the date of a diagnosis. Rather, all of the facts should be examined to determine the date that [a disability] first manifested")). 

For the foregoing reasons, the evidence of record reflects that the Veteran's symptoms of PTSD with MDD, AUD, and TBI have more nearly approximated total occupational or social impairment throughout the appellate period, from August 25, 2022.  The evidence is approximately evenly so as to whether a 100 percent rating is warranted.  The benefit of the doubt doctrine is therefore for application as to this claim.  Lynch, 21 F. 4th 776, 781-82. 

The Board has considered the Veteran's claims and decided entitlement based on the evidence.? Neither the Veteran nor his representative have raised any other issues, nor have any other issues been reasonably raised by the record.  Doucette v. Shulkin, 28?Vet. App.?366, 369-70?(2017) (confirming that the Board is not required to address issues unless they are specifically raised by the claimant or reasonably raised by the evidence?of?record.

 

 

Jonathan Hager

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	B. J. Komins, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability.  38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.