Citation Nr: A25034589
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 230514-346603
DATE: April 15, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for a herniated disc, including as secondary to service-connected conditions is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a back disability other than intervertebral disc syndrome (IVDS) and a herniated disc, to include as secondary to service-connected conditions is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

The evidence persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran has a diagnosis of herniated disc at any point during the period on appeal.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria to establish entitlement to service connection for a herniated disc have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.304.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Marine Corps from August 2008 to March 2013.

The rating decision on appeal was issued in January 2023 and constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA) applies.

In the May 2023 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the January 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of entitlement to service connection for a back disability other than IVDS and a herniated disc, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of this claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

The Board notes that the Veteran has received varying back diagnoses to include degenerative disc disease (DDD) other than IVDS, spinal stenosis, and laminotomy.  Given such, the claims have been recharacterized below to encompass these diagnoses.  See Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1, 3 (2009).

Entitlement to service connection for herniated disc including as secondary to service-connected conditions.

The Veteran seeks service connection for a herniated disc, including as secondary to a limp.  See October 2022 VA Form 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim.

Establishing service connection on a "direct" basis generally requires medical, or in certain circumstances, lay evidence of (1) a current disability; (2) an in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a link between the claimed in-service disease or injury and the present disability.  Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166-67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

The determination as to whether these requirements for service connection are met is based on an analysis of all evidence of record and an evaluation of its credibility and probative value.  Baldwin v. West, 13 Vet.  App. 1 (1999); 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a).  The Board must consider lay evidence in addition to the service records, and the places, types, and circumstances of service.  See 38 U.S.C. § 1154(a); 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a).

Factual Background

The Veteran's service treatment records are silent for complaints, treatment for, or reports of back pain during active service.  See STR-Medical.

In March 2017, the Veteran was seen at a VA clinic for complaints of back pain.  See March 2017 Nursing Outpatient Note, Lawrence VA Clinic, January 2020 received in CAPRI.  The Veteran complained of chronic back pain in June 2017, as well as was seen subsequently in January 2018 after a weightlifting injury; in September 2018 after lifting a box at work; in January 2019 after no known injury; in September 2019 of having more back pain; in October 2019 having pain in the lower back with extension and flexion; in October 2019 having muscle spasms after doing a lot of lifting and that sometimes the pain shot down his legs; and in November 2019 worsening severity of lower back pain.  See generally 2017 to 2019 Treatment Notes, Johnson County VA Clinic and Lawrence VA Clinic, January 2020 received in CAPRI.  

In May 2020, the Veteran reported moving over the weekend and throwing his back out.  See May 2020 Telephone Encounter, Johnson County VA Clinic, October 2022 received in CAPRI.  In July 2020, the Veteran reported that he had lifted objects a couple days prior, felt a twinge, stumbled, and his back pain worsened.  The Veteran additionally reported that the pain in his lower back radiated down his right leg laterally, with numbness that radiates on the outside right lower extremity to his knee and that he had been diagnosed with sciatica.  See July 2020 Emergency Department Note, Kansas City VAMC, October 2022 received in CAPRI.  The Veteran was again seen for back pain in September 2020 where he reported he had received back surgery in July for herniated disks.  See September 2020 Psychiatry Note, Kansas City VAMC, October 2022 received in CAPRI.  In June 2021 and January 2022, the Veteran was again seen for reports of chronic back pain.  See generally June 2021 and January 2022 Notes, Kansas City VAMC, October 2022 received in CAPRI.

The Veteran was also treated by a private physician in the emergency room in July 2022 for complaints of chronic back pain.  See July 2022 Emergency Room Treatment Note, Advent Health Shawnee Mission.

The Veteran filed a claim for, inter alia, entitlement to service connection for herniated discs in October 2022.  See October 2022 VA Form 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim.

In November 2022, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination regarding his claimed back conditions.  The VA examiner diagnosed the Veteran with degenerative disc disease other than IVDS, spinal stenosis, and laminotomy.  See November 2022 Back Thoracolumbar Spine Disability Benefits Questionnaire (DBQ).  The examiner's rationale stated that the Veteran had no current diagnosis of herniated disc as evidenced by the latest MRI.  Id.

In January 2023, the RO denied the Veteran's claim because service treatment records did not show a complaint, treatment, or diagnosis while in service and the Veteran did not have a current diagnosis of herniated discs.  See January 2023 Rating Decision.

The existence of a current disability is the cornerstone of a claim for VA disability compensation.  38 U.S.C. § 1110; see Degmetich v. Brown, 104 F.3d 1328, 1332 (Fed. Cir. 1997).  Absent proof of a current disability, there can be no valid claim.  Boyer v. West, 210 F.3d 1351 (Fed. Cir. 2000); Brammer v. Derwinski, 3 Vet.  App. 223 (1992). 

Here, despite the July 2022 notation of a historical lumbar herniated disc, the Veteran was not found to have a current diagnosis of a herniated disc upon VA examination in November 2022.  See Emergency Room Record, Advent Health Shawnee Mission; November 2022 Medical Opinion DBQ.  Notably, as to be explained further in the Remand below, the Veteran had other diagnoses related to his back.  However, as to a herniated disc, the medical evidence is devoid of such a diagnosis.

Furthermore, even the general lay assertion by the Veteran that he has a herniated disc is not sufficient to satisfy the first element of service connection.  Although laypersons, such as the Veteran, are sometimes competent to provide opinions on certain medical questions, the specific issue in this case falls outside the realm of common knowledge of a lay person as it involves making definitive clinical diagnoses and causation findings based on medical knowledge of musculoskeletal conditions.  See Kahana v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 428, 435 (2011).  While the Veteran is certainly competent to report symptoms related to back pain, he is not competent to link those complaints to a particular diagnosis.  Opinions of this type have been found to be beyond the competence of lay witnesses, as is the Veteran.  Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 (Fed. Cir. 2007) ("sometimes the layperson will be competent to identify the condition where the condition is simple, for example a broken leg, and sometimes not, for example, a form of cancer.").

Given such, as to this diagnosis, the Board finds that the first element of service connection, a current disability, has not been met.  Therefore, in the absence of a current disability, the analysis ends, and the claim of entitlement to service connection for herniated disc, must be denied.  See Gilpin v. West, 155 F.3d 1353 (Fed. Cir. 1998); Brammer v. Derwinski, supra.

In reaching this conclusion, the Board has considered the applicability of the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine.  However, as the evidence persuasively weighs against the claim, that doctrine is not applicable.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

The Board is grateful to the Veteran for his service, and regrets that it cannot render a favorable decision in this matter.  If the Veteran continues to believe that he has a herniated disc, he is encouraged to file a Supplemental Claim, along with new and relevant evidence, seeking readjudication of such claim.

?

REASONS FOR REMAND

Entitlement to service connection for a back disability, other than IVDS and a herniated disc, to include as secondary to service-connected conditions

The Board regrets the delay associated with this remand, however, based on a review of the evidence of record, the Board finds that a remand is necessary to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error and obtain an adequate opinion regarding the nature and etiology of the Veteran's back disability other than IVDS and a herniated disc.  See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 312 (2007).

In November 2022, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination regarding, inter alia, his claimed back condition.  The VA examiner diagnosed the Veteran with degenerative disc disease other than IVDS, spinal stenosis, and laminotomy.  See November 2022 Back Thoracolumbar Spine DBQ.

The examiner was asked to address the Veteran's assertion that his bulging discs are secondary to his service-connected disabilities.  See November 2022 Medical Opinion DBQ.  The examiner opined that it was less likely than not that the Veteran's bulging discs conditions were proximately due to, or the result of, his service-connected knee instability, patellofemoral syndrome, right knee, degenerative arthritis, knee instability, patellofemoral syndrome, left knee, degenerative arthritis, knee instability, patellofemoral syndrome, left knee, limitation of extension, knee instability, patellofemoral pain syndrome, limitation of extension, right knee, pes planus left foot/status post arch reconstruction with internal fixation left foot with scar (referred as osteoarthritis of the talonavicular joint status post talonavicular cueonavilar fusion with extension 14mm plate and screws left foot.  Id.  The examiner's rationale stated, in part:

The most common cause of bulging disc is degenerative disc disease.  There is no current medical consensus or knowledge that any of the above-mentioned conditions contribute to the development of degenerative disc disease or bulging discs as it is usually due to age related wear and tear and/or heavy physical activity.

November 2022 Medical Opinion DBQ.

The VA examiner went on to note that the Veteran's VA Medical Records, Private Treatment Records from Advent Health Shawnee Mission, and the branch of service records had been reviewed and they did not provide evidence to support a nexus.  Id.

The VA examiner made no mention of the Veteran's diagnoses of spinal stenosis and laminotomy or the Veteran's long history of back pain documented in the record as early as March 2017.  See March 2017 Nursing Clinic Check-in, Lawrence VA Clinic, January 2020 received in CAPRI.  The VA examiner did not discuss the additional diagnoses which caused the Veteran's back pain, the Veteran's military occupational specialty (MOS) as a CASS Technician and whether they are related to service or the Veteran's other service-connected conditions.  As such, the Board finds that the November 2022 VA medical opinion is conclusory and, therefore, inadequate for adjudication purposes.  See Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet.  App. 120 (2007); Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet.  App. 295 (2008).

Additionally, the VA examiner did not mention that the Veteran has a limp which has caused his back pain.  See October 2022 Fully Developed Claim.  As such, the Board finds that this opinion is inadequate when, as indicated here, the examiner did not consider  the Veteran's medical history, specifically, that the Veteran had a limp.  See Stefl v. Nicholson, supra.

Finally, no opinion has been obtained regarding whether the Veteran's back condition was aggravated by his service-connected conditions.  See El-Amin v. Shinseki, 21 Vet.  App. 303, 312 (2007).

For these reasons, the Board finds that the November 2022 VA medical opinion is inadequate for adjudication purposes.  Therefore, remand is required to allow the AOJ to obtain an adequate opinion regarding the nature and etiology of the Veteran's back conditions.  See Barr v. Nicholson, supra.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain an opinion from an appropriate clinician regarding the nature and etiology of the Veteran's back condition.  The entire claims file must be provided to, and reviewed by, the examiner.  If the examiner determines it to be necessary, an examination should be scheduled and any indicated tests, studies, or evaluations should be performed.

2. Following a review of the claims file, the examiner is asked to:

(a.) Obtain the Veteran's detailed lay history, including the onset and progression of symptomatology.

(b.) For each diagnosed back condition (not to include IVDS or herniated disc), opine as to:

i.	Whether it is at least as likely as not (i.e., likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal) that such condition had its onset during, or is otherwise related to, the Veteran's active-duty service.

ii.	Whether it is at least as likely as not (i.e., likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal) that such condition was caused by a service-connected condition; and

iii.	Whether it is at least as likely as not (i.e., likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal) that such condition underwent an incremental increase (was aggravated), due to a service-connected condition.

iv.	Are the Veteran's assertions consistent with medical knowledge or implausible?

v.	Are the Veteran's reports about symptoms align with how the disease or disability is known to develop.

3. The examiner must specifically address:

(a.) The Veteran's MOS as a Cass Technician.  See DD-214;

(b.) The Veteran's complaints of back pain beginning in March 2017.  See March 2017 Nursing Clinic Checkin, Lawrence VA Clinic, January 2020 received in CAPRI;

(c.) The Veteran's reported back surgery in July 2020.  See September 2020 Psychiatry Note, Kansas City VAMC, October 2022 received in CAPRI.

(d.) The Veteran's diagnosis of spinal stenosis, laminotomy, and degenerative disc disease. 

"	The term at least as likely as not does not mean within the realm of medical possibility.  Rather, it means that the weight of the medical evidence both for and against a conclusion is at least approximately balanced, or nearly equal, and therefore it is at least as medically sound to find in favor of the conclusion (e.g., etiology) as it is to find against the conclusion.

"	Any opinion expressed by the examiner should be accompanied by a complete rationale.  If medical literature is relied upon in rendering a determination, the examiner should identify and specifically cite each reference material utilized.  If the examiner is unable to offer an opinion without resort to speculation, a thorough explanation as to why an opinion cannot be rendered should be provided.

"	The term incremental increase in disability means additional impairment of earning capacity.  Objective measurement, or numerical quantification, is not required to ascertain an increase in disability.  Moreover, any incremental increase in disability need not be permanent.

"	The physician is advised that the Veteran is competent to report symptoms, treatment, and injuries, and that his reports must be taken into account in formulating the requested opinions.

"	The examiner is also reminded that noting that a condition did not manifest in service as the sole basis for forming a negative nexus opinion, without additional explanation, will not be adequate.

4. The AOJ must review the claims file and ensure that the foregoing development action has been completed in full.

(a.)   If any development action is incomplete, the appropriate corrective action must be implemented.

(b.)   If any report or opinion does not include adequate responses to specific opinions requested, it must be referred to the providing physician for corrective action.

 

 

YVETTE R. WHITE

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	A. C., Abua-Barnes, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided.  This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability.  38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.