Citation Nr: A25034982
Decision Date: 04/16/25	Archive Date: 04/16/25

DOCKET NO. 201020-116751
DATE: April 16, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to Veteran Readiness and Employment (VR&E) benefits under the provisions of Chapter 31, Title 38 of the United States Code, is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. During the period here at issue, the Veteran had service-connected disabilities with a combined disability rating of 20 percent.

2. At the time of his August 2020 Application for VR&E benefits, the Veteran possessed Associate's degrees in Art and Science, Chemistry, and Criminal Justice.  He also had marketable and transferable skills.

3. The evidence persuasively establishes that, during the period here at issue, the Veteran was unemployed but had overcome the effects of his vocational impairment because he was qualified for employment in a suitable occupation consistent with his aptitudes, interests, and abilities.

4. During the period under consideration, the Veteran is not shown to have had an employment handicap; the evidence persuasively establishes that he had overcome any impairment to employability to which his service-connected disabilities had substantially contributed.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to VR&E benefits were not met during the period on appeal.  38 U.S.C. §§ 3100, 3101, 3102; 38 C.F.R. §§ 21.1, 21.32, 21.33, 21.35, 21.40, 21.50, 21.51.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from November 1977 to November 1980.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an October 1, 2020, decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Vocational Rehabilitation Counselor (VRC).  The Veteran timely appealed that decision to the Board on October 20, 2020, and he elected the Board hearing docket under the modernized appeal review system ("AMA").

The Veteran testified at a Board hearing before a Veterans Law Judge (VLJ) in July 2021.  A transcript of that hearing was associated with the claims file and reviewed prior to preparing this decision.  The undersigned VLJ is not the same who conducted the July 2021 Board hearing.  However, under the AMA, the VLJ who conducted a Board hearing is not required to participate in the decision on that claim, and VA is not prohibited from allowing a VLJ other than the one who conducted a hearing to decide an appeal.  As such, there is no bar to proceeding with a decision in the appeal by the undersigned VLJ at this time and the Veteran has not been deprived of fair process.  Frantzis v. McDonough, Vet. App. June 21, 2022.  This case has been carefully reviewed by the undersigned. 

Under the AMA, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the October 2020 Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or his representative at the hearing or within 90 days following the hearing.  38 C.F.R. § 20.302(a).  If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the decision and prior to the Board hearing, or (2) more than 90 days following the hearing, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.302(a), 20.801.

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was added to the claims file that the Board could not consider, he may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify that evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

Entitlement to VR&E benefits

The Veteran seeks to establish entitlement to VR&E services.  He requests assistance from the VR&E program to pursue employment in the field of Criminal Justice.  See September 2020 VA Form 28-1902w, Rehabilitation Needs Inventory (RNI).

The provisions of Chapter 31, Title 38 of the United States Code, are intended to enable veterans with service-connected disabilities to achieve maximum independence in daily living and, to the maximum extent feasible, to become employable and to obtain and maintain suitable employment.  38 C.F.R. § 21.1.  For a veteran with 20 percent disability, basic entitlement to Chapter 31 benefits requires that the veteran be found by VA to need rehabilitation because of an employment handicap.  38 C.F.R. § 21.40(b).  An employment handicap means an impairment, resulting in substantial part from a service-connected disability (or combination of service-connected disabilities) rated at 20 percent or more, of a veteran's ability to prepare for, obtain, or retain employment consistent with such veteran's abilities, aptitudes, and interests.  38 U.S.C. § 3101(7); 38 C.F.R. § 21.35(g).

The determination of whether an employment handicap exists has been specifically delegated by regulation to the discretion of a VA counseling psychologist (CP) or vocational rehabilitation counselor (VRC).  38 C.F.R. §§ 21.50(b), 21.51.  An employment handicap will be found to exist when the individual has a vocational impairment; the individual has not overcome the effects of the impairment of employability through employment in, or qualifying for employment in, an occupation consistent with his or her abilities, aptitudes, and interests; and his or her service-connected disabilities have contributed in substantial part to the overall vocational impairment.  38 U.S.C. § 3102; 38 C.F.R. § 21.51.

During the period here on appeal, the Veteran was service connected for glenohumeral joint osteoarthritis with rotator cuff tendinopathy of the right shoulder, rated 20 percent disabling from October 2, 2019.  His combined disability evaluation was 20 percent, effective October 2, 2019.  He therefore met the basic threshold requirements for entitlement to a program of vocational rehabilitation.  However, as noted, in order to meet the requirements for entitlement to a program of vocational rehabilitation, he must also have been determined by VA to need of rehabilitation because of an employment handicap.  38 U.S.C. § 3102; 38 C.F.R. § 21.40.

In his September 2020 RNI, the Veteran indicated that he wanted to find employment in the field of Criminal Justice.  He indicated that he had earned an Associate's degree in Art and Science in 1999 and had pursued an Associate's degree in Chemistry from 2001 to 2005.  It is unclear from the record whether the Veteran actually completed his Associate's degree in Chemistry.  The Veteran also indicated that he had been pursuing an Associate's degree in Criminal Justice from American Continental University since June 2017.  He indicated that he worked full time as a Clerk Supervisor with the United States Postal Services from March 1985 to July 2017.  He indicated that he earned approximately $3,600/month in gross monthly salary and that he oversaw retail window operations.  He indicated that he supervised fourteen clerks until he retired from that position.  The Veteran also indicated that his service-connected disabilities were not stable and had worsened.  However, the Board notes that a worsening of the Veteran's service-connected disability was not shown by the objective medical evidence during the period on appeal.

Following an October 2020 initial VR&E evaluation, the VRC considered the Veteran's education and work history, as well as his symptoms and impairment due to service-connected right shoulder disability, which had a combined rating of 20 percent, and determined that the Veteran did not have an employment handicap; as such, he was not entitled to receive VR&E services.  See October 7, 2020, VA Form 28-1902b, Counseling Record - Narrative Report.  

Specifically, the VRC noted that the Veteran's service-connected right shoulder disability prevented him from doing physically demanding job functions such as prolonged reaching, pulling, pushing, carrying, climbing, working overhead, reaching, grabbing, lifting, etc.  Id.  The VRC indicated that the Veteran was limited to lifting no more than 10-15lbs.  Id.  The VRC acknowledged that the Veteran was not currently employed but opined that he had acquired reasonably developed skills from his work history and training/education.  Id.  In that regard, the VRC found that the Veteran's prior education and work experience made him qualified for employment in a suitable occupation.  Id.  Put simply, while the VRC found that the Veteran had a vocational impairment resulting in substantial part from his service-connected right shoulder disability, the VRC also found that the Veteran had overcome the effects of that vocational impairment because he had the necessary skills and experience to obtain and maintain suitable employment consistent with his aptitudes, interests, and abilities.  On that basis, the VRC determined that there was no employment handicap or serious employment handicap, and that the Veteran's current unemployment was completely within his control.

Following review of the evidence properly available for consideration, the Board finds that entitlement to Chapter 31 benefits was not warranted during the period on appeal.  Specifically, the record shows that based on the Veteran's transferrable skills, education, work experience, and training, he had overcome any impairment of employment to which his service-connected right shoulder substantially contributed, and he was employable with his then-current skills, experience, and education.

While the evidence reflects that the Veteran's service-connected right shoulder disability, rated as 20 percent disabling, caused some difficulties with aspects of his employment, the VRC nevertheless determined that the Veteran's service-connected right shoulder disability would not cause an impairment in his ability to obtain, maintain, or retain suitable employment.  The VRC reached this conclusion in the specific context of addressing the Veteran's vocational and educational goals.  The VRC had sufficient facts and data before them to support a determination that the Veteran did not have an employment handicap, and the VRC provided a sound rationale for that determination.  See Black v. Brown, 10 Vet. App. 297 (1997).  VRCs are specifically delegated the authority, by VA regulation, to determine whether a veteran has an employment handicap.  On review, the Board finds that the October 2020 initial evaluation by the VRC is entitled to significant probative weight.

The Veteran has not presented persuasive evidence to show that he had an employment handicap and was entitled to VR&E services during the period at issue.  Prior to entry of the decision on appeal, the Veteran did not demonstrate that he had been unable to obtain suitable employment in line with his then-current educational background and experience, to include by reporting any efforts he had made to obtain positions with his then-current degrees.

Overall, the Board finds that the statutory requirements for entitlement to VR&E benefits were not met because the Veteran did not have an employment handicap during the period under consideration and was therefore not in need of rehabilitation.  The evidence of record persuasively demonstrates that the Veteran had the necessary work history, transferrable skills, and education to obtain gainful employment consistent with his abilities, aptitudes, and interests.  38 U.S.C. § 3101(8).  Finally, because an employment handicap is a threshold requirement of having a serious employment handicap, the Veteran also did not have a serious employment handicap during the period on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 21.52(a).

The Board commends the Veteran for wanting to pursue further education. However, the Board emphasizes that the purpose of Chapter 31 VR&E services is not to provide the claimant with whatever level of career training he chooses should his interests or career objectives change.  Rather, the purpose of such services is to provide a level of training that facilitates suitable employment.  38 C.F.R. § 21.70.

The Board has considered the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine but finds that the evidence is persuasively against the Veteran's claim.  That is to say, the evidence on the issue is not in approximate balance.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b).  The appeal must be denied.

 

 

John J. Crowley

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Michael L. Marcum, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.