Citation Nr: A25034490
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 240805-462647
DATE: April 15, 2025

ORDER

A rating in excess of 20 percent prior to January 25, 2024, and a rating in excess of 30 percent from that date, for service-connected cervical spine degenerative disc disease (cervical spine disability) is denied.

A rating in excess of 20 percent prior to January 25, 2024, and a rating in excess of 40 percent from that date, for service-connected lumbar spine intervertebral disc syndrome and degenerative disc disease (lumbar spine disability) is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. For the appeal period prior to January 25, 2024, the Veteran's service-connected cervical spine degenerative disc disease is manifested by pain, muscle spasm, and limitation of motion (at worst, forward flexion to 25 degrees, extension to 25 degrees, right lateral flexion to 20 degrees, left lateral flexion to 45 degrees, right lateral rotation to 55 degrees, and left lateral rotation to 80 degrees), without evidence of forward flexion of the cervical spine to 15 degrees or less, favorable ankylosis of the entire cervical spine, associated neurologic abnormality other than service-connected bilateral upper extremity radiculopathy, or incapacitating episodes having a total duration of at least four weeks.  

2. For the appeal period from January 25, 2024, the Veteran's service-connected cervical spine degenerative disc disease is manifested by pain, muscle spasm, and limitation of motion (at worst, forward flexion to 15 degrees, extension to 10 degrees, right lateral flexion to 15 degrees, left lateral flexion to 10 degrees, right lateral rotation to 30 degrees, and left lateral rotation to 40 degrees), without evidence of unfavorable ankylosis of the entire cervical spine, associated neurologic abnormality other than service-connected bilateral upper extremity radiculopathy, or incapacitating episodes having a total duration of at least four weeks.  

3. For the appeal period prior to January 25, 2024, the Veteran's service-connected lumbar spine intervertebral disc syndrome and degenerative disc disease is manifested by pain, muscle spasm, and limitation of motion, without evidence of forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine to 30 degrees or less, favorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine, associated neurologic abnormality other than service-connected bilateral upper extremity radiculopathy, or incapacitating episodes having a total duration of at least four weeks.  

4. For the appeal period from January 25, 2024, the Veteran's service-connected lumbar spine intervertebral disc syndrome and degenerative disc disease is manifested by pain, muscle spasm, and limitation of motion (at worst, forward flexion to 20 degrees, extension to 5 degrees, right lateral flexion to 10 degrees, left lateral flexion to 5 degrees, right lateral rotation to 10 degrees, and left lateral rotation to 10 degrees), without evidence of unfavorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine, associated neurologic abnormality other than service-connected bilateral upper extremity radiculopathy, or incapacitating episodes having a total duration of at least six weeks.  

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for a rating in excess of 20 percent prior to January 25, 2024, and a rating in excess of 30 percent from that date, for service-connected cervical spine degenerative disc disease have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.71a, Diagnostic Codes (Codes) 5242, 5243.  

2. The criteria for a rating in excess of 20 percent prior to January 25, 2024, and a rating in excess of 40 percent from that date, for service-connected lumbar spine intervertebral disc syndrome and degenerative disc disease have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.71a, Codes 5242, 5243.   

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The appellant is a Veteran who served on active duty from June 23, 1989 to August 24, 1989, from March 1990 to July 1994, from June 1995 to February 2000, from August 16, 2004 to February 1, 2005, from December 1, 2006 to July 8, 2007, and from October 2007 to December 2016.  This case comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a March 2024 rating decision of a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO), which is an agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) that granted a 30 percent rating (from 20 percent) for the cervical spine disability and granted a 40 percent rating (from 20 percent) for the lumbar spine disability, both effective January 25, 2024.  The Veteran appeals for higher ratings prior to and from the effective date.    

In his August 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2024 AOJ decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, he may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.  

Applicable Legal Considerations

Disability evaluations are determined by the application of VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities (Rating Schedule), 38 C.F.R. Part 4.  The percentage ratings in the Rating Schedule represent, as far as can practicably be determined, the average impairment in earning capacity resulting from diseases and injuries incurred or aggravated during military service and their residual conditions in civil occupations.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1.  

Where there is a question as to which of two evaluations shall be applied, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria for that rating.  Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7.  When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, the Secretary of VA shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 4.3. 

Under the Formula for Rating Intervertebral Disc Syndrome (IVDS) Based on Incapacitating Episodes, a 10 percent rating is warranted for IVDS with incapacitating episodes having a total duration of at least one week but less than 2 weeks during the past 12 months.  A 20 percent rating is warranted for IVDS with incapacitating episodes having a total duration of at least 2 weeks but less than 4 weeks during the past 12 months.  A 40 percent rating is warranted for IVDS with incapacitating episodes having a total duration of at least 4 weeks but less than 6 weeks during the past 12 months.  A 60 percent rating is warranted for IVDS with incapacitating episodes having a total duration of at least 6 weeks during the past 12 months.  38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Formula for Rating IVDS Based on Incapacitating Episodes.  

Note 1 to Diagnostic Code 5243 provides that, for purposes of ratings under Diagnostic Code 5243, an incapacitating episode is a period of acute signs and symptoms due to intervertebral disc syndrome that requires bed rest prescribed by a physician and treatment by a physician.  Id.  at Note 1.

Relevant to the cervical spine, under the General Rating Formula for Diseases and Injuries of the Spine, a 10 percent rating is warranted for forward flexion of the cervical spine greater than 30 degrees but not greater than 40 degrees; or, combined range of motion of the cervical spine greater than 170 degrees but not greater than 335 degrees; or, muscle spasm, guarding, or localized tenderness not resulting in abnormal gait or abnormal spinal contour; or, vertebral body fracture with loss of 50 percent or more of the height.  A 20 percent rating is warranted for forward flexion of the cervical spine greater than 15 degrees but not greater than 30 degrees; or, the combined range of motion of the cervical spine not greater than 170 degrees; or, muscle spasm or guarding severe enough to result in an abnormal gait or abnormal spinal contour such as scoliosis, reversed lordosis, or abnormal kyphosis.  A 30 percent rating is warranted for forward flexion of the cervical spine to 15 degrees or less; or favorable ankylosis of the entire cervical spine.  A 40 percent rating is warranted for unfavorable ankylosis of the entire cervical spine.  A 100 percent rating is warranted for unfavorable ankylosis of the entire spine.  38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, General Rating Formula for Diseases and Injuries of the Spine.  

Relevant to the thoracolumbar spine, under the General Rating Formula for Diseases and Injuries of the Spine, a 10 percent rating is warranted for forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine greater than 60 degrees but not greater than 85 degrees; or, combined range of motion of the thoracolumbar spine greater than 120 degrees but not greater than 235 degrees; or, muscle spasm, guarding, or localized tenderness not resulting in abnormal gait or abnormal spinal contour; or, vertebral body fracture with loss of 50 percent or more of the height.  A 20 percent rating is warranted for forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine greater than 30 degrees but not greater than 60 degrees; or the combined range of motion of the thoracolumbar spine not greater than 120 degrees; or, muscle spasm or guarding severe enough to result in an abnormal gait or abnormal spinal contour such as scoliosis, reversed lordosis, or abnormal kyphosis.  A 40 percent rating is warranted for forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine to 30 degrees or less; or, favorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine.  A 50 percent rating is warranted for unfavorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine.  A 100 percent evaluation is warranted for unfavorable ankylosis of the entire spine.  38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, General Rating Formula for Diseases and Injuries of the Spine.  

Any associated objective neurological abnormalities, including, but not limited to, bowel or bladder impairment, are to be evaluated separately under an appropriate diagnostic code.  Id. at Note 1.

Ankylosis is defined as "immobility and consolidation of a joint due to disease, injury, or surgical procedure."  Dorland's Illustrated Medical Dictionary, 94 (32nd ed. 2012).  Fixation of a spinal segment in neutral position (zero degrees) always represents favorable ankylosis.  Id. at Note 5.  Unfavorable ankylosis is defined as "a condition in which the entire cervical spine, the entire thoracolumbar spine, or the entire spine is fixed in flexion or extension, and the ankylosis results in one or more of the following: difficulty walking because of a limited line of vision; restricted opening of the mouth and chewing; breathing limited to diaphragmatic respiration; gastrointestinal symptoms due to pressure of the costal margin on the abdomen; dyspnea or dysphagia; atlantoaxial or cervical subluxation or dislocation; or neurologic symptoms due to nerve root stretching."  Id. at Note 5. 

When evaluating musculoskeletal disabilities based on limitation of motion, as here, 38 C.F.R. § 4.40 requires consideration of functional loss caused by pain or other factors listed in that section that could occur during flare-ups or after repeated use and, therefore, not be reflected on range-of-motion testing.  38 C.F.R. § 4.45 requires consideration also be given to less movement than normal, more movement than normal, weakened movement, excess fatigability, incoordination, and pain on movement.  See DeLuca v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 202 (1995); see also Mitchell v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 32, 44 (2011).  Nonetheless, even when the background factors listed in § 4.40 or 4.45 are relevant when evaluating a disability, the rating is assigned based on the extent to which motion is limited, pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a; a separate or higher rating under § 4.40 or 4.45 itself is not appropriate.  See Thompson v. McDonald, 815 F.3d 781, 785 (Fed. Cir. 2016) ("[I]t is clear that the guidance of § 4.40 is intended to be used in understanding the nature of the veteran's disability, after which a rating is determined based on the § 4.71a criteria.").

Under 38 C.F.R. § 4.59, painful motion is a factor to be considered with any form of arthritis; however, 38 C.F.R. § 4.59 is not limited to disabilities involving arthritis.  See Burton v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 1 (2011).  The final sentence of 38 C.F.R. § 4.59 requires that the examiner record the results of range of motion testing "for pain on both active and passive motion [and] in weight-bearing and non-weight-bearing and, if possible, with range of motion measurements of the opposite undamaged joint."  Correia v. McDonald, 28 Vet. App. 158 (2016).  (The spine has no opposite joint.)  VA examiners must obtain information about the severity, frequency, duration, precipitating and alleviating factors, and extent of functional impairment of flares from the veterans themselves, when a flare-up is not observable at the time of examination.  Sharp v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 26 (2017).

Analysis

1. Entitlement to a rating in excess of 20 percent prior to January 25, 2024, and a rating in excess of 30 percent from that date, for service-connected cervical spine degenerative disc disease

The Veteran's service-connected cervical spine disability is currently rated under 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5243 (for intervertebral disc syndrome), which provides that IVDS is to be rated either under the General Rating Formula for Diseases and Injuries of the Spine or under the Formula for Rating IVDS Based on Incapacitating Episodes, whichever method results in the higher rating when all disabilities are combined under 38 C.F.R. § 4.25.

In this case, the Board finds that for the period on appeal the evidence of record persuasively weighs against a rating in excess of 20 percent prior to January 25, 2024 and a rating in excess of 30 percent from that date for the service-connected cervical spine disability, based on application of the criteria from both rating formulas.  

First, in regard to rating IVDS based on incapacitating episodes, the evidence of record does not demonstrate that the Veteran was ever prescribed bed rest by a physician for a duration that meets the criteria for a higher rating for the period on appeal (either before or after January 25, 2024).  VA examiners in both September 2023 and January 2024 did not find the Veteran had IVDS, much less whether any episodes of acute signs and symptoms required bed rest prescribed by a physician in the past 12 months.  Further, the private and VA treatment records on file do not demonstrate incapacitating episodes due to IVDS that required physician-prescribed bed rest.  

Second, in regard to evaluating the disability under the general rating criteria for evaluating spinal disease and injury, the evidence of record also persuasively weighs against ratings higher than those in effect before and from January 25, 2024.  

For the period before January 25, 2024, the Veteran underwent a VA examination in September 2023.  His active and passive range of motion findings (in degrees) were forward flexion to 30, extension to 30, right lateral flexion to 25, left lateral flexion to 45, right lateral rotation to 60, and left lateral rotation to 80, with most measurements demonstrating that the deviation from normal was attributable to pain.  There was no additional loss of function or range of motion after three observed repetitions.  The Veteran did not report any flare-ups, but from procured information on file to include the Veteran's statements, the examiner determined that the factors of pain and lack of endurance limited his functional ability with repeated use over time.  The estimated the additional loss of range of motion (in degrees) from repeated use over time was forward flexion to 25, extension to 25, right lateral flexion to 20, left lateral flexion to 45, right lateral rotation to 55, and left lateral rotation to 80.  Also, the examiner indicated the Veteran did not have guarding, muscle spasm, or ankylosis of the cervical spine.  VA and private treatment records do not describe the Veteran's cervical spine disability as having greater limitations of motion than those measured/estimated on the VA examination, to include any ankylosis.  Therefore, prior to January 25, 2024, the foregoing evidence does not show that the Veteran's forward flexion of the cervical spine was or approximated 15 degrees or less, or that he had favorable ankylosis of the entire cervical spine, for a higher rating under the applicable criteria.  Thus, his currently assigned 20 percent rating for this period is proper as his findings more nearly approximate the criteria for that rating.  

For the period beginning January 25, 2024, the Veteran underwent a VA examination on that date.  The findings from the examination constitute the initial ascertainable evidence during the appeal period that his cervical spine disability worsened in severity, and for that reason the RO properly assigned an increased rating to 30 percent for the disability from January 25, 2024.  However, a review of the record does not demonstrate that his cervical spine symptoms meet or approximate the criteria for a higher rating of 40 percent, which requires unfavorable ankylosis of the entire cervical spine.  VA and private outpatient records do not suggest his disability has such functional limitation, and on the January 2024 VA examination his cervical spine does not demonstrate unfavorable ankylosis (or any ankylosis at all).  Rather, from procured information on file to include the Veteran's statements, the examiner determined that pain limited the Veteran's functional ability to the greatest extent during flare-ups, and the estimated additional loss of motion (in degrees) during flare-ups was forward flexion to 15, extension to 10, right lateral flexion to 15, left lateral flexion to 10, right lateral rotation to 30, and left lateral rotation to 40.  This medical evidence clearly weighs against a higher rating from January 25, 2024.  

The Board acknowledges the Veteran's lay reports of symptoms to include his statements asserting functional loss from such factors as pain and stiffness.  On the September 2023 VA examination, he reported daily stiffness with intermittent shooting pains down both arms and limitation of full motion.  He described his functional loss in terms of having limitations in moving his neck to the right, which was recorded in the examiner's remarks when asked about the functional impact of the disability on the Veteran's ability to perform any type of occupational task (the Veteran was a retired teacher).  On the January 2024 VA examination, the Veteran reported constant dull pain in the neck and shoulder area with burning pain in the arms with numbness and tingling.  (It is noted he is separately rated for service-connected bilateral shoulder disabilities and radiculopathy in both upper extremities.)  He stated he had difficulty driving, with repeated use activities, sleeping, gripping/grasping, and lifting.  In terms of the functional impact, the examiner remarked that the Veteran's cervical spine disability and bilateral upper extremity radiculopathy interfered with bending, turning, lifting, and carrying objects.  Even accounting for the Veteran's lay reports of symptoms and noted functional loss, the degree of limitation as reflected by his descriptions of impairment are not shown to result, or more nearly approximate, forward flexion of the cervical spine to 15 degrees or less or favorable ankylosis of the entire cervical spine prior to January 25, 2024, or unfavorable ankylosis of the entire cervical spine from January 25, 2024.  

Further, throughout the entire appeal period, the Veteran's cervical spine symptoms during repeated use over time or during a flare-up may not be deemed comparable to ankylosis.  As earlier noted, when considering the functional limitation during repeated use over time and during flare-ups, the examiners considered the Veteran's lay reports of symptoms and provided estimates on the additional functional loss in terms of limitation of motion.  Those determinations do not more nearly approximate fixation of a spinal segment in neutral position (zero degrees), or fixation in flexion or extension whereby there were such problems as difficulty walking because of a limited line of vision, restricted opening of the mouth and chewing, dyspnea or dysphagia, or cervical subluxation or dislocation.  Nor has the Veteran expressly indicated that his cervical spine was akin to being immobilized or fixed in one position.  

As for the evaluation of any associated objective neurologic abnormalities separately under an appropriate diagnostic code (in reference to Note 1 of the General Rating Formula), the lay and medical evidence of record is against a finding that the Veteran has any other neurological impairments associated with the cervical spine disability for which he is not already compensated.  In that regard, the Veteran is recognized as having been granted service connection for bilateral upper extremity radiculopathy (involving all nerve groups) associated with the cervical spine degenerative disc disease, and the lay and medical evidence of record is against a finding that he has any other neurological abnormality associated with the cervical spine disability.  

Lastly, in reaching this decision, the Board has not considered the ameliorative effects of medication in assessing the Veteran's level of impairment caused by his cervical spine disability.  See Jones v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 56, 63 (2012) (holding that when relevant rating criteria do not specifically contemplate medication use, the beneficial effects of that medication must be discounted); see also Ingram v. Collins, 2025 U.S. App. Vet. Claims LEXIS 327 (Mar. 12, 2025) (reaffirming the central holding of Jones relative to assessing the severity of musculoskeletal disability in particular).  As the pertinent rating criteria in this case does not contemplate medication use, the ameliorative effects of medication must be discounted.  Here, examination reports and treatment records reflect that during the period under review the Veteran has used Tylenol, diclofenac, and cyclobenzaprine, as needed, to treat pain and muscle spasm arising from various service-connected disabilities to include his cervical spine.  However, there is no clear indication, nor has the Veteran contended, that any medication he has used had a discernible ameliorative impact on his cervical spine disability symptoms.  For example, VA preventive medicine notes in July 2022 and September 2023 indicate that the Veteran was taking his prescribed medication, yet his pain was still problematic and in need of intervention (the July 2022 note indicates he identified relief from medication, but it also indicates his pain was always present and not managed on current medications/interventions).  Further, the assessments of his functional limitations, such as at the time of the VA examinations, did not reflect that the Veteran was then under the beneficial influence of any medication; on range of motion testing, for instance, his movements were notably restricted to a large degree by pain.  As the record demonstrates no ameliorative effects of medication, there are none to discount.  

For the foregoing reasons, the evidence of record persuasively weighs against the Veteran's claim for a rating in excess of 20 percent prior to January 25, 2024, and a rating in excess of 30 percent from that date, for the service-connected cervical spine disability.  As the evidence of record persuasively weighs against higher ratings, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (2021).

2. Entitlement to a rating in excess of 20 percent prior to January 25, 2024, and a rating in excess of 40 percent from that date, for service-connected lumbar spine intervertebral disc syndrome and degenerative disc disease

The Veteran's service-connected lumbar spine disability is currently rated under 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5242 (for degenerative arthritis, degenerative disc disease other than IVDS) and Code 5243 (for IVDS).  Code 5242 is rated under the General Rating Formula for Diseases and Injuries of the Spine.  Code 5243 provides that IVDS is to be rated either under the General Rating Formula for Diseases and Injuries of the Spine or under the Formula for Rating IVDS Based on Incapacitating Episodes, whichever method results in the higher rating when all disabilities are combined under 38 C.F.R. § 4.25.

In this case, the Board finds that for the period on appeal the evidence of record persuasively weighs against a rating in excess of 20 percent prior to January 25, 2024 and a rating in excess of 40 percent from that date for the service-connected lumbar spine disability, based on application of the criteria from both rating formulas.  

First, in regard to rating IVDS based on incapacitating episodes, the evidence of record does not demonstrate that the Veteran was ever prescribed bed rest by a physician for a duration that meets the criteria for a higher rating for the period on appeal (either before or after January 25, 2024).  A VA examiner in January 2024 found that the Veteran had IVDS but indicated that he did not have any episodes of acute signs and symptoms due to IVDS that required bed rest prescribed by a physician.  Likewise, private and VA treatment records do not demonstrate incapacitating episodes due to IVDS requiring physician-prescribed bed rest.  

Second, in regard to evaluating the disability under the general rating criteria for evaluating spinal disease and injury, the evidence of record also persuasively weighs against ratings higher than those in effect before and from January 25, 2024.  

For the period before January 25, 2024, the Veteran's VA and private treatment records do not demonstrate that his lumbar spine disability was manifest by a limitation of forward flexion that met or approximated 30 degrees or less, or that he had favorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine, for a higher rating under the applicable criteria.  Rather, occasional clinic visits disclose the presence of ongoing low back pain and muscle spasm, as well as the Veteran's request for (and receipt of) a back brace for back pain in January 2023.  On an April 2023 visit to a private provider (CareNow), when he was seen with complaints of back pain, an examination showed resistive range of motion of the lumbar spine (RROM) but without further description of the degree of any limitation of motion of the joint.  In other words, there is no documentary evidence to show that his lumbar spine is restricted to the level of impairment necessary to support the assignment of a higher rating.  Thus, his currently assigned 20 percent rating for this period is proper based on findings that more nearly approximate the criteria for that rating, which contemplate a range of motion of the lumbar spine that is greater than 30 but not greater than 60 degrees, a combined range of motion that is not greater than 120 degrees, or muscle spasm or guarding severe enough to result in an abnormal spinal gait or spinal contour.  

For the period beginning January 25, 2024, the Veteran underwent a VA examination on that date.  The findings from the examination constitute the initial ascertainable evidence during the appeal period that his lumbar spine disability worsened in severity, and for that reason the RO properly assigned an increased rating to 40 percent for the disability from January 25, 2024.  However, a review of the record does not demonstrate that his lumbar spine symptoms meet or approximate the criteria for a higher rating of 50 percent, which requires unfavorable ankylosis of the entire lumbar spine.  VA and private outpatient records do not suggest his disability has such functional limitation, and on the January 2024 VA examination his lumbar spine does not demonstrate unfavorable ankylosis (or any ankylosis at all).  Rather, from procured information on file to include the Veteran's statements, the examiner determined that pain limited the Veteran's functional ability to the greatest extent during flare-ups, and the estimated additional loss of motion (in degrees) during flare-ups was forward flexion to 20, extension to 5, right lateral flexion to 10, left lateral flexion to 5, right lateral rotation to 10, and left lateral rotation to 10.  This medical evidence demonstrating that, at his worst, the Veteran had some motion, albeit very limited, in his lower back weighs against the assignment of a higher rating from January 25, 2024.  

The Board acknowledges the Veteran's lay reports of low back symptoms.  Before January 25, 2024, he complained of low back pain that was aching and dull and that increased with movement and standing/walking (see March 2023 VA preventive medicine note).  He requested a back brace and a cane (for both back but mostly knee pain) from the VA in January 2023.  At the January 25, 2024 VA examination, he related having a constant, sharp pain in the back with constant numbness in the right leg and intermittent pain, numbness, and tingling in the left leg.  He described his functional loss in terms of having difficulty in performing daily tasks such as showering, sleeping, bending, lifting, repeated use, and prolonged sitting, standing, and walking.  (It is noted he is separately rated for service-connected radiculopathy in both lower extremities.)  In terms of the functional impact, the VA examiner remarked that the Veteran's lumbar spine disability, together with his bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy, interfered with bending, lifting, twisting, turning, and prolonged sitting, standing, and walking.  Even accounting for the Veteran's lay reports of symptoms and noted functional loss, the degree of limitation as reflected by his descriptions of impairment are not shown to result in, or more nearly approximate, forward flexion of the lumbar spine to 30 degrees or less or favorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine prior to January 25, 2024, or unfavorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine from January 25, 2024.  

Further, throughout the entire appeal period, the Veteran's lumbar spine symptoms during flare-ups (when his movements were most restricted) may not be deemed comparable to ankylosis.  As earlier noted, when considering the functional limitation during flare-ups, the VA examiner considered the Veteran's lay reports of symptoms and provided an estimate on the additional functional loss in terms of limitation of motion.  That determination does not more nearly approximate fixation of a spinal segment in neutral position (zero degrees), or fixation in flexion or extension whereby there was such problems as difficulty walking because of a limited line of vision, breathing limited to diaphragmatic respiration, gastrointestinal symptoms due to pressure of the costal margin on the abdomen, or dyspnea or dysphagia.  Nor has the Veteran expressly indicated that his lumbar spine was akin to being immobilized or fixed in one position.  

As for the evaluation of any associated objective neurologic abnormalities separately under an appropriate diagnostic code (in reference to Note 1 of the General Rating Formula), the lay and medical evidence of record is against a finding that the Veteran has any other neurological impairments associated with the lumbar spine disability for which he is not already compensated.  In that regard, the Veteran is recognized as already having been granted service connection for bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy (involving both sciatic and femoral nerve groups) associated with the lumbar spine intervertebral disc syndrome and degenerative disc disease, and the lay and medical evidence of record is against a finding that he has any other neurologic abnormality associated with the lumbar spine disability, such as bowel and/or bladder impairment.  

Lastly, in reaching this decision, the Board has not considered the ameliorative effects of medication in assessing the Veteran's level of impairment caused by his lumbar spine disability.  See Jones v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 56, 63 (2012) (holding that when relevant rating criteria do not specifically contemplate medication use, the beneficial effects of that medication must be discounted); see also Ingram v. Collins, 2025 U.S. App. Vet. Claims LEXIS 327 (Mar. 12, 2025) (reaffirming the central holding of Jones relative to assessing the severity of musculoskeletal disability in particular).  As the pertinent rating criteria in this case does not contemplate medication use, the ameliorative effects of medication must be discounted.  Here, the examination report and treatment records reflect that during the period under review the Veteran has used Tylenol, diclofenac, and cyclobenzaprine, as needed, to treat pain and muscle spasm arising from various service-connected disabilities to include his lumbar spine.  However, there is no clear indication that any medication he has used had a discernible ameliorative impact on his lumbar spine disability symptoms.  For example, on the VA examination, the Veteran reported that he experienced severe and prolonged flare-ups but that they were alleviated by stretching, standing, and a back brace.  He also noted at the time that during flare-ups he will go to the emergency room and get pain injections, but this assertion is not corroborated by the record including both VA and private reports.  Evidence on file shows a visit to a private emergency room/urgent care facility in April 2023, after the Veteran rode his bike 25 miles over four days.  He complained of moderate pain in the lower lumbar spine, radiating to the left hip/thigh, and was assessed with acute lumbar strain and acute left-sided sciatica.  His treatment plan was ibuprofen and Robaxin (a muscle relaxant), rather than any spine injections.  Four days later in April 2023 he presented to a different private provider with complaints of worsening back pain and a request for "another steroid shot" (he claimed to have had such a shot three or four days earlier that purportedly helped to relieve his pain quite a bit, as well as muscle relaxants at home that he had not used).  For his diagnosed lumbar sprain, he was advised to start the muscle relaxant he had at home.  There is no evidence he received a spine injection for pain at either of his April 2023 visits despite the Veteran's claim at the time.  Additionally, a March 2023 VA preventive medicine note indicates that the Veteran's back pain was relieved by medication, but it also indicates that his pain was always present and not managed on current medications/interventions.  Further, the assessment of his functional limitations at the time of the January 2024 VA examination did not reflect that the Veteran was then under the beneficial influence of any medication; on range of motion testing, for instance, his movements were notably restricted to a significant degree by pain.  As the record demonstrates no ameliorative effects of medication, there are none to discount.  

For the foregoing reasons, the evidence of record persuasively weighs against the Veteran's claim for a rating in excess of 20 percent prior to January 25, 2024, and a rating in excess of 40 percent from that date, for the service-connected lumbar spine disability.  As the evidence of record persuasively weighs against higher ratings, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (2021).  

 

 

L. B. CRYAN

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Breitbeil, Debbie

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.