Citation Nr: A25034238
Decision Date: 04/14/25	Archive Date: 04/14/25

DOCKET NO. 250306-523798
DATE: April 14, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 60 percent for evaluation of diabetes mellitus, type II, with erectile dysfunction, diabetic retinopathy, macular edema, cataracts, and diabetic nephropathy, is denied.

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 30 percent for the evaluation of diabetic peripheral neuropathy, right upper extremity (radial nerve), is denied.

Entitlement to an effective date earlier than February 20, 2023 for a TDIU is denied. 

Entitlement to an effective date prior to February 20, 2023 for the evaluation assigned to Dependents' Educational Assistance under 38 U.S.C. Chapter 35 based on permanent and total disability status is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran's diabetes mellitus has not resulted in episodes of ketoacidosis or hypoglycemic reactions requiring at least three hospitalizations per year or weekly visits to a diabetic care provider, plus either progressive loss of weight and strength.

2. The Veteran's diabetic peripheral neuropathy, right upper extremity was manifested by no more than moderate incomplete paralysis of the radicular group of nerves.

3. The persuasive weight of the evidence weighs against a finding that the Veteran's TDIU was factually ascertainable prior to February 20, 2023.

4. Prior to February 20, 2023, the Veteran was not permanently and totally disabled due to a service-connected disability and did not meet the criteria for DEA benefits.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for a disability rating in excess of 60 percent for diabetes mellitus have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.119, Diagnostic Code 7913.

2. The criteria for a rating in excess of 30 percent for diabetic peripheral neuropathy, right upper extremity (radial), have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.159, 4.7, 4.124a, Diagnostic Codes 8514.

3. The criteria for an earlier effective date for the grant of a total disability rating based on individual unemployability (TDIU) have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 5107, 5110; 38 C.F.R. § 4.16.

4. The criteria for entitlement to DEA benefits were not met prior to February 20, 2023. 38 U.S.C. §§ 3501, 3510, 5113; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.400, 3.807 (a), 21.3021.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served in the United States Navy from October 1966 to January 1971.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from an August 2024 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office. 

Although the Veteran initially requested Higher-Level Review when submitting the November 2023 VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review, the Higher-Level Reviewer determined that there had been a duty to assist error and transferred the claim to the Supplemental Claim decision review option for additional development. 

In the March 2025 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the August 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) supplemental claim decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted after the AOJ issued the supplemental claim decision on appeal, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Appellant would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

The Appellant has raised a number of issues in her VA Form 10182 stemming from rating decisions that were issued more than one year prior to the filing of the VA Form 10182. The Appellant notes four issues stemming from an October 26, 2023 rating decision, including evaluation of diabetic peripheral neuropathy left lower extremity (sciatic nerve), evaluation of diabetic peripheral neuropathy left upper extremity (radial nerve), evaluation of diabetic peripheral neuropathy right lower extremity (sciatic nerve), and propriety of the reduction in rating for dermatitis and fungal infection of the penis. The Appellant also raises several issues stemming from a November 8, 2023 rating decision, including propriety of the reduction in rating for diabetes mellitus, type II, with erectile dysfunction, diabetic retinopathy, macular edema, cataracts, and diabetic nephropathy, and earlier effective dates for diabetes mellitus, type II, and diabetic peripheral neuropathy right upper extremity radial nerve. 

Review of the record shows the Appellants did not seek an extension of time to file this VA Form 10182, nor did she show good cause for her failure to appeal the issue of service connection for a heart disability within the one-year period following issuance of the 2023 rating decisions. There has also been no waiver of the Board's right to enforce the filing deadline. As these issues were all contained on rating decisions issued more than one year before the filing of the March 6, 2025 VA Form 10182, they are not properly before the Board.

1. Entitlement to a rating in excess of 60 percent for evaluation of diabetes mellitus, type II, with erectile dysfunction, diabetic retinopathy, macular edema, cataracts, and diabetic nephropathy, is denied. 

The Appellant states that the Veteran should have been afforded a rating in excess of 60 percent disabling for diabetes mellitus, type II. After a careful review of the record, the Board determines that this claim must be denied. The reasons follow. 

Diabetes is rated under Diagnostic Code 7913. Diabetes that is manageable by restricted diet only is rated at 10 percent. 38 C.F.R. § 4.119, Diagnostic Code 7913. Diabetes requiring one or more daily injections of insulin and a restricted diet, or an oral hypoglycemic agent and a restricted diet, is rated at 20 percent. Id. Diabetes requiring insulin, a restricted diet, and regulation of activities is rated at 40 percent. Id. A rating of 60 percent is assigned for diabetes requiring insulin, restricted diet, regulation of activities, and involving episodes of ketoacidosis or hypoglycemic reactions requiring one or two hospitalizations per year or visits to a diabetic care provider twice a month, plus complications that would not be compensable if separately evaluated. Id. A rating of 100 percent is assigned for diabetes requiring more than one daily injection of insulin, a restricted diet, regulation of activities (avoidance of strenuous occupational and recreational activities) and involving episodes of ketoacidosis or hypoglycemic reactions requiring at least three hospitalizations per year or weekly visits to a diabetic care provider, plus either progressive loss of weight and strength or complications that would be compensable if separately rated. Id.

Note (1) to Diagnostic Code 7913 provides that compensable complications of diabetes are to be rated separately unless they are part of the criteria used to support a 100 percent rating (under Diagnostic Code 7913). Noncompensable complications are considered part of the diabetic process under Diagnostic Code 7913. 38 C.F.R. § 4.119.

Regulation of activities is defined by Diagnostic Code 7913 as the "avoidance of strenuous occupational and recreational activities." Medical evidence is required to show that such activities have been restricted. Camacho v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 360, 363-364 (2007).

A "successive" rating criteria is where the evaluation for each higher disability rating includes the criteria of each lower disability rating, such that if a component is not met at any one level, the Veteran can only be rated at the level that does not require the missing component. Tatum v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 152, 156 (2009).

The diagnostic code for diabetes (Diagnostic Code 7913) is successive because each higher rating requires the elements of the lower evaluation: the 10 percent rating requires a restricted diet; the 20 percent rating requires a restricted diet and insulin or oral hypoglycemic agent, the 40 percent rating requires insulin, restricted diet, and regulation of activities; and so forth. Camacho, 21 Vet. App. at 366.

In October 2023, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination. The VA examiner noted that the Veteran was diagnosed with diabetes mellitus, type II. The VA examiner stated that the Veteran managed his diabetes with a restricted diet, a prescribed hypoglycemic agent, and a daily insulin injection. The VA examiner noted that the Veteran required regulation of activities, but did not mean restriction in activities, as the VA examiner detailed that the Veteran exercises by walking, and walking in chest deep water, and does physical exercises for his back, leg, and neck pain. The VA examiner noted that the Veteran saw his provider less than two times per month for episodes of ketoacidosis, and two times per month for episodes of hypoglycemia. The Veteran had no hospitalizations for these conditions in the past year. The VA examiner noted that the Veteran had progressive unintentional weight and loss of strength due to his diabetes.  

In November 2023, the Veteran was afforded another VA examination. The VA examiner noted that the Veteran was diagnosed with diabetes mellitus, type II. The Veteran was prescribed an oral hypoglycemic agent and took one injection of insulin daily. It was noted that the Veteran did not need to regulate his activities to control his diabetes. The VA examiner stated that the Veteran saw his provider less than twice per month for episodes of ketoacidosis and hypoglycemia. He was noted as not having had hospitalizations for these conditions within the past year. It was also stated that the Veteran had not had any progressive unintentional weight loss and loss of strength attributable to his diabetes. 

At the time of the rating decision on appeal, the Veteran was receiving a 60 percent disability rating for diabetes. To receive a 100 percent disability rating for diabetes, the Veteran must receive more than one injection of insulin per day. The Veteran was only receiving one injection of insulin per day. The Veteran must have had their activities regulated, which the Veteran did not. The October 2023 VA examination noted a number of physical activities that the Veteran participated in, and the November 2023 VA examination noted that the Veteran's activities were not restricted. The Veteran must also have had episodes of ketoacidosis or hypoglycemic reactions requiring at least three hospitalizations per year or weekly visits to a diabetic care provider, plus either progressive loss of weight and strength or complications that would be compensable if separately rated. The Veteran did not have any hospitalizations within the past year, and did not have weekly visits to his provider. 

As the criteria for the 100 percent rating for diabetes mellitus have not been established, the appeal for the higher disability rating must be denied.  

2. Entitlement to a rating in excess of 30 percent for the evaluation of diabetic peripheral neuropathy, right upper extremity (radial nerve), is denied. 

The Appellant states that the Veteran should have been afforded a rating in excess of 30 percent disabling for his diabetic peripheral neuropathy, right upper extremity (radial nerve). After a careful review of the record, the Board determines that this claim must be denied. The reasons follow. 

The diabetic peripheral neuropathy, right upper extremity (radial nerve) was rated under DC 8514 which provides ratings for the paralysis of the radial nerve. 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a. 

Under DC 8514, complete paralysis of the dominant hand warrants a 70 percent rating, with; drop of hand and fingers, wrist and fingers perpetually flexed, the thumb adducted falling within the line of the outer border of the index finger; cannot extend hand at wrist, extend proximal phalanges of fingers, extend thumb, or make lateral movement of wrist; supination of hand, extension and flexion of elbow weakened, the loss of synergic motion of extensors impairs the hand grip seriously; total paralysis of the triceps occurs only as the greatest rarity. Severe incomplete paralysis, moderate and mild incomplete paralysis of the dominant hand warrant 50, 30 and 20 percent ratings respectively. 

The words "mild," "moderate," and "severe" as used in the various Diagnostic Codes are not defined in the Rating Schedule.  Regulations provide that ratings for peripheral neurological disorders are to be assigned based the relative impairment of motor function, trophic changes, or sensory disturbance. 38 C.F.R. § 4.120.  Consideration is also given for loss of reflexes, pain, and muscle atrophy.  See 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.123, 4.124. The Board observes that "mild" is defined as "not very severe." See Webster's New World Dictionary, Second College Edition (1999), 694. "Moderate" is defined as "of average or medium quantity, quality, or extent." Id. at 704. "Severe" is generally defined as "extremely intense." Id. at 1012

The term "incomplete paralysis" indicates a degree of lost or impaired function substantially less than the type of picture for complete paralysis given with each nerve, whether due to varied level of the nerve lesion or to partial regeneration.  When the involvement is wholly sensory, the rating is for the mild, or at most, the moderate degree.  The disability ratings for the peripheral nerves are for unilateral involvement; when bilateral, the ratings combine with application of the bilateral factor.  38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Note at "Diseases of the Peripheral Nerves."  The Note to 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a establishes a maximum disability rating for conditions that are wholly sensory, as opposed to a minimum disability rating for conditions that are more than wholly sensory.  See Miller v. Shulkin, 28 Vet. App. 376 (2017).

In June 2021, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination which noted a diabetic peripheral neuropathy diagnosis in 2017. The Veteran reported that he had had the condition since the 2000s. The Veteran stated that he worked as a cook in the miliary from 1966 to 1971. He indicated that he was deployed to Vietnam yearly from the time of his enlistment. The Veteran stated that in the 90s, he was diagnosed with diabetes. He reported that he declined to take insulin, and his blood sugar has been uncontrolled. He stated that due to a recent appointment, he may have to take insulin to control his blood sugar. The Veteran stated that his neuropathy has worsened since its onset. He reported that recently, he has noticed weakness and easy fatiguability of the upper extremities. The Veteran stated that he finds it hard to open jars, grasp tiny objects, and he tires easily when writing. He treats his condition with Gabapentin. 

The Veteran reported that his dominant hand is his right hand. The VA examiner noted that the Veteran had symptoms attributable to diabetic peripheral neuropathy. The Veteran was found to have mild paresthesias and/or dysesthesias and mild numbness in the right upper extremity. No constant or intermittent pain was noted in the right upper extremity. The VA examiner noted that there was no muscle atrophy, and no trophic changes were noted in the right upper extremity. The VA examiner stated that the Veteran had diabetic peripheral neuropathy of the right upper extremity and stated that there was mild incomplete paralysis of the radial nerve.  The VA examiner noted that the Veteran was at increased risk of injury because of his decreased sensation. The VA examiner concluded by finding that the severity of the upper extremity neuropathy was mild. 

In October 2023 the Veteran was afforded a VA examination and was found to have diabetes and diabetic peripheral neuropathy. Regarding the upper extremities, the Veteran stated that he had a shooting pain that he would rate as a 5 on a 10-point scale. The Veteran reported that controlling his diabetes and medication help. He also stated that the pain gets worse with prolonged movement. In the right upper extremity, the Veteran was stated to have moderate paresthesias, and moderate numbness. He was not noted to have any constant or intermittent pain. His strength, deep tendon reflexes, and light touch testing were all noted as being normal. The VA examiner stated that the Veteran did not have muscle atrophy. The Veteran was found to have no trophic changes. In addressing the severity of the Veteran's upper extremity diabetic peripheral neuropathy, specifically the right radial nerve, the VA examiner found it to be within normal range. 

Based on the above, the Board finds that the disability is primarily manifested by moderate paresthesias, and moderate numbness. No muscle atrophy or trophic changes were noted in the VA examinations. The Board thus finds that the level of impairment is most analogous to a moderate incomplete paralysis. 

In conclusion, the Board finds that the evidence of record persuasively weighs against the Veteran's claim for a rating in excess of 30 percent for diabetic peripheral neuropathy, right upper extremity (radial nerve).  As the evidence of record persuasively weighs against a rating in excess of 30 percent, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021). Therefore, this claim must be denied. 

3. Entitlement to an effective date earlier than February 20, 2023 for a TDIU is denied. 

The Appellant states that the Veteran's effective date for his TDIU should have been April 28, 2021, the date the Veteran filed a claim for an increased disability rating for his diabetes, not February 20, 2023, the date the Veteran filed a VA Form 8940 for TDIU, as assigned by the RO. After a careful review of the record, the Board determines that the claim must be denied. The reasons follow. 

On February 20, 2023, the Veteran filed an application for TDIU. He stated that he left work in 2002 due to his service-connected disabilities. Along with his application for a TDIU, the veteran submitted a statement regarding his service-connected diabetes mellitus and diabetic neuropathy and his ability to work. The Veteran stated that due to his service-connected disabilities, when standing he must steady himself with a cane or hold onto something to steady himself. He cannot be in a standing position for more than thirty minutes even if he is steading himself by holding onto something. He reported that it is difficult to stand for long periods of time without pain or discomfort. The Veteran stated that he has tingling in his feet and toes, and a numbness which affects his balance. He stated that he cannot walk for more than five minutes before having these issues. The Veteran reported that he cannot sit for more than thirty minutes before having to get up or reposition due to pain. He stated he has issues using his hands and arms to carry, lift, or perform repetitive movements like operating a phone. He is only able to do it for fifteen to twenty minutes before he has to stop due to pain. He also reports that he cannot type due to pain. 

He reported that his service-connected conditions impact his ability to sleep. The pain in his legs would wake him up at least two to three times per night. He stated that he has issues regulating his mood, and that his wife reports that he is always irritable. He reported that he is unable to stay awake during the day and has to take a nap during the afternoon. The Veteran stated that this causes problems concentrating and staying focused. He stated that he has problems retaining information, and that if he does not write something down, he cannot later remember it. The Veteran reported having difficulties with daily living activities. He stated that his mobility is limited due to the constant pain in his legs. He reported having issues with balance, especially in the bathroom. He stated that he constantly trips just walking around his house. He reported that he requires help from his wife to complete almost any task. He explained that during his last period of employment, he had several issues due to his service-connected conditions. It became difficult for him to complete tasks as he had a hard time staying focused. He described his position as a high-stress position that was emotionally draining. He reported that he had issues with mood changes and would fall asleep at work. He stated that working with clients became very difficult. He reported that he missed days of work, suffered immense pain, and also suffered a loss of confidence. 

A claim for individual unemployability is considered a claim for an increase in disability rating. The effective date of a claim for increase is the date entitlement arose or the date of receipt of claim, whichever is later. 38 C.F.R. § 3.400(o)(1). An effective date can be assigned up to one year prior to the date of claim if it is factually ascertainable based on all evidence of record that an increase had occurred if a complete claim or intent to file a claim is received within one year from such date, otherwise, the date of receipt of claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.400(o)(2).

The Veteran has been awarded a TDIU effective February 20, 2023, the date of receipt of his formal TDIU claim. Assigning the appropriate effective date for TDIU involves determining (1) when the Veteran's claim for TDIU was received, and if possible (2) when it became factually ascertainable that the Veteran could not secure and follow gainful employment. See 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.155, 3.340, 3.400(o)(2), 4.16(a); Hazan v. Gober, 10 Vet. App. 511 (1992); Faust v. West, 13 Vet. App. 342, 356 (2000).

The Veteran submitted a February 2023 VA 21-8940 Veterans Application for Increased Compensation Based on Unemployability. The claim was granted in an October 2023 rating decision, with an effective date of February 20, 2023, the date the Veteran submitted his VA Form the VA 21-8940. 

The Appellant maintains that the effective date for the Veteran's TDIU should be the date that the Veteran filed a VA Form 21-526EZ for an increased rating for diabetes mellitus, type II, with erectile dysfunction, diabetic retinopathy, macular edema, and cataract, fungal infection of penis, and dermatitis. However, in determining an effective date for a TDIU, the Board can look back only one year from the TDIU application to determine if TDIU was factually ascertainable at an earlier date. 

Here, on April 28, 2021 and July 15, 2021, the Veteran filed a VA Form 526EZ seeking an increased rating for diabetes. On August 25, 2021, the RO issued a rating decision decreasing the disability rating for diabetes mellitus, type II, from 40 percent disabling to 20 percent disabling. On June 15, 2022, the Veteran filed a request for higher level review. On July 22, 2022, the RO issued a rating decision, which found that the reduction in the diabetes rating disability from 40 to 20 percent was proper.

Therefore, there is no evidence of an increase in disability during the one-year period prior to the Veteran filing for TDIU. Although the Veteran cites to his April 28, 2021 claim for an increased rating of diabetes, that claim was adjudicated as a reduction in disability.  

Therefore, the claim for an earlier effective date for a TDIU must be denied. 

4. Entitlement to an effective date prior to February 20, 2023 for the evaluation assigned to Dependents' Educational Assistance under 38 U.S.C. Chapter 35 based on permanent and total disability status is denied.

The Veteran contends that he is entitled to an effective date earlier than February 20, 2023 for the grant of Dependents' Educational Assistance benefits.  

Effective dates are generally awarded commensurate with the date of receipt of the claim for benefits or the date entitlement to those benefits arose, whichever is later. 38 C.F.R. § 3.400. For the purposes of DEA benefits, basic eligibility exists for veterans discharged from service under conditions other than dishonorable and in receipt of a permanent and total service-connected disability rating. 38 U.S.C. § 3500; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.807, 21.3020. 

The Veteran's TDIU was awarded effective February 20, 2023. Thus, as eligibility for DEA benefits is predicated on the assignment of a TDIU in this case, the effective date of such eligibility is also February 20, 2023, and the Board finds entitlement to an effective date earlier than February 20, 2023 is denied. 

 

 

Michael Lane

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Fleming, Shelley M.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.