Citation Nr: A25034833
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 200526-216717
DATE:  April 15, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to a clothing allowance in calendar year 2019 for a back brace is denied. 

Entitlement to a clothing allowance in calendar year 2019 for Canadian crutches is denied. 

Entitlement to a clothing allowance in calendar year 2019 due to theragesic cream is denied.

Entitlement to a clothing allowance in calendar year 2019 due to Voltaren gel is denied.

Entitlement to a clothing allowance in calendar year 2019 due to hydrocortisone cream is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. For the 2019 calendar year, the evidence of record does not reflect that the Veteran's back brace tended to wear out or tear his clothing.

2. For the 2019 calendar year, the evidence of record does not reflect that the Veteran's Canadian crutches tended to wear out or tear his clothing.

3. For the 2019 calendar year, the prescribed theragesic cream has not been determined by VA to cause permanent damage to clothing.

4. For the 2019 calendar year, the prescribed Voltaren gel has not been determined by VA to cause permanent damage to clothing.

5. For the 2019 calendar year, the prescribed hydrocortisone cream has not been determined by VA to cause permanent damage to clothing.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for an annual VA clothing allowance for the 2019 calendar year for a back brace have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1162, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.810.

2. The criteria for an annual VA clothing allowance for the calendar year 2019 for Canadian crutches are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1162, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.810.

3. The criteria for an annual VA clothing allowance for the calendar year 2019 due to theragesic cream are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1162, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.810. 

4. The criteria for an annual VA clothing allowance for the calendar year 2019 due to Voltaren gel are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1162, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.810. 

5. The criteria for an annual VA clothing allowance for the calendar year 2019 due to hydrocortisone cream are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1162, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.810. 

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Marine Corps from May 1972 to December 1975.

This matter comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a September 2019 administrative decision issued by the VA Regional Office (RO). This rating decision on appeal constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.

In the May 2020 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the May 2020 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.302(a). If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.302(a), 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

CLOTHING ALLOWANCES

The Veteran seeks entitlement to clothing allowances for the calendar year of 2019 due to the use of a back brace, Canadian crutches, theragesic cream, Voltaren gel, and hydrocortisone cream. Specific argument in support of this appeal has not been provided.

I.	Pertinent Legal Criteria

The law provides for payment of an annual clothing allowance for each veteran who, because of a service-connected disability, wears or uses a prosthetic or orthopedic appliance which VA determines tends to wear out or tear the clothing of the veteran or uses medication which a physician has prescribed for a skin condition which is due to a service-connected disability and VA determines causes irreparable damage to the veteran's outer garments. 38 U.S.C. § 1162.

One annual clothing allowance per year is payable in a lump sum, when the following eligibility criteria are satisfied: (1) A VA examination or examination report from a private physician as specified in 38 C.F.R. § 3.326(c) discloses that the veteran wears or uses certain prosthetic or orthopedic appliances which tend to wear or tear clothing (including a wheelchair) because of such service-connected disability or disabilities and such service-connected disability is the loss or loss of use of a hand or foot compensable at a rate specified in 38 C.F.R. § 3.350 (a), (b), (c), (d), or (f); or (2) The Undersecretary for Health or a designee certifies that, because of such service-connected disability or disabilities, a prosthetic or orthopedic appliance is worn or used which tends to wear or tear the veteran's clothing, or that because of the use of a physician-prescribed medication for a skin condition that is due to the service-connected disability or disabilities, irreparable damage is done to the veteran's outer garments. 38 U.S.C. § 1162; 38 C.F.R. § 3.810(a).

A veteran is entitled to an annual clothing allowance for each such prosthetic or orthopedic appliance or medication used by the veteran if each appliance or medication affects a distinct type of article of clothing or outer garment. 38 C.F.R. § 3.810(a)(2). A veteran is entitled to two annual clothing allowances if a veteran uses more than one such prosthetic or orthopedic appliance, (including, but not limited to, a wheelchair), medication for more than one skin condition, or an appliance and a medication, and the appliance(s) or medication(s) together tend to wear or tear a single type of article of clothing or irreparably damage a type of outer garment at an increased rate of damage to the clothing or outer garment due to a second appliance or medication. 38 C.F.R. § 3.810(a)(3).

Applicable law provides for payment of an annual clothing allowance for each veteran who, because of a service-connected disability, wears or uses a prosthetic or orthopedic appliance which VA determines tends to wear out or tear the clothing of the veteran or uses medication which a physician has prescribed for a skin condition which is due to a service-connected disability and VA determines causes irreparable damage to the veteran's outer garments. 38 U.S.C. § 1162 ; 38 C.F.R. § 3.810.

More than one clothing allowance may be paid for appliances that satisfy the above if each appliance affects a distinct type of article of clothing or outer garment.

Two clothing allowances may be paid when a single type of garment is affected if each appliance satisfies the above criteria and the appliances together tend to wear or tear a single type of article of clothing or irreparably damage a type of outer garment at an increased rate of damage to the clothing or outer garment due to a second appliance or medication. 38 C.F.R. § 3.810(a).

In addressing instances in which two or more clothing allowances are warranted, the regulation provides that a veteran is entitled to an annual clothing allowance for each prosthetic or orthopedic appliance (including, but not limited to, a wheelchair) or medication used by the veteran if each appliance or medication satisfies the requirements of 38 C.F.R. § 3.810(a)(1) and affects a distinct type of article of clothing or outer garment. 38 C.F.R. § 3.810(a)(2). 

Further, a veteran is entitled to two annual clothing allowances if he or she uses more than one prosthetic or orthopedic appliance, including a wheelchair, and an appliance and a medication, where each use satisfies the requirements of 38 C.F.R. § 3.810(a)(1) outlined above; and together tends to wear or tear a single type of article of clothing at an increased rate of damage to the clothing due to the second appliance. 38 C.F.R. § 3.810(a)(3).

Certain clothing allowance claims require a determination by a VHA Prosthetic Representative or designated physician when a review of the record is necessary. In all cases where a review is determined to be necessary, the Prosthetic Representative and/or designated physician must determine that: (1) Use of the device or skin medication is medically prescribed; and (2) In the case of a device, such device qualifies as a prosthetic or orthopedic appliance; (3) The device or skin medication tends to wear out, tear, or cause irreparable damage to the veteran's clothing; and (4) The veteran actually uses the device or skin medication with sufficient consistency to wear out, tear, or cause irreparable damage to clothing. See VHA Handbook 1173.15, § 3(b)(c).

II.	Analysis

The Veteran is service connected for obstructive sleep apnea, posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) with depressive disorder, lumbar contusion with myositis and mild lumbar spondylosis (hereinafter a "low back disorder"), osteopenia, tinnitus, left lower extremity radiculopathy, right lower extremity radiculopathy, hepatitis B and C, and bilateral hearing loss. 

The September 2019 Veterans Health Administration (VHA) denial letter stated that the Veteran's applications for clothing allowances were denied because the Veteran's back brace did not cause irreparable damage to the outer garment, the Canadian crutches were issued for a diagnosis that was not service-connected, and the theragesic cream, Voltaren gel, and hydrocortisone cream did not cause irreparable damage to the clothing.

First, a claim must be filed for a clothing allowance to be adjudicated for the calendar year requested. Second, the law provides for payment of an annual clothing allowance for each veteran who, because of a service-connected disability, wears or uses a prosthetic or orthopedic appliance which VA determines tends to wear out or tear the clothing of the veteran or uses medication which a physician has prescribed for a skin condition which is due to a service-connected disability and VA determines causes irreparable damage to the veteran's outer garments. 38 U.S.C. § 1162. 

For the 2019 clothing allowance claims, the claims must be denied. There is insufficient evidence of record to warrant clothing allowances for 2019 for the Veteran's back brace, Canadian crutches, theragesic cream, Voltaren gel, and hydrocortisone cream. The evidence of record, including any statements from the Veteran, is silent as to whether the back brace and/or the Canadian crutches cause wear and tear to his clothing. In addition, as to the theragesic cream, Voltaren gel, and hydrocortisone cream, the evidence of record, including any statements from the Veteran, is silent as to whether the theragesic cream, Voltaren gel, and hydrocortisone cream cause irreparable damage to his clothing. 

As noted in the legal framework section, the key to the award of a clothing allowance is not simply the question of whether the veteran has been prescribed a brace or how often it is used; a clothing allowance is awarded instead when the use of such a brace results in the wearing or tearing of clothes. 38 C.F.R. § 3.810. The evidence here simply does not reflect that the Veteran's use a back brace and/or Canadian crutches result in such damage, precluding the award of clothing allowances for calendar year 2019.

As it relates to the Veteran's claims for clothing allowances related to his prescribed theragesic cream, Voltaren gel, and hydrocortisone cream, the Board notes that the Veteran has been prescribed diclofenac (one percent)(Voltaren gel), hydrocortisone cream (two and a half percent), and menthol (ten percent)/methyl salicylate (fifteen percent)(theragesic cream), which he used to treat pain caused by from his service-connected low back disorder and itching or inflammation. However, topical medication used to treat pain from orthopedic conditions rather than to treat a skin condition is not eligible for a clothing allowance award. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.810(a)(1)(ii)(B). Second, the fact remains that theragesic cream, Voltaren gel, and hydrocortisone cream have been determined to not cause permanent damage to clothing. In addition, there were no complaints from the Veteran nor observations of any clothing staining as a result of his theragesic cream, Voltaren gel, and hydrocortisone cream. 

Therefore, the Board finds that entitlement to annual clothing allowances for the 2019 calendar year for a back brace, Canadian crutches, theragesic cream, Voltaren gel, and hydrocortisone cream is not warranted. 

The Board is sympathetic to the Veteran's claim and medical conditions and regrets that a favorable disposition cannot be granted, but the Board is bound by applicable law and regulations. 

Finally, the Veteran has not raised any other issues, nor have any other issues been reasonably raised by the record, for the Board's consideration. See Doucette v. Shulkin, 28 Vet. App. 366, 369-370 (2017) (confirming that the Board is not required to address issues unless they are specifically raised by the claimant or reasonably raised by the evidence of record).

Accordingly, the appeals for entitlement to a clothing allowance for back brace, Canadian crutches, theragesic cream, Voltaren gel, and hydrocortisone cream for calendar year 2019 is denied.

 

 

S.C. Krembs

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Mariah N. Sim, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.