Citation Nr: A25034512
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 240826-467190
DATE: April 15, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from July 1996 to July 2004. 

This case comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a November 2023 rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO). See Rating Decision - Narrative, dated November 9, 2023. Therefore, the AMA applies. See Pub. L. No. 115-55, 131 Stat. 1105 (2017); see also 38 C.F.R. § 3.2400(a)(1). The Veteran timely filed VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement (NOD)), and selected the Direct Review Docket. See NOD, received August 26, 2024.

Under the AMA, the evidentiary record the Board may consider depends on the evidence considered by the AOJ in the decision on appeal and the Veteran's docket selection on the NOD. The present appeal stems from disagreement with the November 9, 2023, rating decision, and, as discussed above, the Veteran selected the Direct Review Docket. As such, when considering the issue of entitlement to service connection for OSA, the Board may only consider the evidence of record on November 9, 2023, which is the same evidence the AOJ considered at the time. See 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.2400, 3.2500, 3.2601. If evidence was submitted after November 9, 2023, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.302(a), 20.801. However, because the Board is remanding the appeal, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ upon adjudication. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Entitlement to Service Connection for OSA

Under the AMA, the Board must remand to the AOJ to correct pre-decisional duty to assist errors (including when the AOJ failed to make reasonable efforts to obtain VA treatment records or relevant federal or private treatment records, failed to obtain a VA examination, or provided an inadequate VA examination or opinion). 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a). Additionally, under the AMA, the Board may remand for correction of any other error by the AOJ in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty, if correction of the error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the appellant's claim, not just pre-decisional duty to assist errors. Id. 

The Veteran contends that his diagnosed OSA is caused by or is the result of his active-duty service, or, in the alternative, is caused or aggravated by the service-connected left shoulder degenerative joint disease, thoracolumbar spine degenerative joint disease, left knee chondromalacia patella, and/or left ankle sprain. See VA Form 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim and VA Form 21-4138 Statement In Support of Claim, received November 11, 2022.

Generally, establishing service connection requires (1) medical evidence of a current disability; (2) medical or, in certain circumstances, lay evidence of in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) medical evidence of a nexus between the claimed in-service disease or injury and the present disability. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

In certain situations, service connection may be granted for a disability that is the result of a service-connected disability. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a). When service connection is thus established for a secondary condition, the secondary condition shall be considered a part of the original condition. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a); Harder v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 183, 187 (1993). The controlling regulation has been interpreted to permit a grant of service connection not only for disability caused by a service-connected disability, but for the degree of disability resulting from aggravation of a non-service-connected disability by a service-connected disability. See Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439, 448 (1995).

A relevant precedential VA General Counsel opinion addressing secondary service connection and obesity is VAOPGCPREC 1-2017.  This opinion is binding on the Board.  See 38 U.S.C. § 7104(c) ("The Board shall be bound in its decisions by the precedent opinions of the chief legal officer of the Department"). VAOPGCPREC 1-2017 held that "[o]besity may be an 'intermediate step' between a service-connected disability and a current disability that may be service connected on a secondary basis."  To determine whether obesity is an intermediate step between a service-connected disability and the development of a current disability that may be service connected on a secondary basis, the following criteria must all be satisfied: the service-connected disability must have caused the Veteran to become obese or aggravated their obesity; the obesity or aggravation of obesity as a result of the service-connected disability must have been a substantial factor in causing the claimed secondary disability; and the claimed secondary disability would not have occurred but for the obesity caused or aggravated by the service-connected disability.  See generally Walsh v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 300 (2020).

Effective August 10, 2022, the Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxics Act of 2022 (PACT Act) implemented 38 U.S.C. § 1168, requiring a disability examination and medical opinion be requested for certain non-presumptive conditions involving toxic exposure risk activity (TERA). See Honoring Our PACT of 2022, Pub. L. 117-168. For such claims, VA is required to provide a disability examination and medical opinion when the Veteran submits a claim for compensation, has evidence of a disability, had evidence of participation in a TERA, and such evidence is not sufficient to establish service connection for the disability. A Veteran can claim participation in a TERA explicitly or implicitly through service in a location presumed associated with toxic exposure, or records showing participation in a TERA; or, if VA has conceded exposure in a prior claim, or the file has a claim attributable to toxic exposure. Other ways to claim or establish participation in a TERA include when a Veteran's military occupational specialty (MOS) is associated with toxic exposure or when medical records suggest exposure to a toxic substance, chemical, or airborne hazard.

Here, the AOJ has conceded the Veteran's diagnosis of OSA and his participation in a TERA by way of his service in the Southwest Asia Theater of Operations. See Rating Decision - Narrative, dated November 9, 2023. The Board is bound by these findings. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c). The Veteran's service treatment records indicate that upon his return from Iraq and Kuwait in 2003, the Veteran reported still feeling tired even after sleeping through the night. See STR - Medical at 3, received June 26, 2014. As this constitutes an in-service event, the Board is left to determine whether a nexus exists between the Veteran's OSA and his active-duty service, to include his exposure to toxic elements and/or his complaint of and treatment for a sleep disorder; or, in the alternative, whether the Veteran's OSA is caused or aggravated by the service-connected left shoulder degenerative joint disease, thoracolumbar spine degenerative joint disease, left knee chondromalacia patella, and/or left ankle sprain, as asserted. See Rating Decision - Codesheet, dated November 9, 2023.

To support his claim for entitlement to service-connection for OSA, the Veteran has submitted lay statements and medical opinions from private providers and has attended multiple VA examinations. According to the Veteran, he developed OSA because his service-connected musculoskeletal disabilities prevented him from exercising and, thus, he became obese. See VA 21-4138 Statement In Support of Claim, received November 11, 2022. He further indicated that those same conditions prevent him from sleeping on his side, and cause pain making it difficult for him to fall asleep and stay asleep. Id. 

Each of the Veteran's VA examiners determined that although the Veteran was diagnosed with OSA, that OSA was not medically connected to the Veteran's in-service tiredness, his participation in a TERA, or his service-connected disabilities. See C&P Exams, received November 29, 2022, December 12, 2022, March 7, 2023, June 5, 2023, and November 7, 2023. Though each examiner provided their own unique rationales, most agreed that medical literature does not provide a link between OSA and exposure to toxins or other particulate matter. Id. Only one examiner provided an opinion on obesity as an "intermediate step" between the Veteran's service-connected musculoskeletal disabilities and the OSA, stating that it could not be concluded that the Veteran's OSA would not have occurred "but for" the obesity caused or aggravated by his service-connected disabilities. See C&P Exam, received March 7, 2023. The Board considers it worth noting that none of the examiners who provided a secondary medical opinion included any discussion of aggravation and instead centered their analyses on causation alone. See El-Amin v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 136, 140 (2013) (a medical opinion regarding secondary service connection must address both causation and aggravation to be adequate).

Medical opinions from the Veteran's private providers differ greatly from those VA opinions discussed above. Each private provider determined that the Veteran's OSA was caused or aggravated by his service-connected musculoskeletal disabilities. See Medical Treatment Records - Non-Government Facility, received November 11, 2022, and July 27, 2023. Both the November 2022 and July 2023 clinicians found the pain associated with the service-connected musculoskeletal disabilities prevented the Veteran from exercising and thus he became obese, and that obesity was a factor in his developing OSA. Id. Essentially, according to the examiners, the Veteran's OSA is secondary to, or aggravated by, the weight gain and obesity that developed because of the Veteran's service-connected musculoskeletal disabilities. The Board notes that while the November 2022 and July 2023 clinicians refer to their discussion of obesity as an "intermediate step" neither provided the "but for" analysis required for assessing obesity as such. Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008) (most of the probative value of a medical opinion comes from its reasoning). Although argument submitted with the August 2024 Notice of Disagreement indicates that the November 2022 opinion is sufficient to support a grant of service connection, the Board acknowledges the November 2022 report's conclusion that the resultant obesity/weight gain, and thus sleep apnea, is also attributable to a nonservice-connected right knee condition. See id.

Because each of the medical opinions provides limited, if any, probative value, they are insufficient and new opinions must be obtained. Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007) ("Once [VA] undertakes the effort to provide an examination when developing a service-connection claim . . . [VA] must provide an adequate one"). In making this determination the Board has considered whether the evidence provided by the Veteran, i.e., his lay statements, may suffice. To that end, the Board acknowledges the Veteran's competency to report the symptoms relating to his disabilities as they are "...within the realm of his personal knowledge." Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 471 (1994). He is also therefore competent to profess that his disabilities are related to service or to his other service-connected disabilities. See Barr, supra. However, there is nothing in the record to suggest that the Veteran has the appropriate training, experience, or expertise to render a medical opinion regarding the etiology of any diagnosed disabilities, OSA or otherwise. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(a)(1) (setting forth that competent medical evidence means evidence provided by a person who is qualified through education, training, or experience to offer medical diagnoses, statements, or opinions). His assertions to that effect are therefore of no probative value.

As such, it is the Board's determination that the AOJ committed pre-decisional duty to assist errors in accepting and relying on insufficiently rationalized medical opinions in deciding whether the Veteran is entitled to service connection for his OSA disability. Remand is therefore warranted.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1.	Request an addendum opinion from an appropriate clinician to determine the etiology of the Veteran's OSA. The claims file is to be made available to the examiner and reviewed. ***If an opinion cannot be completed without a full examination, then one should be scheduled. After reviewing the claims file, the examiner is asked to opine:

(a.)	Whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's OSA is related to an in-service injury, event, or disease, to include his complaint of and treatment for tiredness and/or his participation in a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA)? 

In forming this opinion, the examiner must consider (1) the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments; and (2) the synergistic, combined effect of all TERAs.

(b.)	Whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's OSA is due to, or the result of, the service-connected left shoulder degenerative joint disease, thoracolumbar spine degenerative joint disease, left knee chondromalacia patella, and/or left ankle sprain?

(c.)	Whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's OSA was aggravated by the service-connected left shoulder degenerative joint disease, thoracolumbar spine degenerative joint disease, left knee chondromalacia patella, and/or left ankle sprain? ***Permanent worsening need NOT be shown, and ANY increase in disability is sufficient to demonstrate aggravation.

The examiner is also asked to address whether obesity is an "intermediate step" between the service-connected left shoulder degenerative joint disease, thoracolumbar spine degenerative joint disease, left knee chondromalacia patella, and/or left ankle sprain, and the non-service-connected OSA. See Medical Treatment Records - Non-Government Facility, received November 11, 2022, and July 27, 2023. The examiner is asked to opine: 

(d.)	Whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the service-connected left shoulder degenerative joint disease, thoracolumbar spine degenerative joint disease, left knee chondromalacia patella, and/or left ankle sprain, caused the Veteran to become obese or aggravated his obesity? ***The examiner must render an opinion on both causation and aggravation.

(e.) If the obesity was caused or aggravated by the service-connected left shoulder degenerative joint disease, thoracolumbar spine degenerative joint disease, left knee chondromalacia patella, and/or left ankle sprain, is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the obesity was a substantial factor in causing the OSA disability?

(f.) If the obesity was caused or aggravated by the service-connected left shoulder degenerative joint disease, thoracolumbar spine degenerative joint disease, left knee chondromalacia patella, and/or left ankle sprain, AND the obesity was a substantial factor in causing the OSA disability, is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the OSA disability would not have occurred but for the obesity caused or aggravated by the service-connected left shoulder degenerative joint disease, thoracolumbar spine degenerative joint disease, left knee chondromalacia patella, and/or left ankle sprain?

The examiner is advised that consideration of the relationship between the claimed OSA and the Veteran's service-connected disabilities should also take into consideration any medications used to treat the service-connected disabilities.

A full rationale for any opinion offered should be provided. If an opinion cannot be made without resort to speculation, the examiner should provide an explanation as to why this is so and note what, if any, additional evidence would permit such an opinion to be made.

The examiner is reminded that the Veteran is competent to report his own symptoms and history. Should the examiner reject any evidence an adequate explanation for so doing must be provided.

 

M. C. WILSON

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Offutt, Marty N. (she/her/hers)

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.