Citation Nr: A25034932
Decision Date: 04/16/25	Archive Date: 04/16/25

DOCKET NO. 240826-467888
DATE: April 16, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a gynecological disability is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army Reserve from February 2003 to February 2004 and from March 2004 to March 2005.

The rating decision on appeal was issued in August 2024 and constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.

In the August 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the August 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  However, because the Board is remanding the claim of entitlement to service connection for a gynecological disability, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

As a final preliminary matter, the Board acknowledges the recent precedential decision in Williams regarding 38 C.F.R. § 20.202(c)(2) and deciding AMA appeals before the time to change dockets has ended.  See Williams v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 305 (2024).  Generally, the Board may not decide an appeal before the deadline for requesting an AMA docket switch has elapsed.  38 C.F.R. § 20.202(c)(2) allows claimants to switch AMA dockets by completing and submitting a new Notice of Disagreement within one year from the date the AOJ mails notice of the decision on appeal, or 60 days from when the Board receives the Notice of Disagreement, whichever is later, unless a claimant has already submitted evidence or testimony as described in 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.302 and 20.303.  In this case, less than one year has passed since the AOJ mailed notice of the decision on appeal; however, as the Board is remanding the issue for additional development, there is no prejudice to the Veteran in proceeding with the claim on appeal prior to the expiration of the deadline for requesting an AMA docket switch.

Entitlement to service connection for a gynecological disability.

The Veteran seeks entitlement to service connection for a gynecological disability (claimed as leiomyoma (fibroids)).  See May 2024 VA Form 21-526EZ, Application for Disability Compensation and Related Compensation Benefits.  Specifically, she asserts that she experienced painful cramps and heavy bleeding during her active duty service and was eventually diagnosed with multiple fibroids, resulting in her recent hysterectomy.

Following a review of the claims file, a remand is warranted to correct pre-decisional duty to assist errors.  Specifically, the Board finds that there may be outstanding, relevant private treatment records, and that the July 2024 VA opinion is inadequate for adjudicative purposes.  See 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a); see also Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007).

During her VA examination in July 2024, the Veteran was diagnosed with status-post hysterectomy.  The Veteran reported that she was diagnosed with fibroids after she experienced abnormal bleeding and underwent a full hysterectomy in October 2023.  In a separate medical opinion, the VA examiner opined that the Veteran's status-post hysterectomy was less likely than not caused by the Veteran's in-service toxic exposure risk activities.  The examiner noted that the medical evidence does not support the causative relationship between the Veteran's diagnosis of hysterectomy and potential toxic exposure from the Veteran's in-service toxic exposure risk activities.  The examiner further indicated that the Veteran underwent a hysterectomy due to fibroids, and this outweighs the Veteran's toxic exposure risk activities.  The examiner noted that it is not known what causes fibroids, but studies suggest genetics and prolonged exposure to estrogen may increase the risk of developing fibroids, and symptoms can include heavy and prolonged periods, bleeding between periods, pressure in the abdomen, and pelvic pain.

First, the Board notes that, prior to the August 2024, rating decision on appeal, the evidence of record indicated that there may be outstanding, relevant private treatment records.  VA has an affirmative duty to assist veterans in obtaining relevant, private treatment records adequately identified.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(b)(1).  Here, on her May 2024 VA Form 21-526EZ, the Veteran reported that she received treatment for her gynecological disability at Atlanta Obstetrics and Gynecology.  Furthermore, in a September 2022 VA treatment record, a VA provider noted that the Veteran was seeing a gynecologist in the community, not through VA's community care.  However, no records from Atlanta Obstetrics and Gynecology or any other private gynecologist, or requests for such records, have been associated with the Veteran's claims file.  The Board finds that the Veteran's treatment records from Atlanta Obstetrics and Gynecology are relevant to the issue on appeal and were adequately identified prior to the August 2024 rating decision on appeal.

Additionally, review of the July 2024 VA opinion indicates that the above treatment records were not otherwise available for review at the time of the opinion.  An adequate medical opinion must be based upon consideration of the relevant evidence and must provide the Board with a foundation sufficient enough to evaluate the probative worth of that opinion.  See Ardison v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 405, 407-8 (1994).  It thus follows that the July 2024 VA opinion is inadequate for adjudication as it was based upon an incomplete evidentiary record.  The Board further observes that the July 2024 VA opinion also does not take into account the Veteran's statements that she experienced painful cramps and heavy bleeding during service.

Accordingly, a remand is necessary to obtain outstanding, relevant private treatment records and to obtain an adequate VA medical opinion to cure the pre-decisional duty to assist errors.

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

1. Contact the Veteran and request that she complete VA Form 21-4142 to allow VA to request records from her private providers, to include Atlanta Obstetrics and Gynecology.  After receiving the necessary authorization forms, make two requests for the authorized records from each private provider, unless it is clear after the first request that a second request would be futile.  All efforts to obtain such records should be fully documented.

2. After completion of the above, obtain an addendum medical opinion addressing the nature and etiology of the Veteran's gynecological disability.  The need for an in-person examination is left to the discretion of the examiner.

The entire claims file, including a copy of this Remand, must be made available to the examiner.  After reviewing the entire claims file, the examiner should:

3. Opine whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that any gynecological disability was incurred in, caused by, or is etiologically related to the Veteran's active service, to include related to or otherwise caused by toxic exposure risk activities.

With respect to the TERA opinion, the examiner must discuss the Veteran's total potential exposure through all applicable military service and the synergistic and combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities.

The examiner is advised that the Veteran is competent to report her symptoms and history and that such reports must be acknowledged and considered in formulating any opinions.  The examiner must provide a complete rationale for any opinion offered, citing to the examiner's own expertise, medical principals, and/or evidence in the Veteran's claims file, when necessary, to support the conclusion reached.  If an opinion cannot be reached without resorting to speculation, the examiner must fully explain why. 

 

H.M. WALKER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Caitlin B.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.