Citation Nr: A25034397
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 240827-468517
DATE: April 15, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea, to include as secondary to service-connected disability is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran had active duty service from June 2000 to April 2015.

The rating decision on appeal was issued in April 2024 and constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.  

In the August 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the April 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. However, because the Board is remanding the claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of it. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea, to include as secondary to service-connected disability is remanded.

Review of the record reveals that remand is required in order to correct a duty to assist error that occurred prior to the April 2024 rating decision on appeal. See 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

In December 2023, the Veteran submitted a service connection claim for obstructive sleep apnea. He stated, "The symptoms of sleep apnea have been ongoing for years to include high blood pressure and lack of sleep. The military never identified as sleep apnea until I went in with a VA." See December 2023 VA 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim (Compensation). 

In the May 2024 rating decision on appeal, the AOJ made favorable findings that the Veteran has a diagnosis of obstructive sleep apnea and participation in a toxic risk exposure activity (TERA) is presumed. The Board is bound by these favorable findings. 38 U.S.C. § 5104A; 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c). Therefore, the remaining questions are whether there was an incident during service and whether the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea is related to his military service.

Initially, the Board observes that the Veteran's service treatment records (STRs) show that upon entrance to service, he did not report any sleep issues and weighed 190 pounds. His remaining service records are silent as to any additional complaints of or treatment for sleep problems. The Veteran's STRs demonstrate that he weighed 211 pounds in August 2000, 245 pounds in September 2003, 254 pounds in February 2008, 236 pounds in 2011, 237 pounds in February 2013, and 250 pounds in April 2016. Furthermore, according to a June 2018 Annual Periodic Health Assessment, the Veteran had moderate trouble falling or staying asleep. It also noted he gets 5 to less than 7 hours of sleep nightly. At that time, he weighed 253 pounds. 

The Veteran underwent a VA examination in December 2023 and a diagnosis of obstructive sleep apnea was confirmed (dated November 2023). The Veteran reported sleeping an average of 4 hours per night. He had difficulty initiating and maintaining sleep and wakes up 3-5 times per night. His symptoms included feeling tired, snoring, daytime sleepiness, and elevated blood pressure. The Veteran said that he cannot concentrate most of the time and had a sleep study performed. He treated his sleep problems with a continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) machine. The examiner stated that the functional impact of obstructive sleep apnea is that it causes the Veteran to always feel tired, leading him to be lethargic and unable to focus at work. Ultimately, the VA examiner determined that the Veteran's claimed obstructive sleep apnea is less likely than not related to TERA. The examiner explained that obstructive sleep apnea is a mechanical obstructive process of the oral-pharyngeal airway that occurs when the muscles in the back of the throat relax. This causes the airway to narrow or close during breathing, which can lower blood oxygen levels. The examiner stated that this process results in the brain "waking up" multiple times per night and it impairs the ability to reach a deep, restful phase of sleep. The examiner also stated that there are several risk factors outside TERA that are likely to cause obstructive sleep apnea, including the Veteran's body mass index (BMI) of 31.7, which is in the obesity range. The examiner remarked, "if this Veteran's potential chemical exposure history was removed from clinical consideration, the Veteran would more likely than not still have sleep apnea." 

The Board notes that despite this indication about weight gain, the AOJ did not obtain an opinion that addressed secondary service connection with obesity as an intermediary step. 

Service connection may be established on a secondary basis for a disability that is proximately due to or the result of a service-connected disease or injury. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a). Establishing service connection on a secondary basis requires evidence sufficient to show (1) that a current disability exists and (2) that the current disability was either (a) caused by or (b) aggravated by a service-connected disability. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(b); Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439 (1995). The United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit recently clarified that, as contemplated by 38 U.S.C. § 1110, secondary aggravation will be shown where a non-service-connected disability would have been less severe "but-for" a service-connected disability, either because there is an etiological link (to include worsening of functionality) between the two conditions, or because the service-connected disability resulted in the inability to treat the non-service-connected disability. See Spicer v. McDonough, 61 F.4th 1360 (Fed. Cir. 2023).

The Board observes the reasonably raised theory that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea is due to obesity. Although obesity is not a condition for which service connection may be granted, obesity may qualify as an "intermediate step" between a service-connected disability and another current disability. See VAOPGCPREC 1-2017; see also Garner v. Tran, 33 Vet. App. 241 (2021); Walsh v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 300 (2020). In a secondary service connection claim, a theory of obesity as an intermediate step is raised when there is some evidence in the record which draws an association or suggests a relationship between the veteran's obesity, or weight gain resulting in obesity, and a service-connected condition. Considerations that could give rise to a reasonably raised theory of secondary service connection with obesity as an intermediate step may include, but are not limited to, statements by treating physicians or medical examiners attributing weight gain or obesity to the service-connected disability. Garner, 33 Vet. App. at 248.

The Board finds that obesity as an intermediate step is reasonably raised in this case by the December 2023 VA opinion and VA treatment records noting obesity in the Veteran's personal medical history and in view of his service-connected orthopedic-type disabilities, including low back disability (with bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy) and bilateral foot disability. See April 2024 Rating Decision - Codesheet. The issue of whether the obesity is due to service-connected disabilities should be addressed under this theory.

When the Board identifies a pre-decisional duty to assist error, under 38 U.S.C. § 5103A; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.159(c), 20.802(a), the Board must remand the appeal back to the AOJ with instructions to correct the error. Therefore, remand is needed for an addendum opinion.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Obtain an addendum opinion from an examiner of appropriate expertise to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's claimed obstructive sleep apnea, to include as secondary to service-connected disability. The electronic claims files and all pertinent records must be made available to the examiner and the examiner must indicate in the examination report that these records have been reviewed.

It should be noted that the Veteran is competent to attest to factual matters of which he had first-hand knowledge, including observable symptomatology. If there is a medical basis to support or doubt the history provided by the Veteran, the examiner should provide a fully reasoned explanation. The examiner should note that the standard is whether likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher.

(a) The examiner should opine whether the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea began in or is otherwise the result of military service.

(b) The examiner should offer an opinion whether but for the Veteran's service-connected orthopedic-type disabilities, the Veteran would not have a current diagnosis of obstructive sleep apnea.  

(c) The examiner should then opine whether the obstructive sleep apnea would be less severe and result in less functional impairment but for the Veteran's service-connected orthopedic-type disabilities.

In so doing, the examiner must also consider whether obesity was an "intermediate step" between any service-connected disability, in causing or contributing to any degree to his obstructive sleep apnea, i.e., did the Veteran's service-connected disabilities result in (1) mobility limitations or reduced physical activity as a result of a service-connected physical disability; (2) reduced physical activity or inability to follow a course of exercise or diet as a result of service-connected disability; or (3) side effects of medication where the medication is prescribed for a service-connected disability.

In offering any opinion, the examiner must consider the full record. The examiner should also reconcile any prior report, as necessary, and provide a comprehensive rationale for the requested opinion. 

If the VA examiner determines that further examination is necessary in order to render any medical opinion, then the Veteran should be scheduled for such an examination.

 

 

Emily Tamlyn

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	M. Miller, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.