Citation Nr: A25034063
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 240815-464005
DATE: April 11, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for tinnitus is granted. 

FINDING OF FACT

The evidence is evenly balanced as to whether the Veteran's tinnitus had its onset in service.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

With reasonable doubt resolved in favor of the Veteran, the criteria for service connection for tinnitus have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1101(3), 1112, 1113, 1131, 1137, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.307, 3.309.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from September 1981 to September 1983.

This case was docketed by the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) based on a VA Form 10182, Notice of Disagreement (NOD), filed by the Veteran on August 15, 2024.  In the NOD, the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  He identified the appealed issue as entitlement to service connection for tinnitus from an August 2024 rating decision.

As the Board is granting the benefit sought in full, it need not consider the waiting period for a docket switch.  See Williams v. McDonough, 37?Vet. App.?305 (2024); 38 C.F.R. § 20.202(c)(2) (allowing claimants to switch AMA dockets by completing and submitting a new NOD within one year from the date the AOJ mails notice of the decision on appeal, or 60 days from when the Board receives an NOD, whichever is later, unless a claimant has already submitted evidence or testimony).

As to the evidentiary period, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the August 2024 rating decision.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the August 2024 rating decision, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

Lastly, the Board notes that the Veteran initially filed a supplemental claim in August 2024 and then filed the NOD.  Claims processing rules prohibit concurrent review of a rating decision.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2500(b).  The time lapse between filing the NOD and issuance of the rating decision in response to the supplemental claim is a matter of days.  The Board notified the Veteran that the appeal was docketed for review shortly after he filed the NOD.  With this background, the Board will waive this claim processing rule violation in filing the NOD while the supplemental claim was pending.  Hall v. McDonough, 34 Vet. App. 329, 334 (2021) (in enforcing claims processing rules, "the Board should identify the governing law, any formal defects in the appeal, whether waiver or forfeiture is a relevant consideration, and any other relevant factors"). 

The Veteran also filed a Higher-Level Review (HLR) request in February 2025 to the August 2024 rating decision on appeal.  The August 2024 Board docketing letter advised the Veteran that the NOD was pending at the Board.  The RO has not otherwise notified the Veteran that the HLR request had been accepted.  The February 2025 HLR request violates the concurrent election prohibition for decision review.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2500(b).  Waiver of this claim processing rule is not warranted since the Veteran had notice that his NOD was pending and there has been no action on the part of VA in processing or accepting the February 2025 HLR request.  The February 2025 HLR request is appropriately characterized as invalid due to the prohibition on concurrent election for decision review.  Id. 

Service connection for tinnitus

Service connection will be granted if the evidence demonstrates that current disability resulted from an injury suffered or disease contracted in active military, naval, air, or space service.  38 U.S.C. § 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a).  Establishing service connection generally requires competent evidence of three things: (1) current disability; (2) in-service injury or disease; and (3) a relationship between the two.  Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356, 1361 (Fed. Cir. 2018).  Consistent with this framework, service connection is warranted for a disease first diagnosed after service when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).

Pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(b), where a chronic disease is shown as such in service, subsequent manifestations of the same chronic disease are generally service connected; if a chronic disease is noted in service but chronicity in service is not adequately supported, a showing of continuity of symptomatology after separation is required.  Entitlement to service connection based on chronicity or continuity of symptomatology pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(b) applies only when the disability for which the Veteran is claiming compensation is due to a disease enumerated on the list of chronic diseases in 38 U.S.C. § 1101(3) or 38 C.F.R. § 3.309(a), which includes tinnitus as an organic disease of the nervous system. Walker v. Shinseki, 708 F.3d 1331 (Fed. Cir. 2013); Fountain v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 258, 271 (2015).  In addition, such chronic diseases are presumed to have been incurred in service if they manifested to a compensable degree within one year of separation from service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1101(3), 1112(a)(1), 1113, 1137; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307(a), 3.309(a).

Service department records reflect that the Veteran's military occupational specialty (MOS) was as a fire support specialist.  He also earned awards for rifle and hand grenade expertise.  

Service treatment records (STRs) do not include complaints or treatment for tinnitus.  The Veteran had an audiogram as part of his August 1981 enlistment examination and again in February 1982.  A September 1983 disposition form stated that the Veteran required medical clearance prior to separation.  The document indicated that the Veteran's health record would be reviewed by a doctor to determine whether a medical examination would serve the best interest of the Veteran and the government.  On the lower section of this document, a physician indicated that the Veteran's health records had been reviewed and physical examination was not required.  STRs included an undated Report of Medical Examination.  It listed the purpose of the examination as "E.T.S." for Expiration, Term of Service.  It did not include clinical findings, but listed laboratory findings, measurements and other measurements, which included an audiogram.  An accompanying medical history report signed by the Veteran, showed that he denied ear, nose or throat trouble and hearing loss.  

October 2023 private medical records concerned a tinnitus evaluation.  The Veteran complained about right sided hearing loss and tinnitus that acutely worsened about a month ago.  He had mild hearing loss and tinnitus prior this event.  His medical history was notable strep throat and COVID during the prior month.  The Veteran described his tinnitus as "roaring" and now constant.  The Veteran recently tried Flonase and oral antihistamine with slight improvement in hearing symptoms.  Physical ear examination showed clear external canals and tympanic membranes.  No effusion was seen.  Weber lateralized to the left.  Rinne testing showed air conduction was greater than bone conduction.  The nose did not exhibit significant mucosal inflammation.  Cranial nerves, other than nerve eight, did not show any deficit.  The clinician assessed that audiometric testing showed low-frequency sensorineural hearing loss of the right ear.  Tympanometry showed normal middle ear pressure and eardrum compliance.  No fluid was found behind the eardrum.  The clinician observed that the worsening hearing and tinnitus coincided with COVID.  She suspected that the Veteran had sudden sensorineural hearing loss on the right side.  Sudden sensorineural hearing loss treatment consisted of steroids.  She noted that this type of hearing loss may resolves spontaneously from a week to months after onset.  The outcomes varied from full resolution to no resolution.  Since the Veteran's symptoms improved over the past day or two, she suspected he may have partially recovered.  Accordingly, the Veteran deferred steroid treatment.  She also mentioned magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) to evaluate retrocochlear pathology, such as an acoustic neuroma.  The Veteran opted to wait six months to reevaluate his hearing and would consider an imaging study at that time.  

In July 2024, the Veteran had a VA-contract examination with an audiologist.  The audiologist diagnosed tinnitus.  The Veteran stated it started probably around 2018 to 2019.  He had developed hearing difficulties with his right ear.  He had a very hard time with background noises or crowded events.  The audiologist noted that the Veteran's MOS had a high probability for noise exposure.  The Veteran detailed that he had miliary noise exposure from firearm training, proximity to large artillery as a forward observer, armored personnel carrier (APC) operations, and Howitzers.  He commented that it was common not wear ear plugs during these activities.  Occupational noise exposure included automobile painting and inspection duties with hearing protection device (HPD) use as needed.  Recreational noise exposure included lawn care activities and hunting without HPD use.  Pertinent medical history was notable for childhood ear infections and occasional dizziness.  For tinnitus medical history, the Veteran reported being unsure of onset.  It had been present for a long time and became significantly worse over the past five years or so.  It more often affected the right ear and occasionally the left ear.  It had worsened over the past five years.  Left ear had  more of a high pitch ring sound and the right ear had fullness with a constant whooshing type sound that changed in volume.  The audiologist indicated that tinnitus was likely related to hearing loss, but that it was less likely tinnitus was related to military noise exposure.  STRs did not confirm a significant permanent threshold shift other than normal measurement variability from enlistment to separation.  There was no evidence of permanent auditory damage on active duty.  There was no complaint of tinnitus during service.  Although excessive noise exposure during military service was conceded, there was no nexus of active duty auditory damage to relate the current tinnitus reports.      

For the following reasons, service connection for tinnitus is warranted.

The evidence confirms that the Veteran currently experiences tinnitus.  The current disability requirement has thus been met.

Occupational military noise exposure is conceded as noted above.  Also, the Veteran is competent to report about his history of military noise exposure and has given multiple reports about it.  Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 n.4 (Fed. Cir. 2007).  His reports are consistent with the places, types, and circumstances of his service, the Board finds them credible.  Thus, military occupational noise exposure is conceded and the in-service injury requirement is met.

The disputed issue is whether there is a relationship between military noise exposure and current tinnitus.  

The evidence is evenly balanced on this point.  The Veteran's answers to when the tinnitus started were imprecise.  In one part of the July 2024 VA-contract audiology examination, the audiologist lists the symptom onset as 2018 or 2019.  In another part, the audiologist reports that the Veteran was unsure of tinnitus onset, but that it had been longstanding and significantly worsened over the past five years.  The October 2023 private evaluation is unclear as to when the Veteran first started experiencing tinnitus, but does not provide any information suggesting that the symptoms dated to active service.  

In context, the Veteran's indication that the tinnitus was longstanding but he was unsure of the precise date of onset is sufficient to conclude that it at least as likely as not started in service.  38 C.F.R. § 3.102 (the benefit of the doubt doctrine applies to any point within a claim as well as its ultimate disposition).

The July 2024 VA-contract medical opinion did not consider the Veteran's lay statements as to onset in service and therefore is inadequate.  Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331, 1336, n. 1 (Fed. Cir. 2006) (noting that VA's examiner's opinion, which relied on the absence of contemporaneous medical evidence, "failed to consider whether the lay statements presented sufficient evidence of the etiology of [the veteran's] disability such that his claim for service connection could be proven without contemporaneous medical evidence").

While the Board could remand the claim for another opinion, a request for another opinion could be construed as obtaining additional evidence for the sole purpose of denying a claim, which is impermissible.  38 C.F.R. § 3.304(c) ("The development of evidence in connection with claims for service connection will be accomplished when deemed necessary but it should not be undertaken when evidence present is sufficient for this determination"); Andrews v. McDonough, 34 Vet. App. 216, 225 (2021) ("Remand is inappropriate where the predominant purpose is not to allow the Board to make a fully informed decision unencumbered by error but to allow VA to obtain more evidence so that it can properly deny the claim").

For the above reasons, the evidence is sufficient to decide the claim, as it is evenly balanced as to whether the Veteran's tinnitus had its onset in service.  As the reasonable doubt created by this relative equipoise in the evidence must be resolved in favor of the Veteran, entitlement to service connection for tinnitus is warranted. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b), 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

 

 

Jonathan Hager

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	C. D. Simpson, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.