Citation Nr: A25034543
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 240301-421691
DATE: April 15, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an effective date prior to December 5, 2023, for the assignment of a 50 percent disability rating for service-connected bilateral flat foot (pes planus) and plantar fasciitis, with history of stress fractures and left foot calcaneal slide with posterior tibialis tendon reconstruction surgery (hereafter bilateral foot disability) is denied.

Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 10 percent for lumbar strain with dextroscoliosis is denied.

Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 50 percent for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is denied.

Entitlement to a compensable disability rating for bilateral optic nerve head drusen and residual photophobia post-ocular trauma (hereafter eye disability) is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The record does not show that it was factually ascertainable that increase in severity of the Veteran's service-connected bilateral foot disability occurred prior to December 5, 2023.

2. The Veteran's service-connected lumbar spine disability was manifested by forward flexion greater than 60 degrees and a combined range of motion greater than 120 degrees, even in contemplation of functional loss due to symptoms such as pain, fatigue, weakness, lack of endurance, or incoordination, or as a result of repetitive motion and/or flare-ups, without muscle spasm or guarding severe enough to result in an abnormal gait or abnormal spinal contour, ankylosis, or the functional equivalent thereof, incapacitating episodes due to IVDS, or associated objective neurologic abnormalities.

3. The Veteran's PTSD symptoms have more nearly approximated occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity. Symptoms of occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas were not demonstrated.

4. The Veteran's service-connected eye disability is not shown to have been manifested by impairment of muscle function, visual field defect, corrected visual acuity of either eye worse than 20/40, or incapacitating episodes, as defined by VA regulation, at any time during the period on appeal.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for entitlement to an effective date prior to December 5, 2023, for the assignment of a 50 percent disability rating for service-connected bilateral foot disability have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 5107, 5110; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.400.

2. The criteria for a disability rating in excess of 10 percent for service-connected lumbar strain with degenerative disc disease have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.7, 4.10, 4.40, 4.45, 4.59, 4.71a, Diagnostic Code (DC) 5237.

3. The criteria for an initial disability rating in excess of 50 percent for PTSD have not been met. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.7, 4.126, 4.130, DC 9411.

4. The criteria for a compensable disability rating for an eye disability have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.7, 4.10, 4.31, 4.75, 4.76, 4.77, 4.78, 4.79, DC 6099-6009.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served honorably on active duty in the United States Army from February 2021 to August 2023.

This appeal comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) decision in January 2024 issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs.  In the February 2024, VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

The Board notes that in the Veteran's February 2024 VA Form 10182 NOD, filed by her attorney, she requests a review of numerous disabilities to include issues of service connection and disability rating that were not the subject of the January 2024 rating decision on appeal.   Nor did the Veteran or attorney cite a decision date other than the January 2024 rating decision.  Accordingly, the Board will not address those issues further.  

1. Entitlement to an effective date prior to December 5, 2023, for the assignment of a 50 percent disability rating for bilateral foot disability

By way of background, a September 2023 rating decision granted service connection for a bilateral foot disability rated 30 percent disabling and effective August 28, 2023, the day after the Veteran's discharge from active duty. 

On September 21, 2023, the Veteran filed a VA Form 21-526EZ, Application for Disability Compensation and Related Compensation Benefits, seeking an increased disability rating for her bilateral foot disability. In the January 2024 decision on appeal, the Veteran was granted an increased, 50 percent disability evaluation for her bilateral foot disability, effective December 5, 2023, the date of her VA foot conditions examination which showed an increase in disability. This appeal followed.  

The effective date of an award for a claim for an increased disability rating is the earliest date on which it is factually ascertainable that an increase in disability had occurred, if the claim is received within one year from such date; otherwise, the effective date of the award is the later of the date of receipt of the claim or the date entitlement arose. 38 U.S.C. § 5110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.400(o).  

Here, the Board finds that the date of claim is September 21, 2023 (VA Form 21-526EZ), whereas the evidence demonstrates that an increase in the severity of the Veteran's bilateral foot disability, warranting the assignment of the higher rating (i.e., the date on which it is factually ascertainable that an increase in disability had occurred) was no earlier than December 5, 2023, the date of the Veteran's VA examination for foot conditions. 

The Board finds that there is no basis on the facts of this case and governing law to award an effective date earlier than December 5, 2023.  Notably, the Veteran's March 2023 VA examination for foot conditions and VA treatment records do not demonstrate an increase in severity of the Veteran's bilateral foot disability symptoms prior to the December 5, 2023, examination. Although the Veteran and her attorney contend that there has been continuity of symptoms during the appeal period, prior to December 5, 2023, the evidence of record cited above, to include VA treatment records, do not show symptoms of the frequency, duration, and severity, which would support a 50 percent disability rating. 

Although the Board is sympathetic to the Veteran's contention that she should be awarded an earlier effective date for the 50 percent disability rating, the Board is bound by applicable statutes and regulations. See 38 U.S.C. § 7104(c); 38 C.F.R. § 20.101(a). As the probative evidence of record persuasively weighs against the claim, the Board finds that entitlement to an effective date prior to December 5, 2023, for the assignment of a 50 percent disability rating for bilateral foot disability is not warranted.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b).

2. Entitlement to an increased disability rating for a lumbar spine disability

The Veteran contends that she is entitled to a disability rating in excess of 10 percent disability rating for a lumbar spine disability. See February 2024 Notice of Disagreement.

The Veteran's lumbar degenerative disc disease is rated under 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, DC 5237.  Under the General Rating Formula for Diseases and Injuries of the Spine, a 20 percent rating is warranted for forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine greater than 30 degrees but not greater than 60 degrees; or the combined range of motion of the thoracolumbar spine not greater than 120 degrees; or, muscle spasm or guarding severe enough to result in an abnormal gait or abnormal spinal contour such as scoliosis, reversed lordosis, or abnormal kyphosis. A 40 percent rating is warranted for forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine to 30 degrees or less; or, favorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine. A 50 percent rating is warranted for unfavorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine. A 100 percent evaluation is warranted for unfavorable ankylosis of the entire spine. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, General Rating Formula for Diseases and Injuries of the Spine.

Following the criteria set forth in the General Rating Formula for Diseases and Injuries of the Spine, Note (1) provides: evaluate any associated objective neurologic abnormalities, including, but not limited to, bowel or bladder impairment, separately, under an appropriate diagnostic code.

Note (2) provides that, for VA compensation purposes, normal forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine is zero to 90 degrees, extension is zero to 30 degrees, left and right lateral flexion are zero to 30 degrees, and left and right lateral rotation are zero to 30 degrees. The combined range of motion refers to the sum of the range of forward flexion, extension, left and right lateral flexion, and left and right rotation. The normal combined range of motion of the thoracolumbar spine is 240 degrees. The normal ranges of motion for each component of spinal motion provided in this note are the maximum that can be used for calculation of the combined range of motion.

Note (3) provides that in exceptional cases, an examiner may state that because of age, body habitus, neurologic disease, or other factors not the result of disease or injury of the spine, the range of motion of the spine in a particular individual should be considered normal for that individual, even though it does not conform to the normal range of motion stated in Note (2). Provided that the examiner supplies an explanation, the examiner's assessment that the range of motion is normal for that individual will be accepted.

Note (4) requires that each range of motion measurement be rounded to the nearest five degrees.

Note (5) provides that for VA compensation purposes, unfavorable ankylosis is a condition in which the entire cervical spine, the entire thoracolumbar spine, or the entire spine is fixed in flexion or extension, and the ankylosis results in one or more of the following: difficulty walking because of a limited line of vision; restricted opening of the mouth and chewing; breathing limited to diaphragmatic respiration; gastrointestinal symptoms due to pressure of the costal margin on the abdomen; dyspnea or dysphagia; atlantoaxial or cervical subluxation or dislocation; or neurologic symptoms due to nerve root stretching. Fixation of a spinal segment in neutral position (zero degrees) always represents favorable ankylosis.

Note (6) provides that disabilities of the thoracolumbar and cervical spine segments must be separately evaluated, except when there is unfavorable ankylosis of both segments, which will be rated as a single disability.

The Veteran underwent a VA examination in March 2023. The Veteran reported low back pain. She did not report flare-ups. Range of motion testing was normal. There was no evidence of pain on examination. The examiner noted mild tenderness to palpitation of the lumbar and thoracic paraspinal muscles. The Veteran underwent repetitive use testing with at least three repetitions and repeated use over time testing with no additional loss of function or range or motion. There was no muscle atrophy or ankylosis.  Reflexes and sensory examinations were normal.  There were no symptoms of radiculopathy.  She did not have IVDS. An image study documented normal lumbar lordosis with no subluxation, mild lumbar dextroscoliosis, no compression deformities, and normal bony mineralization; however, there was no thoracic vertebral fracture with loss of 50 percent of height. 

The Veteran underwent another VA examination in November 2023. The Veteran reported low back pain. She did not report flare-ups. Range of motion testing revealed forward flexion to 80 degrees, extension to 20 degrees, bilateral lateral flexion to 30 degrees, and bilateral lateral rotation to 30 degrees. Pain was noted on examination but did not cause functional loss. There was no guarding, muscle spasms, or tenderness. The Veteran underwent repetitive use testing with at least three repetitions and there was no additional loss of function or range or motion. Estimated range of motion with repeated use over time was forward flexion to 70 degrees, extension to 10 degrees, bilateral lateral flexion to 20 degrees, and bilateral rotation to 20 degrees. There was no muscle atrophy or ankylosis.  Reflexes and sensory examinations were normal.  There were no symptoms of radiculopathy.  

After a review of the relevant evidence, both lay and medical, the Board finds that the criteria for a rating in excess of 10 percent for a lumbar strain with dextroscoliosis have not been met. The competent evidence does not show the Veteran had forward flexion limited to 60 degrees or combined range of motion was limited to 120 degrees, or such results in ankylosis, or the functional equivalent thereof, even in contemplation of functional loss due to symptoms such as pain, fatigue, weakness, lack of endurance, or incoordination, or as a result of repetitive motion and/or flare-ups. Moreover, there was no evidence of muscle spasm or guarding severe enough to result in an abnormal gait or abnormal spinal contour. Although image studies revealed mild dextroscoliosis, the VA examinations found that the Veteran did not have guarding or muscle spasms of the lumbar spine, which is required for the 20 percent disability rating. Thus, the evidence of record does not demonstrate symptoms severe enough to support a rating in excess of 10 percent under DC 5237, or any other DC, and the Veteran's symptoms are most appropriately compensated by the 10 percent rating she was assigned.

In sum, the Board finds that the Veteran's lumbar spine disability has not been manifested by symptomatology or findings more nearly approximating the criteria for a rating in excess of 10 percent under DC 5237. Accordingly, a rating in excess of 10 percent must be denied.

3. Entitlement to an increased disability rating for PTSD

The Veteran seeks an increased disability rating in excess of 50 percent for service-connected PTSD.  See February 2024 Notice of Disagreement. 

The regulations governing rating mental disorders are found in 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.125-4.130.  Under the General Rating formula for Mental Disorders, a 50 percent rating is assigned for occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to such symptoms as: flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short- and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships. Id.

A 70 percent rating is warranted for occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a work like setting); inability to establish and maintain effective relationships. Id.

A 100 percent rating is warranted for total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name. Id.

The symptoms associated with each rating under the General Rating formula do not constitute an exhaustive list, but rather serve as examples of the type and degree of the symptoms, or their effects, that would justify a particular rating. See Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436, 442 (2002). Thus, the evidence considered in determining the appropriate rating of a psychiatric disorder is not restricted to the symptoms set forth in the General Rating formula. See id.

When rating the level of disability from a mental disorder, VA will consider the extent of social impairment, but shall not assign a rating solely on the basis of social impairment. 38 C.F.R. § 4.126 (b). In other words, VA must engage in a holistic analysis that assesses the severity, frequency, and duration of the signs and symptoms of the psychiatric disability; quantifies the level of occupational and social impairment caused by those symptoms; and assigns an evaluation that most nearly approximates the level of occupational and social impairment. Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 10, 22 (2017).

In March 2023, the Veteran underwent a VA examination for PTSD. She was diagnosed with PTSD. The Veteran was currently on active duty and in the medical board process. The Veteran's treatment included therapy and medication. She adjusted to military life with ease and has made friends that support her socially. She was married in 2022 but was currently divorcing her husband. She did not have children. The Veteran's symptoms included depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks that occur weekly or less often, chronic sleep impairment, impairment of short and long-term memory, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, and difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances. The Veteran arrived on-time and was dressed neatly and appropriately. She was oriented with congruent affect and normal responsiveness. Memory, insight, and judgement appeared adequate, and the veteran was engaged and cooperative throughout the exam with organized and logical speech. According to the examiner, the extent of the Veteran's condition caused her occupational and social impairment due to mild or transient symptoms.

In December 2023, the Veteran underwent another VA examination for PTSD. She was diagnosed with PTSD. The Veteran reported being divorced and being in a relationship. She lived in an apartment and worked full-time as an assistant manager. She reported maintaining a relationship with her extended family and social interaction with friends, neighbors, and co-workers. She liked to stay at home with her boyfriend as it was safe. She reported caring for her dog and fish. Her hobbies included crafts and working on her car. The Veteran's symptoms included depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks that occur weekly or less often, chronic sleep impairment, disturbances of motivation and mood, and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships. The Veteran arrived on-time and was dressed appropriately. She was oriented in all spheres, cooperative, and able to perform simple arithmetic and vocabulary tasks. She described feelings of sadness, anger, lack of motivation, being hurt, and uninspired. Judgement and insight were normal, as well as abstract reasoning. She denied suicidal or homicidal ideation, plan, or intent. According to the examiner, the extent of the Veteran's condition caused her occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.

Throughout the appeal period, VA treatment records reveal that the Veteran denied suicidal and homicidal ideation.  Also, the Veteran reported being able to perform all activities of daily living. 

After consideration of all of the relevant evidence of record, lay and medical, the Veteran is not entitled to a disability rating in excess of 50 percent for her service-connected PTSD. A 70 percent disability rating is not warranted because at no time did the Veteran exhibit occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a worklike setting).

During the March 2023 VA examination, the Veteran reported difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a worklike setting). However, since separating from active service, the Veteran has been employed full-time as an assistant manager that engages with the public. She reported maintaining social interactions with co-workers. The December 2023 VA examination did not indicate difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a worklike setting). Rather, the record indicates that the Veteran maintained full-time work since separating from active duty and has not reported missing work due to her service-connected PTSD. See November 2023 CAPRI Records. The Board finds that her reported difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances reported during active service was not present after discharge, as the Veteran consistently worked full-time as an assistant manager and reported no employment issues. The Veteran also noted short-term memory impairment during her VA examination. Nevertheless, the Board finds that this is contemplated by the currently assigned 50 percent disability rating, as it incorporates impairment of short- and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks). 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411.

In sum, the Board finds that the Veteran's symptoms more nearly approximate the criteria for a 50 percent rating throughout the appeal period. The Board has considered the totality of the Veteran's symptoms, as well as their frequency, severity, and duration. In reaching the above conclusions, the Board considered the applicability of the benefit of the doubt doctrine. However, as the weight of the evidence is against the Veteran's claim, that doctrine is not applicable. See 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49, 55-56 (1990). Therefore, the Veteran's claim for a disability rating in excess of 50 percent for PTSD is denied.

4. Entitlement to a compensable disability rating for an eye disability

VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities does not contain a specific diagnostic code for the evaluation of photophobia. Rather, Veteran's disability has been rated under DC 6099-6009. Hyphenated diagnostic codes are used when a rating under one diagnostic code requires the use of an additional diagnostic code to identify the specific basis for the evaluation assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.27. When an unlisted disease, injury, or residual condition is encountered, requiring rating by analogy, the diagnostic code number is "built-up" as follows: The first two digits are selected from that part of the schedule most closely identifying the part, or system, of the body involved; the last two digits of "99" are then used for all unlisted conditions. Id. 

Diagnostic Code 6009 pertains to the evaluation of unhealed eye injury. The Board observes that the selection of that diagnostic code is consistent with the Veteran's contention that her photophobia is due to an in-service injury. See March 2023 VA eye examination.

Diagnostic Code 6009 instructs that unhealed eye injuries are to be evaluated pursuant to the General Rating Formula for Diseases of the Eye. The General Rating Formula instructs that the disability at issue is to be evaluated on the basis of either visual impairment due to the particular condition, or on incapacitating episodes, whichever results in a higher evaluation.

As to incapacitating episodes, the rating schedule provides that where there are documented incapacitating episodes requiring at least 1 but less than 3 treatment visits for an eye condition during the past 12 months, a 10 percent rating is warranted. Where there are documented incapacitating episodes requiring at least 3 but less than 5 treatment visits for an eye condition during the past 12 months, a 20 percent rating is warranted. Where there are documented incapacitating episodes requiring at least 5 but less than 7 treatment visits for an eye condition during the past 12 months, a 40 percent rating is warranted. Where there are documented incapacitating episodes requiring 7 or more treatment visits for an eye condition during the past 12 months, a 60 percent rating is warranted. Note (1) indicates that, for purposes of evaluations under 38 C.F.R. § 4.79, an incapacitating episode is an eye condition severe enough to require a clinic visit to a provider specifically for treatment purposes. Note (2) indicates that examples of treatment may include but are not limited to: systemic immunosuppressants or biologic agents; intravitreal or periocular injections; laser treatments; or other surgical interventions. Note (3) indicates that, for purposes of evaluating visual impairment due to a particular condition, the adjudicator is to refer to 38 C.F.R. § 4.75-4.78 and to § 4.79, DCs 6061-6091.

Here, VA eye examinations conducted in March 2023 and November 2023 both found that the Veteran had not suffered any incapacitating episodes, as defined by VA regulation, during the prior 12 months. Nothing in the other evidence available for review reflects otherwise.

The evaluation of visual impairment is based on impairment of visual acuity (excluding developmental errors of refraction), visual field, and muscle function. 38 C.F.R. § 4.75 (a). Examinations of visual impairment must be conducted by a licensed optometrist or ophthalmologist, and the examiner must identify the disease, injury, or other pathologic process for any visual impairment found. 38 C.F.R. § 4.75 (a)-(b). Examinations of visual field or muscle function will be conducted only when medically indicated. Id. 

In this case, both the March 2023 and November 2023 VA eye examinations found that the Veteran did not have any impairment of muscle function/diplopia, or any visual field defect. Nothing in the other evidence available for review reflects otherwise. Therefore, the provisions pertaining to the evaluation of such impairments are not applicable.

Evaluation of visual acuity is based on corrected distance vision with central fixation. 38 C.F.R. § 4.76 (b)(1). The measurements for each eye are applied to the table for Impairment of Central Visual Acuity. Generally, the table is divided into steps corresponding to different levels of visual acuity for one eye, and each step is further divided into subsections of visual acuity for the other eye, with corresponding ratings. The rater will first locate the step that matches the visual acuity of the poorer eye. Within that step, the rater will then locate the subsection that matches the visual acuity of the better eye, which will produce the corresponding rating. Where a reported visual acuity is between two sequentially listed visual acuities, the visual acuity which permits the higher evaluation will be used. 38 C.F.R. § 4.76 (c).

Here, the Veteran's March 2023 and November 2023 VA eye examinations show uncorrected and corrected visual acuity of 20/20 or better, bilaterally.

Diagnostic Code 6066 provides ratings where vision in one eye (the poorer eye) is 10/200 or better. Where the visual acuity in both eyes is 20/40 or better, a 0 percent rating is warranted. Here, nothing in the other evidence available for review demonstrates that either eye had corrected visual acuity that was worse than 20/40 at any time during the period on appeal.

Finally, the Board finds that the service-connected disability does not warrant a separate or higher evaluation under any other potentially applicable diagnostic code. The Board has specifically considered Diagnostic Code 6036, which pertains to status-post corneal transplant, as it provides that a 10 percent rating is assigned if there is pain, photophobia, and glare sensitivity. In considering that code, the Board is cognizant of Webb v. McDonough, 71 F.4th 1377 (Fed. Cir. 2023), in which the Federal Circuit held that once it has been determined that rating by analogy is appropriate, the symptoms of the unlisted condition need not precisely match the criteria for a higher rating for the listed disease in order to warrant the higher rating. However, Diagnostic Code 6036 clearly contemplates that the claimant has undergone a surgical procedure. In this case, the Veteran has not undergone a corneal transplant or any other analogous procedure. The Board concludes, therefore, that a higher rating for his disability is not warranted by analogy under that diagnostic code.

(Continued on the next page)

?

For all of the foregoing reasons, the Board finds that the weight of the evidence available for review is persuasively against the assignment of a compensable rating for the Veteran's service-connected eye disability. Accordingly, entitlement to a compensable rating for an eye disability must be denied.

 

 

ANTHONY C. SCIRÉ, JR

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	J. Costello, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.