Citation Nr: A25034834
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 241028-488651
DATE: April 15, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for acquired psychiatric disorder, claimed as depression and posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

Resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder is etiologically related to active service.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.304.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from January 1979 to August 1979. 

This matter is before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal of an October 2024 rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ).

In the October 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the October 2024 AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

As an initial matter, the Board observes that a claim for service connection that describes only one particular psychiatric disorder should not necessarily be limited to that disorder. Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1 (2009). After review of the evidence, and consistent with the representative's November 2024 brief, the Board finds that the Veteran's claim for service connection of posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is more appropriately characterized as service connection for acquired psychiatric disorders.

Service Connection

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service. 38 U.S.C. § 1131. Generally, the evidence must show the existence of a present disability, in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury, and a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service ("nexus"). Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166-67 (Fed. Cir. 2004). A showing of continuity of symptoms from separation to the present is a factor to be considered in assessing service connection claims.  

Service connection for PTSD requires medical evidence diagnosing the condition in accordance with 38 C.F.R. § 4.125(a), a link, established by medical evidence, between current symptoms and an in-service stressor; and credible supporting evidence that the claimed in-service stressor occurred. When considering a PTSD claim, if the stressors alleged are non-combat in nature or not otherwise related to a fear of hostile military or terrorist activity, service records or other credible evidence must be shown to corroborate the claimed stressors.

For claims of in-service personal assault, evidence of behavior changes following the event constitutes relevant evidence. Examples of behavior changes that may constitute credible evidence of the stressor include but are not limited to a request for a transfer to another military duty assignment, deterioration in work performance, substance abuse, unexplained economic or social behavior changes, or episodes of depression, panic attacks, or anxiety without an identifiable cause. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.304(f)(5).

1. Service connection for acquired psychiatric disorders

The Veteran seeks service connection for acquired psychiatric disorders, claimed as PTSD, due to military sexual trauma. 

Based upon the evidence of record, and resolving all reasonable doubt in favor of the Veteran, the Board determines that service connection is warranted for an acquired psychiatric disorder. 

As an initial matter, the Veteran's VA treatment records as of June 2024 showed current diagnoses of PTSD, dysthymic disorder, uncomplicated alcohol dependence, and cocaine dependence in remission. A September 2024 VA examiner diagnosed chronic adjustment disorder with anxiety rather than PTSD. Accordingly, a current disability of acquired psychiatric disorders is established. 

Next, the Veteran's service treatment records reflect that September 1978 enlistment examination and medical history were negative for psychiatric symptoms, and there is no documentation of any assault.  However, there is additional evidence which the Board finds sufficient to support a finding that such an assault occurred.  Notably, the Veteran first reported her being assaulted to medical providers in May 2023 which were made outside the context of applying for benefits. In September 2023, a VA psychiatrist diagnosed PTSD based on these reports. The Veteran also provided statements to VA in July 2023 and December 2023 that were consistent with the reports in her medical records. She provided another credible report of the same events to the September 2024 VA examiner. Her reports regarding these incidents have been persuasive and generally consistent throughout the record. 

Further, VA regulations allow the Board to consider behavioral changes following an assault as a possible confirmation that such an assault occurred. Here, the Veteran received non-judicial punishment for cursing at a superior officer. Additionally, she was medically discharged from service over her objections, ostensibly for scoliosis. Notably, her enlistment examination noted only mild curvature of the upper thoracic spine, and the clinical evaluation of her spine was noted to be normal at that time. As part of her appeal of the Medical Board, statements from her colleagues noted she began crying and appearing sad during basic training, which the Veteran had attributed to back pain at that time. 

The Veteran developed substance abuse issues shortly after service. A June 1996 psychiatric evaluation described a 12-year history of cocaine use with multiple attempts at substance abuse programs since 1984. At the same time, she presented with possible psychotic symptoms, and the clinician suggested these were due to a combination of drug and alcohol use with high levels of stress. Finally, the Veteran worked only briefly if at all after service, and she has been receiving Social Security disability benefits since March 1991. Considering all of these factors and affording the Veteran the benefit of the doubt, the Board finds sufficient evidence that she was sexually assaulted in service. 

Finally, the Board considers whether a nexus is established between the current acquired psychiatric disorders and the Veteran's military sexual traumas.  In this regard, the Veteran was afforded a September 2024 VA examination, where the examiner indicated that the Veteran did not have service-related PTSD, but rather diagnosed diagnosis was chronic adjustment disorder with anxiety. However, this examiner concluded that this diagnosis was at least as likely as not caused by the claimed military sexual traumas. In support, they cited the evidence such as an Article 15 during service, development of substance use, loss of employment, relationship issues, and loss of child custody as corroborating the occurrence of the military sexual trauma. The Board finds this assessment adequate and probative. 

The Board acknowledges the negative evidence, including the September 2018 VA examination and medical opinion. However, additional evidence has been received, such as the Veteran's more recent VA treatment for psychiatric disorders and disclosure of her military sexual trauma, that renders this opinion inadequate. The Board finds that the positive evidence discussed above is at least in approximate balance with the negative evidence. Accordingly, the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine is applicable. See 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

For these reasons, the Board finds that the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorders are etiologically related to service, and service-connection is granted.  The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303. 

 

B.T. KNOPE

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	M. Heger