Citation Nr: A25034268
Decision Date: 04/14/25	Archive Date: 04/14/25

DOCKET NO. 240924-476910
DATE: April 14, 2025

REMANDED

The appeal for eligibility for benefits under the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA's) Program of Comprehensive Assistance for Family Caregivers (PCAFC) is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The first party to this matter is the Veteran, who served on active duty in the United States Marine Corps from August 1996 to September 2000, and in the United States Air Force from September 2012 to March 2013, February 2014 to July 2014, and February 2017 to July 2021.  The second party to the matter is his spouse, J.G., who is applying to be the Primary Family Caregiver.

In September 2024, the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) received a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal to review a September 2024 decision by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).  See generally Beaudette v. McDonough, 34?Vet. App.?95 (2021) (certifying a class of claimants who received an adverse benefits decision under the Caregiver Program and have not been afforded the right to appeal to the Board).   

The Appellants elected the Hearing docket.  A Board hearing was held on December 13, 2024.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the September 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Appellants or the Veteran's representative at the hearing or within 90 days following the hearing.  

38 C.F.R. § 20.302(a).  If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal and prior to the Board hearing, or (2) more than 90 days following the hearing, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  

38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.302(a), 20.801.  However, because the Board is remanding the issue of eligibility for PCAFC, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in its adjudication.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

The Appellants contest the AOJ's finding that the Veteran was not eligible for Family Caregiver services because he was not in need of personal care services for a minimum of six months due to an inability to perform an activity of daily living (ADL) or need supervision, protection, or instruction.  

As discussed below, this appeal is remanded for correction of an AOJ error in satisfying a regulatory and statutory duty as such correction has a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the Appellants' claim.  38?C.F.R. §?20.802(a). 

The Board finds that the Veteran requires personal care services for a minimum of six continuous months based on a need for supervision, protection, or instruction.  See 38?C.F.R. §?20.801(a) (providing any findings favorable to the claimant in a prior Board decision on an issue on appeal are binding on all AOJ and Board adjudicators, unless rebutted by evidence that identifies a clear and unmistakable error in the favorable finding). 

The Board notes that the regulatory definition for a need for supervision, protection, or instruction has been invalidated as it is more restrictive than the statute it implements.  See Veteran Warriors, Inc. v. Sec'y of Veterans Affairs, 29 F.4th 1320, 1342-43 (Fed. Cir. 2022) (38?C.F.R. §?71.15 includes a frequency requirement of on "a daily basis" and a requirement that the supervision, protection, or instruction impacts a veteran's ability to maintain personal safety, which is inconsistent with 38?U.S.C. §?1720G(a)(2)(C)(ii)-(iii)); VAOGCPREC 7-03 (providing rules announced in judicial decisions apply retroactively to all cases still open on review when the new rule is announced); see also Brewer v. West, 11?Vet. App.?228, 234 (1998). 

The criteria outlined in the statute describe an eligible veteran to include individuals in need of personal care services because of a need for supervision or protection based on symptoms or residuals of neurological or other impairment or injury; or a need for regular or extensive instruction or supervision without which the ability of the veteran to function in daily life would be seriously impaired.  38?U.S.C. §?1720G(a)(2)(C)(ii)-(iii). 

The record reflects that the Veteran requires supervision or protection based on symptoms or residuals of a diagnosed condition and regular or extensive instruction or supervision without which his ability to function in daily life would be seriously impaired due to his memory deficits and functional limitations; further, the record reflects the personal care services of another are required for at least six continuous months.  38?U.S.C. §?1720G(a)(2)(C)(ii)-(iii).   

A January 2024 VA MRI assessment revealed that the Veteran has chronic episodic migraine and cluster headaches following multiple episodes of in-service traumatic brain injury (TBI).  The assessment indicated that multiple traditional therapies failed, and that the Veteran had better outcomes with nontraditional treatment.  The VA provider prescribed a vagus nerve stimulator, which the Veteran had previously received outside of VA.

At the August 2024 Veteran assessment, the Veteran reported that his TBI affected his cognitive abilities and that he experienced chronic fatigue.  Regarding his reported short-term memory problems, the Veteran stated that he had attempted to drive himself to a VA facility four months prior when the Caregiver and his mother were not available, that he drove to the wrong hospital and could not figure out how to use a phone mapping application to find the correct facility, and that the Caregiver had to help him find the facility by phone.  It was noted that the Veteran was found disabled by his state after testing in 2021.  The Veteran had positive depression and suicide screens.  Regarding the Veteran's neurological, cognitive or mental health needs, the Caregiver reported that the Veteran required assistance due to his memory problems.  She reported managing medications, to include ensuring that the Veteran takes the right medications and administering the Veteran's shots.  She reported that she does not allow the Veteran to use the stove because he has left it on several times and almost started a fire.  The Caregiver reported that the Veteran drives independently but she tries to limit his driving and that he does not drive alone because he is easily agitated, and suffers from vertigo and optical migraines. 

At the September 2024 functional assessment, the Veteran reported the impact of his memory problems and chronic fatigue on his ability to perform ADLs.  The Veteran reported needing prompting from the Caregiver to eat at times because he forgets whether he has eaten or he is having an episode of fatigue and does not have the energy to do so without prompting.  He reported that the Caregiver prompted him to brush his teeth at times because he is unable to remember when he last brushed them.  Regarding bathing, the Veteran reported that he needs assistance when having periods of extreme fatigue.  The Caregiver reported that during episodes the Veteran stays in his pajamas and that she must dress him if he needs to get dressed.  The Caregiver reported that the Veteran's episodes can last from 24 hours to 6 weeks.  A May 2024 VA treatment note indicated that after surgery the Veteran had an acute flare of chronic fatigue and that he "couldn't do anything."  The Caregiver stated that his episodes of fatigue were worsening over time, and that the Veteran is now "on the couch" 60 percent of the time.  The Veteran reported that on "good days" (40% of the time), he is able to walk  independently.  He stated that he uses a cane at night to get to and from the bathroom.  The Veteran reported that that even on good days, he can only walk for 15 minutes without stopping to rest.  The Caregiver stated that it had been nine months since the Veteran was able to walk the one-mile loop around their neighborhood.  The Veteran reported that his left ankle fusion, left total hip replacement and left side nerve damage made it difficult to walk longer distances, and that pain from his fused ankle and low energy level limited his activity tolerance.  The Veteran and Caregiver reported that on the bad days the Veteran requires standby assistance to stand up from sitting and may need assistance to walk if his equilibrium does not even out on its own.  The Veteran stated he would not try to cross a crosswalk on a bad day.  The Veteran and Caregiver stated that the Veteran does not leave the house when he is having an episode.

Regarding the need for supervision, protection, or instruction, it was noted that the Veteran needs medication management in the form of medication administration, as the Veteran is unable to remember when he last took his medication due to memory issues.  The Veteran was noted to be mentally unable to cope, make appropriate decisions and take action in a changing environment or a potentially harmful situation.  The Veteran was also noted to be at risk of self-neglect due to medication management, with risk factors of dehydration or malnutrition; hygiene that may compromise health; impairment of orientation, memory, reasoning, and/or judgment; and inability to manage medications or to seek medical treatment that may threaten health or safety.  The Veteran was also at risk of neglect, abuse, or exploitation by another person, and it was noted that the Caregiver manages all medications, appointments, and finances.  Although it was noted that the Veteran can be left alone for most of the day, on his "bad days" someone has to be with him.  The record indicated that Veteran experiences chronic fatigue at least 60 percent of the time.  The Veteran requires intense support when leaving home because of behavioral difficulties.  The Caregiver reported daily challenges due to the Veteran's memory deficits.  She stated: 

I will tell him something and 10 minutes later he will ask about it and forget we talked about it.  I have to remind him to brush his teeth.  I will ask him to do something and find him doing something else later and he will not remember what I asked him to do.  He forgets names and people's faces; forgets where he puts things.  He is not allowed to use grills or ovens because he has left things on, or set things on the hot stove while they are on.  The other day, he had turned on the stove, then set groceries down right on top of it.  I will ask him to start my car and he forgets to open the garage door. 

The Veteran stated that the Caregiver manages the finances, and that she manages a shared calendar and sets reminders on his phone and watch so that he does not forget things.  The Veteran and Caregiver reported that "if he's doing well", he can be left alone for the majority of the day, but on his "bad days", someone has to be with him.  They reported that someone needs to be with the Veteran when he is away from home for assistance with remembering, decision-making, and judgement, and to serve as a "buffer" for his behavioral outbursts.  The Caregiver stated that sometimes she is able to calm the Veteran, but that she often she has to remove him from the situation or trigger.  The Veteran reported using a vagus nerve stimulator which helped to alleviate some of his headache symptoms and helps to calm him within a few minutes.  A January 2024 VA neurology consult noted indicated that the use of the vagus nerve stimulator has a significant impact in controlling his headaches and TBI symptoms, and that the Veteran had used it for the past year, prescribed by a provider in the community.  A review of the Veteran's medical history showed lumbar degenerative disc disease, low back pain status post L4-5 laminectomy in March 2024, cervical degenerative disc disease with 4th/5th finger radiculopathy, chronic fatigue, migraine and cluster headaches, TBI, chronic left ankle pain, pain in left hip joint, tinnitus, internal derangement of the knee, and posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD).

During the December 2024 Board hearings, testimony was provided by Dr. S.L., a neurologist.  Upon review of the Veteran's claims file and interview of the Veteran and Caregiver regarding residuals of the Veteran's TBI.  Dr. S.L. stated that the Veteran requires daily aid and attendance with ADLs due to his TBI.  She indicated that the Veteran would need institutional care without assistance from the Caregiver.  Regarding the functional impact of the Veteran's TBI, Dr. S.L. stated that the Veteran suffers constant severe fatigue, and may be confined to the couch or bed for 10 to 12 hours a day.  Dr. S.L. indicated that on the Veteran's best days, he can perform minor tasks such as feeding himself and watching TV for two to three hours.  Dr. S.L. further noted the Veteran's significant dizziness, headaches, photophobia and nausea that are severe enough to cause balance problems.  She also noted the Veteran's reports of being unable to remember names and significant past events, and not eating regularly.  Regarding the Veteran's reported significant change of mood and personality, Dr. S.L. noted that the Veteran requires supervision away from home and that he is easily irritable and angered, and may have public outbursts.  Dr. S.L. stated that the Veteran has risk factors of memory problems affecting his ability to manage his medication, safety concerns to include having previously left the stove on which caused a fire, and fall risk due to dizziness and imbalance.  She also noted that the Veteran's fatigue affects his ability to get dressed, prepare meals, and take his medication.  Ultimately, Dr. S.L. stated that the Veteran would be unable to perform most activities of daily living, to include bathing, showering, dressing, feeding, preparing meals and eating without being told to do so.  She also expressed the concern that the Veteran may "get into situations in which he could inadvertently harm himself if there was no one there."

The Caregiver and Veteran also provided testimony at the December 2024 hearings.  The Caregiver testified that she assists the Veteran with going to restroom several times per night.  She testified that she sets up and administers medications that the Veteran takes at morning and midday.  The Caregiver stated that the Veteran requires assistance due to vertigo, dizziness, and fatigue.  She stated that when the Veteran has a "bad day", she is concerned with his ability to navigate their home, and that on these days the Veteran "doesn't feel good enough to do anything."  The Caregiver testified that she assists the Veteran with navigating stairs, as their bedroom is upstairs.  The Caregiver stated that she attends medical appointments and communicates with medical providers about his care, as the Veteran sometimes has a hard time accurately explaining or conveying his symptoms and remembering what has happened since the last appointment.  The Caregiver testified that she does all of the shopping, and plans and manages the Veteran's days.  She further testified that the Veteran requires a special diet and that she prepares his meals.  The Caregiver stated that she would have to assist the Veteran if there were an emergency in the home.  The Caregiver stated that she has been assisting Vet for six months and anticipates that he will need assistance for the rest of his life.  The Veteran testified that he takes over 25 different medications, and that he takes medication three times a day, including some shots.  The Veteran testified that the Caregiver sets up his medication and brings it to him.  Regarding his memory problems, the Veteran recounted starting a fire when he put canvas bags on top of stove that was turned on.  The Veteran testified that the Caregiver assists him with bathing when he has vertigo and nausea due to balance issues, that she supervises him to prevent falls, and that she provides hands-on assistance when he feels ill.  The Veteran reported being mostly independent with dressing, but sometimes needing assistance with putting on his socks due to lower back limitations.

The evidence of record indicates that the Veteran requires regular supervision due to his disabilities, and that the Caregiver is active in providing his care.  The Veteran has multiple conditions which affect his mobility and ability to provide for his safety, to include TBI; PTSD; and low back, neck, and ankle conditions.  A review of the evidentiary record shows that the Veteran has consistently required regular assistance and supervision from the Caregiver due to functional limitations caused by chronic fatigue, memory deficits, vertigo, and joint pain.  At the December 2024 Board hearing, Dr. S.L. stated that the Veteran experiences constant severe fatigue, and may be confined to the couch or bed for 10 to 12 hours a day.  The Caregiver has reported that the Veteran experiences episodes of severe fatigue 60 percent of the time, and that his condition has worsened.  The Veteran is also noted to require supervision at all times when outside of the home as he is easily irritated and angered.  The Veteran also experiences challenges both in the home and away from home due to his memory problems, and as a result the Veteran does not use the stove or drive alone.  A review of the record indicates that the Caregiver manages the Veteran's medication, meal planning and preparation, and finances, and is actively involved with the Veteran's medical care.  In addition to the limitations caused by severe fatigue, the Veteran experiences joint pain, requires at least some assistance in navigating stairs due his fused left ankle, and exhibits a lack of endurance.

Based on this evidence, the Board resolves reasonable doubt in favor of the Veteran and finds that the Veteran requires supervision or protection based on symptoms or residuals of multiple diagnosed conditions and regular or extensive instruction or supervision without which his ability to function in daily life would be seriously impaired, and that the Veteran is in need of personal care services for a minimum of six continuous months.  38?U.S.C. §?1720G(a)(2)(C)(ii)-(iii). 

However, this finding does not represent a full grant of the benefit sought, the joint applicants' eligibility for PCAFC.  Rather, additional development is required to determine whether the Veteran is eligible for a Family Caregiver pursuant to  38?C.F.R. §?71.20(a), which may include an evaluation on the amount of instruction, preparation, and training the eligible Veteran's proposed family caregiver requires to provide the personal care services and allow the caregiver to complete said instruction and training to become an approved provider of personal care services for the eligible Veteran.  38?U.S.C. §?1720G(a)(5)(B), (6)(A)-(B).  As an appeal may be remanded for correction of an AOJ error in satisfying a regulatory and statutory duty if such correction has a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the appellant's claim, remand is warranted in this case.  38?C.F.R. §?20.802(a); VAOGCPREC 7-03. 

After correction of any error, the AOJ must readjudicate the claim and provide notification of the decision in accordance with the criteria outlined in 38?U.S.C. §?5104(b).  See 38?C.F.R. §?20.802(c); see also 38?U.S.C. §?1720G(a)(12) (directing VA to provide notice of all PCAFC decisions affecting the furnishing of assistance shall include the elements required for notice under §?5104(b)).  Generally, this includes the following:?identification of the issues adjudicated; a summary of the evidence considered by the Secretary; a summary of the applicable laws and regulations; identification of findings favorable to the claimant; in the case of a denial, identification of elements not satisfied leading to the denial; an explanation of how to obtain or access evidence used in making the decision; and, if applicable, identification of the criteria that must be satisfied to grant service connection or the next higher level of compensation.?  38?U.S.C. §?5104(b).  

Additionally, the evidence of record indicates that the Veteran has non-VA health care providers.  The August 2024 Veteran assessment noted that Origin Medical provides cognitive recovery and functional medicine treatment, and that an outside TBI specialist manages his TBI, fatigue, and chronic pain.  The January 2024 MRI assessment indicated that the Veteran had been prescribed a vagus nerve stimulator by an outside provider.  VA has a duty to make reasonable efforts to assist Veterans in securing evidence necessary to substantiate their claim.  ?38 U.S.C. § 5103A;?38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c).  As the records are likely relevant to the determination of eligibility for PCAFC benefits, a remand is warranted to try to obtain them.   

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Make efforts to associate with the file the records from any private medical providers, to include Origin Medical.  See January 2024 MRI assessment, August 2024 Veteran Assessment. 

2. Undertake any development deemed necessary to assess whether the Veteran is eligible for a Family Caregiver pursuant to 38?C.F.R. §?71.20(a) considering the favorable finding outlined in the body of this remand (the Board finds the Veteran requires personal care services for a minimum of six continuous months based on a need for supervision, protection, or instruction).   

Notification of the decision issued to the Veteran, the Caregiver, and the Veteran's representative on the issue of entitlement to eligibility for PCAFC benefits under 38?C.F.R. §§ 71.15-71.25 should include the criteria outlined in 38?U.S.C. §?5104.

 

 

D. Martz Ames

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Bynum, Tamara L.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.