Citation Nr: A25034998
Decision Date: 04/16/25	Archive Date: 04/16/25

DOCKET NO. 240621-450163
DATE: April 16, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 70 percent for major depressive disorder and persistent depressive disorder (dysthymia) and unspecified anxiety disorder is remanded.  

Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 20 percent for gouty ankle and knees is remanded.  

Entitlement to a total disability rating based on individual unemployability due to service-connected disabilities (TDIU) is remanded.  

Preliminary Matters

The Veteran had honorable active-duty service with the United States Army from April 1973 to June 1992, and from November 2001 to November 2002.  

On August 23, 2017, the President signed into law the Veterans Appeals Improvement and Modernization Act, 131 Stat. 1105 (2017), also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA).  

This matter is before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an April 2024 rating decision of a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).  

In June 2024, the Veteran filed VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement (NOD)).  The Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  He acknowledged that Direct Review would entail the Board reviewing the evidence of record at the time of the prior decision, with no evidence submission or hearing requests.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the April 2024 decision.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  

The Board recognizes that the issue of entitlement to a TDIU was previously denied by the AOJ.  See May 2024 rating decision.  Nevertheless, the claim for a TDIU remains in appellate status, as it is part and parcel to the increased rating claim for the service-connected psychiatric disorder currently on appeal.  Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447 (2009).  In May 2024, the Veteran filed a VA Form 21-8940, Veterans Application for Increased Compensation Based on Unemployability.  However, during a March 2024 VA examination for his service-connected psychiatric disorder, the Veteran indicated that he had stopped working in January 2024, as he started having issues with procrastination and a lack of focus.  Thus, the issue of entitlement to a TDIU is properly before the Board.  Accordingly, the Board has taken jurisdiction over the issue of entitlement to a TDIU under AMA as an issue part and parcel with the increased rating claim for the service-connected psychiatric disorder under Rice.  

The Board notes that evidence was added to the claims file during a period of time when new evidence was not allowed.   Therefore, the Board may not consider this evidence.  See 38 C.F.R. § 20.300.  That stated, the newly submitted evidence will be reviewed and considered by the AOJ after it completes the development ordered by the Board with respect to the issues being remanded.  

REASONS FOR REMAND

After thorough review of the record, the Board finds that additional evidentiary development is warranted before a final decision may be reached for the issues on appeal.  

1. Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 70 percent for major depressive disorder and persistent depressive disorder (dysthymia) and unspecified anxiety disorder is remanded.  

The Board finds that a remand is necessary in order to cure a pre-decisional duty-to-assist error by assisting the Veteran in obtaining outstanding relevant private treatment records that were identified prior to the issuance of the rating decision on appeal.  

During a March 2024 VA psychiatric examination, the Veteran indicated that he had been working in Italy as a contractor for over two years.  He further indicated that, while working in Italy, he had been seeing a psychologist for six months.  No efforts have been made to obtain these private treatment records.  Thus, a remand is necessary in order to provide the Veteran an opportunity to submit, or authorize VA to obtain, these outstanding private treatment records.  

2. Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 20 percent for gouty ankle and knees is remanded.  

VA treatment records and a March 2024 VA examination report show that the Veteran takes Allopurinol daily to treat his gout.  The examination report notes that the Veteran's gout is controlled with this medication.  However, there is no indication in the March 2024 VA examination report that the examiner considered the ameliorative effects of Allopurinol when describing the Veteran's symptoms and incapacitating exacerbations.  See Jones v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 56, 61 (2012); Ingram v. Collins, No. 23-1798 (2025).  

The Board finds that VA should have obtained a medical opinion addressing the ameliorative effects of the Veteran's Allopurinol prior to issuing a decision on the claim.  In this regard, the medical evidence notes the Veteran's medication usage, which appears to have a significant effect on the severity of his gout.  The criteria for rating gout do not contemplate the ameliorative effects of medication.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a.  Accordingly, the Board may not consider those ameliorative effects in assigning a rating.  Therefore, the March 2024 VA examination is inadequate, as it does not describe the severity of the Veteran's disability without the ameliorative effects of medication.  The RO's failure to obtain an adequate VA examination constitutes a pre-decisional duty-to-assist error.  Accordingly, the claim is remanded to correct this pre-decisional duty-to-assist error.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5103A; 38 C.F.R. § 20.802.  

3. Entitlement to a TDIU is remanded.  

As previously indicated, the Board finds that entitlement to a TDIU has been raised by the record as part and parcel to the increased rating claim for the service-connected psychiatric disorder.  Rice, 22 Vet. App. at 453-54.  Given the Board's remand of the increased rating claim for the Veteran's psychiatric disability, the Board finds that the issue of entitlement to a TDIU is inextricably intertwined therewith as the development and adjudication of that claim may impact the Board's assessment of entitlement to a TDIU.  See Harris v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 180 (1991) (holding that where a decision on one issue would have a significant impact upon another, and that impact in turn could render any appellate review on the other claim meaningless and a waste of judicial resources, the two claims are inextricably intertwined).  As such, adjudication of entitlement to a TDIU should be deferred until such development is completed.  

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Afford the Veteran an opportunity to submit, or authorize VA to obtain, all outstanding private treatment records pertaining to his treatment for his psychiatric disorder, specifically the treatment records from Italy.  After obtaining any necessary authorization from him, all outstanding treatment records should be obtained.  Make at least two (2) attempts obtain records from any identified sources.  If any such records are unavailable, inform the Veteran and afford him an opportunity to submit any copies in his possession.  

2. Obtain a medical opinion with respect to the Veteran's claim for a higher rating for gouty ankle and knees.  Upon review of the record, the clinician should answer the following:  

(a) Comment on the ameliorative effects Allopurinol has had on the Veteran's gout symptoms throughout the period on appeal.  

(b) Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's gout would have resulted in symptom combinations productive of definite impairment of health or incapacitating exacerbations occurring three or more times a year but for the use of Allopurinol during the period on appeal?  

(c) Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's gout would have resulted in weight loss and anemia productive of severe impairment of health or severely incapacitating exacerbations occurring four or more times a year or a lesser number over prolonged periods but for the use of Allopurinol during the period on appeal?  

(d) Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's gout would have resulted in totally incapacitating constitutional manifestations associated with active joint involvement but for the use of Allopurinol during the period on appeal?  

A complete rationale must be given for all opinions and conclusions expressed.  If it is not possible to provide a specific measurement without resorting to mere speculation, the examiner must state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general medical knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training).  

 

 

Christopher Seppanen

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Y. MacDonald, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.