Citation Nr: A25034904
Decision Date: 04/16/25	Archive Date: 04/16/25

DOCKET NO. 240820-464597
DATE: April 16, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a gastrointestinal disability, to include irritable bowel syndrome (IBS), is remanded.  

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the U.S. Army from July 2009 to April 2013.

The rating decision on appeal was issued in September 2023 and constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act, applies.  The September 2023 rating decision was a higher-level review of a prior January 2023 rating decision, which denied the Veteran's service-connection claim for IBS.  

In the August 2023 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the January 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the Veteran's claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Entitlement to service connection for a gastrointestinal disability, to include IBS, is remanded.  

The Veteran seeks service connection for a gastrointestinal disability, which he identified as IBS on his September 2022 claims form.  

At his November 2022 intestinal conditions examination, the Veteran reported lower intestinal issues that come in waves, but frequently.  He noted loose stools numerous times per day.  On a regular day, he reported having 2-3 bowel movements, and on worse days he reported having upwards of 4-5 bowel movements.  He reported persistent bloating and urgency.  He noting having to stop when travelling to have bowel movements, and that such has been happening since his return from his deployments to Iraq while on active duty.  

The November 2022 examiner ultimately concluded that the Veteran had no diagnosed disability.  She noted that it would be appropriate to state that while there are non-specific GI symptoms reported, there is no diagnosis at this time, nor is there a high clinical suspicion of IBS as being the appropriate diagnosis.  The examiner also stated that the Veteran does not have a diagnosis of unknown etiology, nor was it felt that his symptoms were due to an undiagnosed illness.  Instead, the examiner speculated that such "may be part of normal varied bowel habits with [the] individual."  When asked to provide an addendum opinion, the examiner indicated no opinion was needed, as the Veteran did not meet the diagnostic criteria for a diagnosis.  See a January 11, 2023, Addendum.  Ultimately, the AOJ relied on these medical assessments in denying the Veteran's service-connection claim. 

The Board finds the medical opinion to be, at best, too conclusory in nature to facilitate an informed decision on the Veteran's claim.  While it may be that the symptoms described by the Veteran are not manifestations of actual disability, the examiner does not provide any medical explanation as to how this conclusion was reached.  Nor did the examiner offer any discussion as to how she ruled out the presence of an undiagnosed illness or medically unexplained chronic multi-symptom illness, which if present, may be presumed to be related to the Veteran's service in Southwest Asia under the provisions of 38 C.F.R. § 3.317.  Before denying the Veteran's claim, the AOJ should have sought further clarification from a medical professional as to the nature of the Veteran's claimed condition, if any, so that all theories of entitlement for the benefit sought can be addressed.  The Board agrees with the Veteran's attorney that a remand is needed in this case to correct this pre-decisional duty-to-assist error.  See the August 2024 Addendum to the VA Form 10182; see also 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).  

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Schedule the Veteran for an examination to assess the nature and etiology of his claimed gastrointestinal disability (claimed as IBS).  The examiner should review the Veteran's medical records, and take a history from the Veteran as to the progression of his symptoms.

After review of the record, interview and examination of the Veteran, the examiner should respond to the following:

a)	Please clarify whether the Veteran has a disability or disabilities manifested by gastrointestinal distress, including frequent loose bowel movements, bloating or urgency, as described at the November 2022 intestinal conditions examination.  Please specifically discuss whether the Veteran's symptoms are at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) a manifestation of an undiagnosed illness or a medically unexplained chronic multi-symptom illness (MUCMI)?  A multi-symptom illness is a MUCMI where either the etiology or pathophysiology of the illness is inconclusive.  Stewart v. Wilkie, 30 Vet. App. 383, 389-90 (2018).

b)	For each disability identified (other than as a manifestation of an undiagnosed illness or MUCMI), is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that such had onset in service, or is otherwise related to service, to include hazardous environmental exposures while serving in the Persian Gulf?   In forming an opinion, the examiner must consider (1) the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments; and (2) the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities. 

All opinions should be supported by a medical explanation or rationale.

 

 

ANTHONY C. SCIRÉ, JR

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	V. Chiappetta, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.