Citation Nr: A25034781
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 240521-442261
DATE: April 15, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea (OSA), to include as secondary to the Veteran's service-connected bilateral pes planus with plantar fasciitis is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

The most probative evidence of record demonstrates the Veteran's service-connected bilateral pes planus with plantar fasciitis caused his OSA, with obesity as an intermediate step.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for service connection for OSA as secondary to bilateral pes planus with plantar fasciitis, have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.310.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from February 2003 to October 2003.

The Appeals Modernization Act (AMA) creates a new framework for Veterans dissatisfied with VA's decision on their claim to seek review. The AMA became effective on February 19, 2019. The AMA modernized review system applies to all claims for which VA issues a notice of an initial decision on or after the February 19, 2019 effective date of the modernized review system.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a February 2024 Higher-Level Review decision issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In the June 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) (NOD), the Veteran elected the direct review option. For the Direct Lane docket, the Board's review is limited to the evidentiary record at the time of the RO decision on appeal. See Andrews v. McDonough, 34 Vet. App. 151, (2021). 

Service Connection

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service. 38?U.S.C. §?1110; 38?C.F.R. §?3.303(a). To establish a right to compensation for a present disability, a Veteran must show: (1) the existence of a present disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service-the so-called "nexus" requirement. Holton v. Shinseki, 557 F.3d 1362, 1366 (Fed. Cir. 2009) (quoting Shedden v. Principi, 38 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004)). The absence of any one element will result in the denial of service connection.

Additionally, service connection may be granted on a secondary basis when the evidence establishes (1) that a current disability exists and (2) that the current disability was either (a) caused by or (b) aggravated by a service-connected disability.? See Wallin v. West, 11?Vet. App.?509, 512 (1998); 38?C.F.R. §?3.310.

The Court has recently held that the proper interpretation of establishing obesity as an intermediate step requires consideration of both proximate causation and aggravation. Walsh v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 300, 306-7 (2020).  Thus, for secondary service connection to be granted under this theory, the record must demonstrate (1) whether a service-connected disability (or service-connected disabilities combined) caused or aggravated (i.e., worsened) the Veteran's obesity; (2) if so, whether the obesity or aggravation of obesity as a result of service-connected disability was a substantial factor in causing the claimed current disability; and (3) whether the claimed disability would not have occurred but for obesity caused or aggravated by the service-connected disability. See Walsh v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 300, 307 (2020).

1. Entitlement to service connection for OSA, to include as secondary to the Veteran's service-connected bilateral pes planus with plantar fasciitis, is granted.

The Veteran contends that his OSA is related to his active-duty service, or alternatively, secondary to his service-connected bilateral pes planus with plantar fasciitis. The Board finds the Veteran's OSA is related to his service-connected bilateral pes planus with plantar fasciitis. Accordingly, the Board will not address the theory of direct service connection. Additionally, the Board notes that the issue of obesity as an intermediate step for the Veteran's OSA has been raised by the record.

In the February 2024 rating decision, the AOJ made a favorable finding that the Veteran has a current disability of OSA. 38 U.S.C. § 5104(b)(4); 5104A; 38 C.F.R. § 20.801(a). Accordingly, the Board finds that the current disability element has been met.

The record also established that the Veteran is service connected for bilateral pes planus with plantar fasciitis. Thus, this element of secondary service connection is also met.

The remaining question is whether there is a nexus between the Veteran's current disability and his service-connected bilateral pes planus with plantar fasciitis. 

With respect to secondary service connection, in a private medical opinion dated June 2021, a private medical examiner opined that the Veteran's weight gain is due to his bilateral pes planus with plantar fasciitis and, that the Veteran's obesity was a substantial factor in causing the Veteran's OSA, and that the Veteran's OSA would not have occurred but for the Veteran's obesity. The examiner noted the Veteran weighed 190 pounds upon military entrance, 240 pounds upon military separation, and has a current weight of 300 pounds. The examiner further noted that the Veteran's weight gain developed after his musculoskeletal symptomatology related to his service-connected bilateral pes planus with plantar fasciitis, explaining that the Veteran's weight gain was due to inactivity because of the pain caused by his service-connected bilateral pes planus with plantar fasciitis. This evidence clearly indicates the Veteran's service-connected disabilities aggravated his obesity due to an inability to exercise. The examiner went on to explain that obesity is a leading cause of OSA and ultimately found that but for the Veteran's obesity, the Veteran would not have developed OSA. This opinion was thorough, based on review of the medical record and the Veteran's lay statements and it is supported by a complete rationale and medical literature.  Accordingly, the Board finds that this opinion is highly probative.

Against the finding of a nexus, in August 2021, a VA examiner opined the Veteran's OSA was less likely than not due to or the result of the Veteran's bilateral pes planus with plantar fasciitis. The examiner opined that plantar fasciitis and obesity are not etiologically related. The VA examiner opined that obesity is caused by excessive food intake and lack of physical activity, indicating that obesity was a choice and not caused by inactivity due to the Veteran's pes planus and plantar fasciitis pain. The examiner summarily opined that caloric intake was the cause of the Veteran's obesity and discounted the Veteran's reports of pain causing reduced physical activity. In a second VA medical opinion from April 2022, a VA examiner opined that while the Veteran's pes planus with plantar fasciitis can represent a risk factor for weight gain, and while obesity represents a risk factor for sleep apnea, obesity is multifactorial and could be prevented by dietary discretion and non-weightbearing exercise which are still possible in the presence of his service-connected foot disabilities. Both VA examiners disregarded the Veteran's reports of musculoskeletal pain related to his service-connected pes planus with plantar fasciitis and summarily found the Veteran was obese due to his diet. Thus, the Board affords the opinions low probative weight. 

In light of the above evidence, the Board finds that the most probative evidence shows that the Veteran's obesity was a substantial factor in causing the Veteran's OSA, and the Veteran's OSA would not have occurred but for the obesity. As such, the necessary factors for the Veteran's obesity to be considered an intermediate step between his OSA and his service-connected pes planus with plantar fasciitis have been satisfied. Consequently, entitlement to service connection for OSA is granted as secondary to the service connected pes planus with plantar fasciitis.

 

 

GAYLE STROMMEN

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Risley, H.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.