Citation Nr: A25034126
Decision Date: 04/14/25	Archive Date: 04/14/25

DOCKET NO. 240830-470075
DATE:  April 14, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for degenerative disc disease(cervical)/ neck pain as secondary to left knee patellofemoral pain syndrome, status post meniscal tear, hereinafter a "neck disorder," is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a back condition/intervertebral disc syndrome (IVDS), hereinafter a "back disorder," is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the U.S. Army from July 2009 to April 2010. 

The rating decision on appeal was issued in August 2024 and constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies. 

In the August 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the August 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) supplemental claim decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted after the AOJ issued the supplemental claim decision on appeal, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of entitlement to service connection for both claims, neck disorder and IVDS, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

As a final preliminary matter, the Board acknowledges the recent precedential decision in Williams regarding 38 C.F.R. § 20.202(c)(2) and deciding AMA appeals before the time to change dockets has ended. See Williams v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 305 (2024). Generally, the Board may not decide an appeal before the deadline for requesting an AMA docket switch has elapsed. 38 C.F.R. § 20.202(c)(2) allows claimants to switch AMA dockets by completing and submitting a new Notice of Disagreement within one year from the date the AOJ mails notice of the decision on appeal, or 60 days from when the Board receives the Notice of Disagreement, whichever is later, unless a claimant has already submitted evidence or testimony as described in 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.302 and 20.303. In this case, less than one year has passed since the AOJ mailed notice of the decision on appeal; however, as the Board is remanding the issues for additional development, there is no prejudice to the Veteran in proceeding with the claim on appeal prior to the expiration of the deadline for requesting an AMA docket switch.

1. Neck Disorder

The Veteran asserts service connection for neck pain secondary to left knee patellofemoral pain syndrome, status post meniscal tear which she asserts occurred in service. See Fully Developed Claim, VA Form 21-526EZ, August 2023. 

Turning to the evidence, in October 2023 the Veteran received a VA examination for the neck, cervical spine. The Veteran reported she developed sudden onset neck pain after carrying ruck sacks in 2010 during service which has worsened since the onset. Based on the presented symptoms, the examiner diagnosed the Veteran with degenerative disc disease other than IVDS for the claimed compensation condition of neck pain with the date of diagnosis as 2023. 

In February 2024 the Veteran received an updated independent medical opinion regarding secondary service connection. The examiner opined that the claimed condition is less likely than not proximately due to or the result of Veteran's service-connected condition of left knee patellofemoral pain syndrome. 

In February 2024 the Veteran received a medical opinion regarding the Veteran's neck pain being proximately due to or the result of left knee subluxation. The examiner opined that the claimed condition less likely than not proximately due to or the result of Veteran's service-connected condition of left knee subluxation. The examiner stated that there was no clear evidence from review of orthopedic literature or the Veteran's own history, records, or examination to suggest that an injury to one joint would have any significant impact on another or opposite uninjured joint or limb.

In August 2024 the Veteran received an updated independent medical opinion regarding the cervical spine. The examiner opined that the claimed condition of neck pain was less likely than not incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness. The examiner stated that the Veteran was in active military services from the year of 2009-2010 and after reviewing the pertinent and medical c-file records, there was no documentation of any trauma, injuries, complaints, or symptoms such as back or neck conditions during active military service. And, regarding the Veteran's scoliosis and any scoliosis related back pain, the August 2024 examiner opined that unmistakably existed prior to service, was clearly and unmistakably not aggravated beyond its natural progression by an in-service injury, event, or illness. 

The Board finds the October 2023 VA examination and the following medical opinions of February 2024 and August 2024 to be inconsistent with the lay evidence of record. As such, the Board finds the October 2023 examination regarding the cervical spine, and the following February 2024 and August 2024 medical opinions inadequate to decide the claim. The examiners, in their opinions and conclusions, made no mention of the Veteran's lay statements regarding to any active service injuries, pain, and continuity of symptomatology from ongoing movement. In that regard, the examiners from October 2023, February 2024, or August 2024, did not provide an adequate rationale for the for the conclusion that the Veteran did not experience neck pain, which is also contrary to the evidence of record. See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake,?22?Vet. App.?295, 304 (2008); Stefl v. Nicholson, 21?Vet. App.?120, 123 (2007). The VA examiners failed to address the Veteran's lay statements and contentions, namely, that her neck pain was due to activity arising from active service. Additionally, the examiners seem to rely solely on the lack of diagnoses during active service in rendering the opinions. See Dalton v. Nicholson,?21?Vet. App.?23?(2007). The October 2023, February 2024, and August 2024 opinions are therefore afforded no probative weight. 

As there exists no adequate medical opinion of record to decide the claim, remand is required to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error and obtain a VA addendum opinion on the nature and etiology of the Veteran's claimed bilateral hearing loss.

2. Back Disorder

The Veteran asserts entitlement to IVDS, originally claimed as "back condition," stating that her back injury occurred simultaneous to her knee injury during her first year of service. See Full Developed Claim, VA Form 21-526EZ, August 2023. 

Turning to the pertinent evidence, in October 2023 the Veteran received a VA examination for the thoracolumbar spine. The Veteran reported that while carrying ruck sacks and doing training, she developed mid-lower back pain around 2010 which has worsened since onset. The Veteran stated she experienced flare-ups 1-2 times weekly, for 1-2 days with increased pain and increased range of motion to back with moderate severity that could only be alleviated with rest and medication. Considering the symptoms, the examiner diagnosed the Veteran with IVDS and lumbar radiculopathy since 2021.

The October 2023 examiner opined that the claimed condition was less likely than not incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness. The examiner stated that after a thorough search of the medical records, no documentation found to support current back condition was sustained as a result of injury or activity that occurred in service. Therefore, based on reviewing the Veteran's available VA e-folder medical records and current evaluation, the examiner opined that the Veteran's condition is less likely than not incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness. 

Based on the evidence, the Board finds the October 2023 examination regarding the thoracolumbar spine, inadequate to decide the claim. The October 2023 examiner seems to rely solely on the lack of diagnoses during active service in rendering the opinions. See Dalton v. Nicholson,?21?Vet. App.?23?(2007). Moreover, the examiner did not provide an adequate supporting rationale for the conclusions reached, which is also contrary to the evidence of record. See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake,?22?Vet. App.?295, 304 (2008); Stefl v. Nicholson, 21?Vet. App.?120, 123 (2007). The VA examiners failed to address the Veteran's lay statements and contentions, namely, that her back pain arose from activity during active service and occurred simultaneous to other injuries. This opinion is therefore insufficient to decide the appeal and is afforded no probative weight. 

Thus, as there exists no adequate medical opinion of record to decide the claim, remand is required to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error and obtain a VA addendum opinion on the nature and etiology of the Veteran's claimed bilateral hearing loss. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination with an appropriate medical examiner and obtain an etiology opinion to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's claimed neck disorder. The need for physical examination or telehealth evaluation is left to the discretion of the medical professional offering the medical opinion. The record must be made available to the examiner for review, and the examiner should indicate that the record was reviewed in connection with the examination. All indicated tests and studies should be accomplished and the findings then reported in detail.

The examiner should respond to the following question:

Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that any currently present neck disorder had its onset during the Veteran's active service, or is otherwise etiologically related to such service? The examiner must consider the Veteran's lay statements regarding the onset and continuity of his symptoms.

A rationale should be provided for all opinions offered. 

The medical opinion must support the conclusions reached with an analysis that is adequate to consider and weigh against other evidence of record; medical opinions must contain not only clear conclusions with supporting data, but also a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two. If an opinion cannot be expressed without resort to speculation, ensure that the clinician so indicates and discusses why an opinion is not possible, to include whether there is additional evidence that could enable an opinion to be provided, or whether the inability to provide the opinion is based on the limits of medical knowledge.

2. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination with an appropriate medical examiner and obtain an etiology opinion to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's claimed back disorder. The need for physical examination or telehealth evaluation is left to the discretion of the medical professional offering the medical opinion. The record must be made available to the examiner for review, and the examiner should indicate that the record was reviewed in connection with the examination. All indicated tests and studies should be accomplished and the findings then reported in detail.

The examiner should respond to the following question:

Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that any currently present back disorder had its onset during the Veteran's active service, or is otherwise etiologically related to such service? The examiner must consider the Veteran's lay statements regarding the onset and continuity of his symptoms.

A rationale should be provided for all opinions offered. 

The medical opinion must support the conclusions reached with an analysis that is adequate to consider and weigh against other evidence of record; medical opinions must contain not only clear conclusions with supporting data, but also a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two. If an opinion cannot be expressed without resort to speculation, ensure that the clinician so indicates and discusses why an opinion is not possible, to include whether there is additional evidence that could enable an opinion to be provided, or whether the inability to provide the opinion is based on the limits of medical knowledge.

 

Mariah N. Sim

Acting Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Mary E. Carter, Associate Attorney

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.