Citation Nr: A25034855
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 240402-440016
DATE: April 15, 2025

ORDER

Service connection for an abdominal pain disability, to include as secondary to a claimed left foot disability, is denied.

Service connection for a back disability, to include as secondary to service-connected left foot disability, is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The probative medical evidence reflects that the Veteran's claimed abdominal pain disability is not etiologically linked to service.

2. The probative medical evidence reflects that the Veteran's claimed abdominal pain disability is not caused by, nor aggravated beyond its natural progression, by his service-connected left foot disability.

3. The probative medical evidence reflects that the Veteran's claimed back disability is not etiologically linked to military service.

 4. The probative medical evidence reflects that the Veteran's claimed back disability is not caused by, nor aggravated beyond its natural progression by his service-connected left foot disability.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for service connection for an abdominal pain disability, to include as secondary to service-connected left foot disability, have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.304, 3.310.

2. The criteria for service connection for a back disability, to include as secondary to service-connected left foot disability, have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.304, 3.310.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from April 1980 to June 1980.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal of March 2024 Supplemental Statement of the Case (SSOC) issued by the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ). In the April 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran opted into the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA) and elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2024 SSOC. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted after the AOJ issued the March 2024 SSOC, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Upon review of the post-remand development, the Board finds that the AOJ substantially complied with the Board May 2023 remand directives by affording the Veteran VA examinations for the claimed disabilities, ultimately granting service connection for a left foot disability; thus, the Board will proceed to adjudicate the remaining claims on the merits. Stegall v. West, 11 Vet. App. 268, 271 (1998).

Legal Authority Service Connection

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.

The three-element test for service connection requires evidence of: (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166-67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

Service connection may also be established on a secondary basis for a disability which is proximately due to, or the result of, a service-connected disability. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a). Secondary service connection may also be established for a disorder which is aggravated by a service-connected disability; compensation may be provided for the degree of disability (but only that degree) over and above the degree of disability existing prior to the aggravation. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(b); Allen v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 374 (1995).

Service connection may be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).

In order to prevail in a secondary service connection claim, the record must show: (1) evidence of a current disability; (2) evidence of a service-connected disability; and (3) medical nexus evidence establishing a connection between the service-connected disability and the current disability. See Wallin v. West, 11 Vet. App. 509, 512 (1998); see also Allen, 8 Vet. App. at 374.

In determining whether service connection is warranted for a disability, VA is responsible for determining whether the evidence supports the claim or is in relative equipoise, with the claimant prevailing in either event. See 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

Entitlement to service connection for an abdominal pain disability, to include as secondary to a claimed left foot disability is denied.

The Board remanded these claims in May 2023 as intertwined with an underlying service connection claim for a left foot disability. The Veteran's left foot disability has since been service-connected on a secondary basis, as having clearly and unmistakably pre-existed service but been aggravated beyond its natural progression by service. The Veteran contends generally that he experiences abdominal pain that is caused by his now service-connected left foot disability.

In complying with the May 2023 Board remand directives, the Veteran was afforded a compensation and pension (C&P) examination in February 2024. During the in-person examination, the VA examiner determined that the Veteran had an extensive history of alcohol abuse which in turn caused stomach ulcers and abnormal liver function. The examiner opined that it is less likely than not that the Veteran's abdominal pain is proximately due to or the result of his service-connected left foot disability. As rationale the examiner explained that abdominal pain is not caused by a gunshot wound to the foot. 

The examiner also opined that it is less likely than not that claimed condition was aggravated beyond its natural progression by the Veteran's service-connected condition. As rationale, the examiner explained that the two conditions are not related and that there is no evidence to support that his foot injury causes stomach pain.

In March 2024, the Veteran's file was sent to another examiner for review and opinion based on the Veteran's contention that during the 2-months he was on active duty he was diagnosed with a digestive condition. The Board notes that service treatment records (STRs) are silent for any such complaint, diagnosis, or treatment. The examiner opined that the claimed condition was less likely than not incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness. The examiner explained that the Veteran has no diagnosis of any abdominal pain disability, hence, chronicity cannot be established.

In this case, the probative medical evidence reflects that the Veteran's claimed abdominal pain is due to alcohol abuse and is not etiologically linked to military service. Additionally, the medical evidence reflects that Veteran's claimed abdominal pain is not caused, nor aggravated beyond natural progression, by his service-connected left foot disability.

Accordingly, service connection for an abdominal pain disability, to include as secondary to service-connected left foot disability, is not warranted. In reaching this decision, the Board has considered the benefit-of-the-doubt rule and finds it not applicable as the evidence is not in approximate balance. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b) (2018); Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc).

Entitlement to service connection for a back disability, to include as secondary to service-connected left foot disability, is denied.

The Veteran also contends that his back disability was directly caused by his active service or otherwise by his service-connected left foot disability.

After an in-person examination in February 2024 the VA examiner determined that the Veteran had degenerative disc disease (DDD), but that the condition is less likely than not proximately due to or the result of the Veteran's service-connected condition. The examiner also opined that it is less likely than not that the condition was aggravated beyond its natural progression by the service-connected condition. As rationale, the examiner explained that there is a lack of a relationship between the Veteran's service-connected left foot disability and the claimed back condition.

The examiner further explained the Veteran was diagnosed with lumbar radiculopathy in 2015 which radiates from the back, through the hip, down to the feet. Thus, the examiner's explanation indicates that the back condition is not caused by or worsened by the service-connected left foot disability, but rather the non-service-connected back condition causes radiculopathy pain which can radiate to the Veteran's left foot.

In March 2024, the Veteran's file was sent to another examiner for review and opinion on the Veteran's contention that the 2-months he was in active service directly caused his back condition. The Board notes that service treatment records (STRs) are silent for any complaints, diagnosis, or treatment for a back condition during service. The examiner opined that the claimed condition was less likely than not incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness. As rationale, the examiner explained that there was no indication in the record to support the Veteran's contention that the condition began during service, or that a nexus to service could be established.

Medical records indicate that the Veteran was diagnosed with DDD in 2015, and spinal stenosis in 2017, over 35-years after separating from service. While this lengthy period of time without complaint, diagnosis, or treatment for a back condition is not dispositive, it does weigh against a finding that the Veteran's back condition had its onset during service and has existed since service. See Maxson v. Gober, 230 F.3d 1330, 1333 (Fed. Cir. 2000). 

In this case, the probative medical evidence reflects that the Veteran's back condition was not caused by, nor aggravated beyond its natural progression by his service-connected left foot disability, nor is the back condition etiologically linked to service.

The Board has considered the Veteran's argument included in his April 2024 VA Form 10182 claiming that he did not receive thorough VA examinations and finds the claim without merit. The February 2024 VA examiner reviewed the claims file and conducted in-person examinations and interviews as to each claimed disability. The examination reports were thoroughly and completely documented on the appropriate VA disability benefits questionnaires (DBQ). The Veteran's responses to questions were noted and the examiner provided a well-articulated and sound explanation for their findings, opinions and conclusions. Thus, the Board finds the February 2024 VA examinations adequate and highly probative.

(Continued on the next page)

?

Accordingly, service connection for a back disability, to include as secondary to service-connected left foot disability, is not warranted. In reaching this decision, the Board has considered the benefit-of-the-doubt rule and finds it not applicable as the evidence is not in approximate balance. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b) (2018); Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc).

 

 

David H. Robertson

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	R. Schulte

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.