Citation Nr: A25034969
Decision Date: 04/16/25	Archive Date: 04/16/25

DOCKET NO. 210811-177558
DATE: April 16, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from May 2013 to November 2013, with additional time in the Army Reserve.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a March 2021 rating decision of a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO). In the August 2021 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Evidence Submission docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2021 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or his representative with, or within 90 days from receipt of, the VA Form 10182. 38 C.F.R. § 20.303.  If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal and prior to the date the Board received the VA Form 10182, or (2) more than 90 days following the date the Board received the VA Form 10182, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.303, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea is remanded.

Under the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), the Board must remand to the AOJ to correct pre-decisional duty to assist errors (including when the AOJ failed to make reasonable efforts to obtain VA treatment records or relevant federal or private treatment records, failed to obtain a VA examination, or provided an             inadequate VA examination or opinion).  38 C.F.R. § 20.802 (a).

The Veteran asserts generally that his current sleep apnea, diagnosed following a sleep study in November 2017, is related to his active service.  For the reasons addressed below, the Board finds that VA failed to obtain an adequate medical opinion regarding the nature and etiology of the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea.  As this constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error, remand is required.

In March 2021, a VA examiner completed a sleep apnea disability benefits questionnaire (DBQ) based upon the Acceptable Clinical Evidence (ACE) review process, including a review of the claims file and an interview with the Veteran.  The VA examiner noted a diagnosis of obstructive sleep apnea in 2017.  The Veteran reported that his condition had onset in 2015 when he was told by his wife he snored and stopped breathing while he slept.  He noted that his condition had improved with the use of an automatic titrating positive airway pressure (autoPAP) machine.  The VA examiner acknowledged that the Veteran's service treatment records documented diagnoses of sinusitis and rhinitis, but opined that the Veteran's sleep apnea was less likely than not incurred in or caused by service.  As a rationale, the examiner stated that sinusitis and rhinitis are not known to cause sleep apnea, after which the examiner went on to explain the mechanics of obstructive sleep apnea, which occurs when the muscles in the back of the throat relax too much to allow normal breathing.

Upon review, the Board finds that the March 2021 VA examiner's opinion is inadequate to adjudicate the Veteran's claim of entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea.  Significantly, the opinion is not supported by a well-reasoned rationale.  Rather, the VA examiner merely stated that sinusitis and rhinitis are not known to cause sleep apnea, without discussing relevant medical literature or studies, or other probative evidence that explains why the conditions are unrelated, especially given the specific facts of the Veteran's medical history.  Next, the examiner merely relayed the physical mechanics of sleep apnea without discussing why the specific facts of the Veteran's case did not show that his diagnosed obstructive sleep apnea was otherwise related to active service.  Finally, the opinion did not consider or discuss relevant evidence, including the Veteran's related history that his sleep apnea began in 2015 when his wife observed related symptoms such as snoring and trouble breathing during sleep, as well as a February 2018 physical profile which documents that the Veteran had experienced pauses in breathing during sleep with an unknown cause or mechanism of injury.  Given the above, the Board finds the March 2021 VA opinion is inadequate and that remand is warranted to obtain an adequate nexus opinion upon remand.

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Provide the claims file to a qualified VA examiner for an addendum opinion regarding the Veteran's claim of entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea. The entire claims file, including a copy of this Remand, must be made available to, and be reviewed by the examiner in conjunction with the requested opinion. Any indicated evaluations, studies, and tests should be conducted. The need for a full, in-person examination is left to the discretion of the examiner.

Following a review of the claims file, the examiner must opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's current sleep apnea is a result of an in-service event, disease, or injury. Please state upon what facts, medical principles and/or medical literature the opinion is based.

For the purposes of the opinion, the examiner should assume the Veteran's statements about his symptoms are credible, unless they are inconsistent with the medical evidence or with medical principles concerning his condition.  The Board emphasizes that this does not constitute a positive credibility determination, as the Board will weigh the evidence once the appeal returns.

If there is a medical basis to support or doubt the history provided by the Veteran, the examiner should provide a fully reasoned explanation.  In doing so, the examiner may identify any discrepancies, inconsistencies, or contradictions contained in the evidence of record, and may state whether or not the Veteran's lay statements are supported by medical or other evidence.  The examiner may not dismiss the Veteran's statements about his symptoms solely because they are not documented in contemporaneous treatment records.

In rendering the requested opinion, the examiner is asked to consider and discuss the relevant lay and medical evidence of record, including the October 2013 service treatment records documenting diagnoses of sinusitis and rhinitis, as well as the Veteran's reported history and objective physical profile from February 2018 of sleep apnea symptoms with onset in at least 2015, including witnessed apneas and snoring. A full rationale must be provided for all medical opinions given. If the examiner is unable to provide an opinion without resorting to mere speculation, he or she should explain why this is so. The examiner shall then explain whether the inability to provide a more definitive opinion is the result of a need for more information and indicate what additional evidence is necessary, or whether he or she has exhausted the limits of current medical knowledge in providing an answer to that question(s).

 

 

D. C. JOHNSON

Acting Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Makarenko, Darya A.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.