Citation Nr: A25034952
Decision Date: 04/16/25	Archive Date: 04/16/25

DOCKET NO. 240813-463733
DATE: April 16, 2025

ORDER

Restoration of a 70 percent rating, effective September 1, 2024, for service-connected posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

The evidence of record at the time of the reduction of the rating assigned to the Veteran's service-connected PTSD, from 70 percent to 50 percent, effective September 1, 2024, did not show actual improvement in his ability to function under the ordinary conditions of life and work.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The reduction from a 70 percent rating to a 50 percent rating, effective September 1, 2024, for service-connected PTSD was not proper; the 70 percent rating is restored.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.105, 3.344, 4.1, 4.2, 4.10, 4.130, Diagnostic Code (DC) 9411.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from November 1986 to November 1990 and November 17, 1990, to May 27, 1991.

By a May 2024 rating decision, the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) reduced the rating assigned to the Veteran's service-connected PTSD, from 70 percent to 50 percent, effective September 1, 2024.  The Veteran submitted a timely August 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request:  Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement NOD)), electing direct review of his claim by a Veterans Law Judge (VLJ) of the VA Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board), as to the propriety of the rating reduction.  

While it has not been one year since the May 2024 rating decision, the Board interprets the Veteran's statements as reflecting an intent to have this matter reviewed in an expeditious manner, which the Board finds to be an implicit waiver of the Veteran's right to change Board dockets under Williams v. McDonough, 37?Vet. App.?305 (2024).

The Board may thus only consider the evidence of record at the time of the May 2024 rating decision on appeal, issued on May 31, 2024.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Despite the fully favorable decision herein, if the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

Whether the reduction of the rating for service-connected PTSD, from 70 percent to 50 percent effective September 1, 2024, was proper.

Here, the 70 percent rating assigned to the Veteran's service-connected PTSD in the November 2022 rating decision was effective July 16, 2021, a period of less than five years, at the time of the rating reduction.  As the rating was in effect for less than five years, the provisions of 38 C.F.R. § 3.344 (a), (b), which provide additional regulatory hurdles to rating reductions, do not apply.  The provisions of 38 C.F.R. § § 3.344 (c) provide that ratings in effect for less than five years can be reduced upon a showing that the disability has improved.

When reduction in the rating of a service-connected disability is contemplated and the lower rating would result in a reduction or discontinuance of compensation payments, the provisions of 38 C.F.R. § 3.105 provide requirements related to affording the Veteran an opportunity to present additional evidence and request to be heard on the matter.  Id.  Here, the reduction did result in a reduction of compensation payments.  By a January 2024 letter, the Veteran was provided a January 2024 rating decision proposing the reduction, setting forth all material facts and reasons, and informing him that a predetermination hearing was available at his request; there is no indication that the Veteran did not receive such notice.  After the prescribed 60-day period, in the May 2024 rating decision on appeal, the rating was indeed reduced.  The Board thus finds that all due process requirements under § 3.105(e) were satisfied.

The Board notes here that the issue is somewhat complicated by the AOJ's initial action in this regard; in an October 2023 rating decision, the AOJ proposed to reduce the rating assigned to service-connected PTSD from 70 percent to 50 percent.  The AOJ provided the Veteran adequate notice of such in October 2023 and the Veteran submitted a December 2023 statement disagreeing with the proposed action.  The AOJ then issued a December 2023 rating decision reducing the rating assigned to the Veteran's service-connected PTSD, from 70 percent to 50 percent, effective March 1, 2024.  However, by another January 2024 rating decision, the rating decision discussed above, the AOJ again proposed to reduce the rating in the same manner; the AOJ issued adequate notice of such in January 2024, discussed above, and as noted, in May 2024, indeed reduced the rating, effective September 1, 2024.  The corresponding May 2024 rating decision codesheet indicates that the Veteran's service-connected PTSD was initially rated 50 percent disabling, effective February 29, 2016, then rated 70 percent disabling, effective July 16, 2021, and then rated 50 percent disabling, effective September 1, 2024; the reduction subject to the December 2023 rating decision was not put into effect and the only relevant rating decision on this issue is the May 2024 rating decision on appeal. 

In any event, as the Board thus finds that the AOJ complied with the procedural safeguards regarding the notice of the proposed rating reductions and the implementation of that reductions, it will now consider the propriety of the same.  A claim stemming from a rating reduction action is a claim for restoration of the prior rating and, typically, does not contemplate a claim for an increased rating. Peyton v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 292 (1991); Dofflemyer v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 277, 280 (1992).

In Brown v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 413 (1993), the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) identified general regulatory requirements which are applicable to all rating reductions, including those which have been in effect for less than five years.  Brown, 5 Vet. App. at 417.  Pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § § 4.1, it is essential, both in the examination and in the evaluation of the disability, that each disability be viewed in relation to its history.  Id. at 420.  Similarly, 38 C.F.R. § 4.2, establishes that "[i]t is the responsibility of the rating specialist to interpret reports of examination in light of the whole record history, reconciling the various reports into a consistent picture so that the current rating may accurately reflect the elements of the disability present."  Id.  The Court has held that these provisions "impose a clear requirement" that rating reductions be based on the entire history of the Veteran's disability.  Id. 

Furthermore, 38 C.F.R. § § 4.13 provides that the rating agency should assure itself that there has been an actual change in the condition, for better or worse, and not merely a difference in the thoroughness of the examination or in use of descriptive terms.  Additionally, in any rating reduction case, not only must it be determined that an improvement in a disability has actually occurred, but that such improvement reflects improvement in ability to function under ordinary conditions of life and work.  See Brown, 5 Vet. App. at 420-421; see also Stern v. McDonough, 34 Vet. App. 51, 56 (2021); see also 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.2, 4.10.  A claim as to whether a rating reduction was proper must be resolved in the Veteran's favor unless VA concludes that a fair preponderance of evidence weighs against the claim.  Brown, 5 Vet. App. at 421.

?

In addressing whether improvement is shown, the comparison point generally is the last examination on which the rating at issue was assigned or continued.  Hohol v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 169 (1992).  Where, however, the rating was continued in order to see if improvement was in fact shown, the comparison point may include prior examinations as well.  Collier v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 247 (1992). Importantly, the reduction of a rating must have been supported by the evidence on file at the time of the reduction, rather than only by post-reduction evidence. However, pertinent post-reduction evidence favorable to restoring the rating must also be considered and may show that the rating reduction was improper. Dofflemeyer v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 277 (1992).

The Veteran bears the burden of presenting and supporting a claim for benefits. 38 U.S.C. § 5107 (a).  A layperson is competent to report on the onset and continuity of observable symptomatology.  See Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 470 (1994) (a Veteran is competent to report on that of which he or she has personal knowledge).  In its evaluation, the Board considers all information and lay and medical evidence of record.  38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b).  When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, the Board gives the benefit of the doubt to the claimant.  Id. 

It appears that the AOJ based their decision to reduce the rating assigned to the Veteran's service-connected PTSD from 70 percent to 50 percent on the results of his August 2023 VA Review PTSD Disability Benefits Questionnaire (DBQ), provided to adjudicate his April 2023 claim of entitlement to an increased rating for service-connected PTSD.  At that time, the examiner found occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks although functioning satisfactorily.  The Veteran reported that he stayed to himself and avoided crowds, limiting his social life to his immediate family, and reported that he had an anxious mood and difficulty recalling recent information.  The Veteran reported a positive relationship with his spouse of many years and his adult children and stepchildren.  He reported that he had been working in water treatment but was helping out at a 

?

venue with maintenance, set-up, and grounds keeping.  He reported VA treatment, every six months, and the use of prescription medication.  His PTSD diagnostic criteria included recurrent, involuntary, intrusive memories, recurrent distressing dreams, dissociative reactions, avoidance of memories, avoidance of cues, markedly diminished interest and participation, feelings of detachment and estrangement, hypervigilance, concentration problems, and sleep disturbance, all found to cause clinically significant distress and impairment.  The Veteran endorsed anxiety, suspiciousness, chronic sleep impairment, disturbances of motivation and mood, and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships.  Mental status examination revealed anxiety.

During his May 2022 VA Review PTSD DBQ, approximately one year prior, the Veteran appears to have presented in the same manner, with a few exceptions.  At that time, the examiner found occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks although functioning satisfactorily.  The Veteran reported a good relationship with his spouse and children and grandchildren, and reported that he had a "couple" of good friends; he denied involvement in social or church groups.  He reported that while he was no longer working due to business constraints related to the COVID-19 virus, he currently helped at the venue at which his spouse was employed, doing maintenance, set-up, and grounds keeping.  He reported the use of prescription medication and denied involvement in outpatient psychotherapy.  He denied experiencing a significantly depressed mood, and reported a tendency toward irritability and social isolation, as well as lowered motivation, sleep difficulty, and anxiety, which easily overwhelmed him and caused fatigue.  His PTSD diagnostic criteria included recurrent, involuntary, intrusive memories, recurrent distressing dreams, dissociative reactions, intense or prolonged distress with cues, marked physiological reactions to cues, avoidance of memories, avoidance of cues, markedly diminished interest and participation, feelings of detachment and estrangement, irritable behavior with angry outbursts,  hypervigilance, concentration problems, and sleep disturbance, all found to cause clinically significant distress and impairment.  He endorsed anxiety, suspiciousness, chronic sleep impairment difficulty in establishing and maintaining 

?

effective work and social relationships, and difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances.  His mental status examination was unremarkable.

Under Diagnostic Code 9411, for service-connected PTSD, as pertinent to the present appeal, a 50 percent rating is warranted where the disorder is manifested by occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to such symptoms as:  flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks (more than once a week); difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short- and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships.  A 70 percent rating requires occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as:  suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a work like setting); and inability to establish and maintain effective relationships. 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, DC 9411.

The difference recorded by the VA examiners, during the May 2022 and the August 2023 DBQs, appears to be only the irritability and difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances, with PTSD diagnostic criteria including intense or prolonged distress with cues, marked physiological reactions to cues in the May 2022 DBQ and the difficulty recalling recent information and anxiety on mental status examination in the August 2023 DBQ.  Significantly, both DBQs showed the same conclusion as to the Veteran's social and occupational functioning, that the Veteran service-connected PTSD was manifested by occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency 

?

and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks although functioning satisfactorily.  Also, significantly, both DBQs showed the same conclusion as to the effect of the Veteran's PTSD diagnostic criteria, that such caused clinically significant distress and impairment.  

In his December 2023 statement disagreeing with the proposed reduction, he asserted that there was no reason to reduce the rating assigned to his service-connected PTSD, that every day is a battle, that he sees his VA treatment provider as scheduled, and that he experiences internal struggles and voices of which his treatment providers are not aware. He asserted that just because he is not having a meltdown during an appointment, that does not mean that his disability has improved.

The AOJ did not appear to adequately consider the paramount issue before the Board, that if an improvement in a disability has actually occurred, whether such improvement reflects improvement in the ability to function under ordinary conditions of life and work.  Brown, 5 Vet. App. at 420-421; Stern, 34 Vet. App. 51, 56; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.2, 4.10.

Thus, despite the lengthy recitation of pertinent laws and regulations, the analysis is quite simple and may be stated briefly.  Here, while during the May 2022 DBQ, the Veteran demonstrated irritability and difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances, symptoms contemplated by DC 9411 for a 70 percent rating, and during his August 2023 DBQ he did not exhibit such, to the extent that such represents improvement in a disability that actually occurred, there is no probative evidence of record that the Veteran experienced improvement in the ability to function under ordinary conditions of life and work.  38 C.F.R. §§ 4.2, 4.10, 4.130, DC 9411; Brown, 5 Vet. App. at 420-421; Stern, 34 Vet. App. 51, 56.  The issue before the Board is not the proper rating warranted, as one could make the argument that without the irritability and difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstance recorded during the May 2022 DBQ, the Veteran's service-connected PTSD does not warrant a 70 percent rating under DC 9411.  38 C.F.R. § 4.130, DC 9411.  Instead, again, the issue before the Board is whether the evidence, reports of 

?

the May 2022 and August 2023 DBQs, is sufficient to demonstrate improvement in the ability to function under ordinary conditions of life and work.  38 C.F.R.         §§ 4.2, 4.10; Brown, 5 Vet. App. at 420-421; Stern, 34 Vet. App. 51, 56.  

In this regard, the Board has considered the Veteran's argument, that his treatment regimen remains, he is prescribed medication to treat his service-connected PTSD and is followed by VA treatment providers; in essence, it appears that he intends to assert that he has not been discharged by VA treatment, that his prescription medication has not been discontinued, and that his presentation during the two instances of VA examination wherein he is not having a meltdown, does not accurately reflect his struggles with PTSD symptoms.   The Board agrees.  The Veteran is competent to report that he has not experienced an improvement in his service-connected PTSD and there is no indication that he is not credible in this regard.  Layno, 6 Vet. App. 465, 470.  The Board cannot conceive of a scenario where the irritability and difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances endorsed during the May 2022 DBQ was not present, or resolved, by the time of the August 2023 DBQ, approximately one year later.  Again, it is most significant that the clinical evidence recorded during the two DBQs at issue demonstrates no change in the examiner's conclusions that the Veteran's service-connected PTSD was manifested by occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks although functioning satisfactorily and caused clinically significant distress and impairment.  

Based on the above, the Board thus finds that there is not sufficient probative evidence to conclude that the Veteran's service-connected PTSD, to the extent that any improvement occurred, resulted in improvement in the ability to function under ordinary conditions of life and work.  38 C.F.R. §§ 4.2, 4.10; Brown, 5 Vet. App. at 420-421; Stern, 34 Vet. App. 51, 56.

?

Accordingly, the reduction from a 70 percent rating to a 50 percent rating, effective September 1, 2024, for the Veteran's service-connected PTSD was not proper. Therefore, the 70 percent rating is restored, effective September 1, 2024.

 

 

P.M. DILORENZO

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Anderson, Megan

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.