Citation Nr: A25034657
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 210604-164205
DATE: April 15, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for hypertension is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for diabetes mellitus, to include as secondary to hypertension, is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for renal failure, to include as secondary to hypertension, is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty with the United States Army from September 1974 to September 1977. 

This appeal is being processed under the modernized review system, commonly referred to as the "AMA," as established by the Veterans Appeals Improvement and Modernization Act of 2017. 115 Pub. L. No. 55, 131 Stat. 1105.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal of a June 2020 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) regional office, an agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ).  

The Veteran appealed in a June 2021 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) and elected the Evidence Submission docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the June 2020 AOJ decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or his representative, within 90 days from receipt of the Notice of Disagreement. 38 C.F.R. § 20.303. If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal and prior to the date the Board received the Notice of Disagreement, or (2) more than 90 days following the date the Board received the Notice of Disagreement, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.303, 20.801. However, because the Board is remanding the claims, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Additionally, the Board notes that the Veteran's June 2021 Notice of Disagreement was submitted by his representative, Robert W. Gillikin II, who was not counsel of record at the time of submission. See January 2022 VA Form 21-22a, Power of Attorney. Accordingly, the Veteran's prior representative, and not Mr. Gillikin, was copied on the Board's AMA notification letter. See June 2021 BVA Letter (copying Virginia Department of Veterans Services). However, as these claims are not being finally adjudicated, but instead are being remanded to the AOJ for additional development, the Veteran is not prejudiced by this. Additionally, as referenced above, any and all arguments and evidence submitted by the Veteran or received by VA since the rating decision on appeal will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claims.

The issue of entitlement to service connection for hypertension.

In the June 2020 rating decision on appeal, the AOJ found that new and relevant evidence had been received and reopened the Veteran's claim for hypertension, ultimately denying the claim. 

The Board adopts the AOJ's favorable finding that the Veteran had current diagnosis of hypertension. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c) (stating that a favorable finding to the claimant made by a VA adjudicator or the Board is generally binding on all subsequent adjudications by the AOJ and the Board).

In a December 2018 VAMC medical opinion, Dr. F.L., M.D., opined that the Veteran's hypertension was more likely than not related to service based on blood pressure readings in service and current medication to control his hypertension. No further rationale was provided. 

In a November 2019 VAMC medical opinion, Dr. F.L., M.D., opined that the Veteran's hypertension was more likely than not related to service based on the Veteran's reports of high blood pressure in service and his current diagnosis of hypertension and prescribed medication. No further rationale was provided.

In a June 2020 private medical opinion from M.P. Urgent Care and Family Practice, Dr. C.M., M.D., opined that the Veteran's hypertension was brought on by high stress in service and stated that the Veteran has had documented hypertension since entering into the military since 1974. No further rationale was provided. 

In an April 2019 VA hypertension examination, the examiner confirmed the Veteran's diagnosis of hypertension and noted the Veteran's contention that his condition onset sometime from 1974 to 1977. The Veteran remarked that he was sent home because of elevated blood pressure for one week, and that he had multiple elevated blood pressure readings during service, but no treatment was ever supplied. In 1975 during deployment to the desert in California, the Veteran reported that his blood pressure was so high they put him on bed rest and a block of ice. 

In the accompanying April 2019 medical opinion, the examiner stated that the Veteran's hypertension was less likely than not (less than 50 percent probability) incurred in or caused by service. As rationale, the examiner stated that Service Treatment Records (STRs) do not support the claim as they show blood pressure readings of 134/80 and 118/84 with no diagnosis of high blood pressure/hypertension. The examiner reviewed Dr. F.L.'s statement but stated that a review of the evidence did not support the doctor's statement regarding a 160/80 blood pressure reading during service. 

The Board finds that the VA examiner's April 2019 medical opinion is inadequate. The examiner failed to consider the Veteran's lay statements in their entirety, specifically, his statements concerning high blood pressure readings, stress, and medication during service. See April 2019 VA hypertension examination; see also March 2010 and June 2015 VA Form 21-4138, Statements in Support of Claim; Dalton v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 23, 39 (2007) (finding that an examiner impermissibly ignored the Veteran's lay assertions). 

Additionally, the April 2019 examiner did not consider the articles submitted by the Veteran or his statements that he was prehypertensive in service and thus should have had his blood pressure checked occasionally. See June 2015 VA Form 21-4138; see also June 2015 Correspondence (articles re prehypertension). Additionally, the Board notes that the VA examination includes a factually inaccurate premise regarding the year the Veteran was diagnosed with hypertension. Medical records indicate that the Veteran was diagnosed with hypertension in February 2009; however, the examiner stated that the Veteran was diagnosed in 2019. See February 2009 Treatment Note, Private Treatment Records (received by VA March 2010). 

Remand by the Board in the AMA is proper for correction of duty to assist errors occurring prior to the date of the AOJ decision on appeal (i.e., pre-decisional duty to assist errors) and (2) AOJ errors in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty, if correction of such error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the appellant's claim. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).  

Here, the AOJ committed a pre-decisional duty to assist error by not ensuring the Veteran was provided an adequate medical opinion and a remand is necessary to correct this error.

The issue of entitlement to service connection for diabetes mellitus, to include as secondary to hypertension.

The issue of entitlement to service connection for renal failure, to include as secondary to hypertension.

The Veteran contends that his diabetes mellitus and renal failure were caused by and are secondary to his hypertension. See June 2021 Notice of Disagreement; see also March 2020 VA Form 20-0995, Supplemental Claim Application. 

In the rating decision on appeal, the AOJ found that new and relevant evidence had not been received and denied the claims for diabetes mellitus and renal failure. Notwithstanding this finding, in the reasons for their decision, the AOJ found for the first time that the Veteran had a current diagnosis of noninsulin dependent diabetes and a current diagnosis of mild renal insufficiency. See June 2020 rating decision. Therefore, by making the favorable findings, in effect, the AOJ found that new and relevant evidence had been received. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c). Accordingly, the Board finds that the AOJ implicitly found that sufficient new and relevant evidence had been received, and the Board will not address the matter again.  

The Board adopts the AOJ's favorable finding that the Veteran had current diagnoses noninsulin dependent diabetes and mild renal insufficiency. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c) (stating that a favorable finding to the claimant made by a VA adjudicator or the Board is generally binding on all subsequent adjudications by the AOJ and the Board). 

Because a decision on the service connection of hypertension could impact a decision on the issue of entitlement to service connection of diabetes mellitus and renal failure, the issues are inextricably intertwined. A remand of the claim for service connection of diabetes mellitus, to include as secondary to hypertension, and renal failure, to include as secondary to hypertension, is required. Harris v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 180 (1991).

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain an addendum opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (a nearly equal probability or greater) that the Veteran's hypertension is causally related to service.  

In rendering the opinion, the examiner should carefully consider and address all lay statements by the Veteran, specifically his statements regarding prehypertension upon entrance on active duty, high blood pressure readings during service, and stress and medication during service which he contends resulted in high blood pressure. See March 2010 and June 2015 VA Form 21-4138, Statements in Support of Claim. The examiner must also address the articles submitted by the Veteran. See June 2015 Correspondence. The examiner should reconcile all evidence with their findings.

(Continued on the next page)

?

2. In providing the requested opinions, consider the Veteran's description of the in-service symptoms as well as post-service symptoms. If there is any medical reason to accept or reject the proposition that the Veteran's reported symptoms in service and thereafter represented the onset of the current disability, this should be noted.  Stated another way, do the Veteran's reports about the symptoms align with how the currently diagnosed disability is known to develop or are the Veteran's reports generally inconsistent with medical knowledge or implausible?

3. The examiner is advised that the Veteran is competent to report his symptoms and history, and that such reports must be acknowledged and considered in formulating the above requested opinion. A clear explanation for all opinions requested herein would be helpful, and a discussion of the facts and medical principles involved would be of considerable assistance to the Board. If the examiner is unable to provide an opinion, they should explain why.

 

 

Marcus N. Fulton

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Cress, L., Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.