Citation Nr: A25034197
Decision Date: 04/14/25	Archive Date: 04/14/25

DOCKET NO. 240708-454102
DATE: April 14, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent for tinnitus with insomnia is denied.

Entitlement to a separate rating of 30 percent for an insomnia disorder is granted. 

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran's service connected tinnitus is assigned a 10 percent rating, which is the maximum rating authorized for tinnitus under Diagnostic Code 6260, for either a unilateral or bilateral condition.  

2. Throughout the period on appeal, the Veteran's an insomnia disorder manifested as occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks, although generally functioning satisfactorily, with normal routine behavior, self-care and conversation.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. There is no legal basis for the assignment of a schedular rating in excess of 10 percent for tinnitus.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.1-4.14, 4.87, Diagnostic Code 6260.  

2. The criteria for a separate 30 percent rating for an insomnia disorder have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.1-4.14, 4.125, 4.126, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9434.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Marine Corps from January 2009 to January 2013.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal on appeal from a July 2023 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO). The rating decision on appeal constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.  

In the July 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the July 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim[s], considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

The Board is cognizant of the recent decision issued by the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) in the case of Williams v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 305 (2024). There, the Court held, in essence, that the Board must refrain from deciding a case until the case proceeds to the point where a docket switch is no longer permitted under the terms of 38 C.F.R. § 20.202(c)(2). In this case, a docket switch is no longer permitted under the terms of 38 C.F.R. § 20.202(c)(2) as it is more than one year from the date that the AOJ mailed notice of the decision on appeal, and it is more than 60 days of the date that the Board received the July 2024 VA Form 10182. Therefore, the Board shall proceed with adjudication.

Increased Rating Criteria

Disability evaluations are determined by evaluating the extent to which a veteran's service-connected disability adversely affects his ability to function under the ordinary conditions of daily life, including employment, by comparing his symptomatology with the criteria set forth in the Schedule for Rating Disabilities (Rating Schedule). 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.10.

Where there is a question as to which of two evaluations shall be applied, the higher rating will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that evaluation. Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7. Reasonable doubt as to the degree of disability will be resolved in the veteran's favor. 38 C.F.R. § 4.3. It is permissible to switch diagnostic codes to reflect more accurately a claimant's current symptoms. See Read v. Shinseki, 651 F. 3d 1296, 1302 (Fed. Cir. 2011).

Where entitlement to compensation has already been established and an increase in the disability rating is at issue, the present level of disability is of primary concern. Although a rating specialist is directed to review the recorded history of a disability in order to make a more accurate evaluation, see 38 C.F.R. § 4.2, the regulations do not give past medical reports precedence over current findings. Francisco v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 55 (1994).

Pertinent regulations do not require that all cases show all findings specified by the Rating Schedule, but that findings sufficiently characteristic to identify the disease and the resulting disability and above all, coordination of rating with impairment of function will be expected in all cases. 38 C.F.R. § 4.21. Therefore, the Board has considered the potential application of various other provisions of the regulations governing VA benefits, whether or not they were raised by the veteran, as well as the entire history of the veteran's disability in reaching its decision. Schafrath v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 589, 595 (1991).

In general, all disabilities, including those arising from a single disease entity, are rated separately, and all disability ratings are then combined in accordance with 38 C.F.R. § 4.25. Pyramiding, the evaluation of the same disability, or the same manifestation of a disability, under different diagnostic codes, is to be avoided when rating a veteran's service-connected disability. 38 C.F.R. § 4.14. It is possible for a veteran to have separate and distinct manifestations from the same injury which would permit rating under several diagnostic codes, however, the critical element in permitting the assignment of several ratings under various diagnostic codes is that none of the symptomatology for any one of the conditions is duplicative or overlapping with the symptomatology of the other condition. See Esteban v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 259, 261-62 (1994).

The basis of disability evaluation is the ability of the body as a whole, or of the psyche, or of a system or organ of the body to function under the ordinary conditions of daily life including employment. 38 C.F.R. § 4.10.

Separate ratings can be assigned for separate periods based on the facts found, a practice known as "staged" ratings. Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119 (1999); Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007). Staged ratings are appropriate whenever the factual findings show distinct periods where the service-connected disability exhibits symptoms that would warrant different ratings. Id.

The veteran is competent to report symptoms and experiences observable by his senses. See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 (Fed. Cir. 2007); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(a).

The Veteran's insomnia is to be rated under the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders (General Rating Formula).  38 C.F.R. § 4.130. 

Psychiatric disabilities are rated based on the General Rating Formula codified in 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, which provides disability ratings are based on a spectrum of symptoms.  "A veteran may qualify for a given disability rating by demonstrating the particular symptoms associated with that percentage, or others of a similar severity, frequency, and duration."  Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 117 (Fed. Cir. 2013).  VA must consider all symptoms of a claimant's condition that affect the level of occupational and social impairment, including, if applicable, those identified in the American Psychiatric Association: Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (4th ed. 1994) (DSM-IV) and (5th ed. 2013) (DSM-5).  See Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436, 442-43 (2002).  VA is to engage in a holistic analysis in which it assesses the severity, frequency, and duration of the signs and symptoms of the Veteran's service-connected mental disorder; quantifies the level of occupational and social impairment caused by those signs and symptoms; and assigns an evaluation that most nearly approximates that level of occupational and social impairment.  Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 10, 22 (2017).

Under the General Formula for Mental Disorders, a 30 percent rating is assigned for occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks (although generally functioning satisfactorily, with routine behavior, self-care, and conversation normal), due to such symptoms as: depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks (weekly or less often), chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss (such as forgetting names, directions, recent events). 38 C.F.R.  § 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9434.

A 50 percent rating is assigned for occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to such symptoms as: flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; or difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, cause occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity. Id.

A 70 percent rating is assigned for occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relationships, judgment, thinking or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a work-like setting); and inability to establish and maintain effective relationships. Id.

A 100 percent rating is assigned for total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent ability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; and memory loss for names of closes relatives, own occupation, or own name.  Id.

In addition, when evaluating a mental disorder, the rating agency shall consider the frequency, severity, and duration of psychiatric symptoms, the lengths of remissions, and the Veteran's capacity for adjustment during periods of remission. 38 C.F.R. § 4.126(a).  The rating agency shall assign an evaluation based on all evidence of record that bears on occupational and social impairment rather than solely on the examiner's assessment of the level of disability at the moment of the examination.  Id.  However, when evaluating the level of disability from a mental disorder, the rating agency will consider the extent of social impairment but shall not assign an evaluation on the basis of social impairment.   

The Board notes that with regard to the use of the phrase "such as" in 38 C.F.R.        § 4.130 (General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders), ratings are assigned according to the manifestations of particular symptoms.  However, the use of the phrase "such as" in 38 C.F.R. § 4.130 demonstrates that the symptoms after that phrase are not intended to constitute an exhaustive list, but rather are to serve only as examples of the type and degree of the symptoms, or their effects, that would justify a particular rating.  Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436 (2002). Accordingly, the evidence considered in determining the level of impairment under 38 C.F.R. § 4.130 is not restricted to the symptoms provided in the Diagnostic Code.  Instead, VA must consider all symptoms of a claimant's condition that affect the level of occupational and social impairment.

The Board acknowledges that psychiatric examinations frequently include assignment of a global assessment of functioning (GAF) score.  The American Psychiatric Association has released the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (5th Ed.) (DSM-5), and 38 C.F.R. § 4.130 has been revised to refer to the DSM-5.  The DSM-5 does not contain information regarding GAF scores.  Effective August 4, 2014, VA amended the portion of its Schedule for Rating Disabilities dealing with mental disorders to remove outdated references to the DSM-IV and replace them with references to the DSM-5.  See 79 Fed. Reg. 45,093, 45,094 (Aug. 4, 2014).  VA adopted as final, without change, the interim final rule and clarified that the provisions of the final rule did not apply to claims that were pending before the Board, this Court, or the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit on August 4, 2014, even if such claims were subsequently remanded to the agency of original jurisdiction.  See 80 Fed. Reg. 14,308 (Mar. 19, 2015).  In Golden v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 221 (2018), the Court held that given that the DSM-5 abandoned the GAF scale, and that VA has formally adopted the DSM-5, the Board errs when it uses GAF scores to assign a psychiatric rating in cases where the DSM-5 applies.  This appeal was certified to the Board after August 2014.  As such, the DSM-5 applies, and the GAF scores will not be considered.

Although the Board has an obligation to provide reasons and bases supporting its decision, there is no obligation to discuss, in detail, the extensive evidence of record. See Gonzales v. West, 218 F.3d 1378, 1380-81 (Fed. Cir. 2000) (holding that the Board must review the entire record but does not have to discuss each piece of evidence). Therefore, the Board will summarize the relevant evidence where appropriate, and the Board's analysis will focus specifically on what the evidence shows, or fails to show, as it relates to the Veteran's claim.

When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, VA shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc).

1. Entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent for tinnitus with insomnia is denied. 

2.  Entitlement to a separate rating of 30 percent for an insomnia disorder is granted. 

The Veteran contends that a higher rating for tinnitus with insomnia, to include a separate rating for insomnia associated with his service connected tinnitus, is warranted.  See August 2023 Statement in Support of Claim (VA Form 21-4138).  Significantly, the Veteran states that it takes him a long time to fall asleep, he does not get enough sleep and he is sleepy through the day which causes him to be tired and easily angered.

The Veteran's tinnitus with insomnia is currently rated as 10 percent disabling under Diagnostic Code 6260. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.87. Under Diagnostic Code 6260, a single 10 percent rating is warranted for tinnitus, regardless of whether it is unilateral r bilateral, or whether it is constant versus recurrent. 38 C.F.R. § 4.87. The Veteran is in receipt of the maximum schedular rating for tinnitus.

With regards to the Veteran's argument that a separate rating is warranted for his insomnia as the functional impairments are distinct from his tinnitus, the Board finds that a separate 30 percent rating is warranted.

Turning to the evidence, during a May 2023 Insomnia Severity Index, the Veteran reported that his difficulty to fall asleep was very severe, that his difficulty staying asleep was severe, and that his problem waking up early was severe. The Veteran reported that it was very noticeable that his sleep problem was impairing the quality of his life. He reported that he was somewhat distressed about his current sleep problem. The Veteran noted that his sleep problem very much interfered with his daily functioning. The Veteran was rated with severe clinical insomnia. 

A June 2023 VA examiner diagnosed the Veteran with insomnia disorder. The examiner noted that the Veteran reported symptoms of anxiety, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss and disturbances of motivation and mood. The  examiner noted that the Veteran reported that he got married in 2018, that he had two children and another child from a previous relationship, that he separated from his wife in 2019 and that he currently residing with his parents and his children visiting him when he has them. The examiner noted that the Veteran stated that he has friends at work whom he socializes with while he is working; however, he does not socialize much outside of work and that he worked as a police officer. The examiner noted that the Veteran reported that he has difficulty completing work responsibilities due to drowsiness, fatigue, difficulty remembering things, leaving work early or going into work late. The examiner noted that the Veteran reported he takes time off from his compensatory time earned from working overtime because of his condition, that his supervisor is lenient with his time off and he has not gotten into trouble and that he uses sticky notes and a notebook to write everything down so he can remember things. The examiner noted that the Veteran reported that he takes either melatonin, Benadryl, or Z-Quil to daily assist with his sleep and that he began having difficulty sleeping after bootcamp, which worsened with loud noises and his current tinnitus. The examiner noted that the Veteran reported that he has difficulty falling asleep and staying asleep even with sound machines and fans,  that he has difficulty waking up too early, that he gets sleep paralysis and getting anxious about waking with sleep paralysis and that he does not go out and socialize with others due to his fatigue. 

The April 2023 VA examiner found that the Veteran presented as alert and oriented, that his mood was euthymic, that his affect congruent and that his thought process was logical and goal oriented. The examiner found that the Veteran had no apparent delusions, audiological hallucinations or visual hallucinations and noted that the Veteran denied suicidal or homicidal ideation. The examiner found that the Veteran is capable of managing his own finances and that the Veteran had occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks, although generally functioning satisfactorily, with normal routine behavior, self-care and conversation.

During a June 2023 STOP- Bang Questionnaire for obstructive sleep apnea, the Veteran reported that he often feels tired, fatigued or sleepy during the day. 

Further review of the record shows that the Veteran receives treatment at the VA Medical Center for various disabilities.  However, there is no indication from the treatment notes of record that the Veteran has reported symptoms that are worse than those noted in the VA examination reports of record.  

Based on the foregoing, the Board finds that a separate rating of 30 percent, but no higher, is warranted for an insomnia disorder as occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks due to such symptoms was shown.  The Veteran reported anxiety, disturbances of motivation and mood, chronic sleep impairment. Although the Veteran was married and had children, difficulty in establishing relationship was shown as the Veteran reported being separated from his wife after a year. However, he was still able to maintain relationships as he has joint custody of his children and lives with his parents. The Veteran further stated that he could not socialize outside of work because of his fatigue. Despite the Veteran's sleep impairments, the June 2023 VA examiner noted that the Veteran's thought process was logical and goal oriented. The Veteran reported mild memory loss, but noted that he used sticky notes and a notebook to help him remember. He also reported that although he leaves work early and comes in late, he still comes into work and is able to perform overtime work, which allows him to use his leave when he needs to. Therefore, a rating of 30 percent for insomnia is warranted. 

The Board further finds that a higher 50 percent rating for an insomnia disorder is not warranted during the appeal period as occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity was not shown.  Although the Veteran reported anxiety, sleep paralysis, and mild memory loss, the Veteran did not report panic attacks, difficulty in understanding complex commands, impaired judgment, impaired abstract thinking, and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships. The Veteran reported that he did not socialize outside of work because of fatigue, but also noted that he did have friends at work.  Further, although the Veteran reported disturbances of motivation and mood, the Veteran reported still being able to maintain his career as a police officer. In the June 2023 VA examination the examiner found that the Veteran's mood was euthymic, that his affect congruent and that his thought process logical and goal oriented. Further, the record did not show homicidal or suicidal ideations, and no audio or visual hallucinations were reported. Therefore, a rating of 50 percent for insomnia is not warranted.

In addition, a 70 percent rating for an insomnia disorder is not warranted during the appeal period as occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas was not shown. Impairment to mood was shown as the Veteran reported anxiety and some impairment to family relations was shown as the Veteran reported being separated from his wife. However, the Veteran also reported that he resided with his parents and visited with his children. Impairment to thinking was not shown in the record as there was no evidence or allegation of visual hallucinations, auditory hallucinations, delusions or perceptual disorders. Moreover, the June 2023 VA examiner found the Veteran's thought processes to be logical and goal oriented. Impairment to judgment was not shown in the record or alleged by the Veteran. The Veteran reported being employed as a police officer during the appeal period, that his supervisor is lenient and that he has not gotten into trouble for taking time off; there is otherwise no evidence or allegation of impairment to work. Schooling was not attempted during the appeal period. The Veteran has not alleged, and the record does not establish, suicidal ideation, obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities, speech that was intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant, near-continuous panic or depression affecting ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively, impaired impulse control, spatial disorientation, neglect of personal appearance and hygiene, difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances and inability to establish and maintain effective relationships. Therefore, a 70 percent rating for an insomnia disorder is not warranted.

Finally, the Board finds that a 100 percent rating for an insomnia disorder is not warranted as total social and occupational impairment was not shown. The Veteran reported that he worked a police officer and that his supervisor was lenient about time off; as such, total occupational impairment was not shown. Total social impairment was not shown as the Veteran reported living with his parents and visiting with his children. In this case, the Veteran's symptoms have not been shown to be so severe that he has both total occupational and total social impairment. "Total" is defined as "whole, not divided; full; complete," and "utter, absolute." Black's Law Dictionary, 1498 (7th ed. 1999). The Veteran has been able to maintain some personal relationships, specifically with his parents and children. Although the Veteran reported some memory impairments and that he used post it notes to assist with his memory, there is no evidence or allegation of memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name. The Veteran has not alleged, and the evidence does not establish, gross impairment in thought processes or communication, persistent delusions or hallucinations, grossly inappropriate behavior, a persistent danger of hurting self or others, an intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living and disorientation to time or place. Therefore, a 100 percent rating of for an insomnia disorder is not warranted.

In making its determination in this case, the Board acknowledges the Veteran's belief that his symptoms are more severe than the current rating reflects. While the Board recognizes that the Veteran is competent to provide statements regarding his observable symptomatology, he is not competent to provide an opinion regarding the severity of his symptomatology in accordance with the rating criteria. See Woehlaert v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 456 (2007) (although the claimant is competent in certain situations to provide a diagnosis of a simple condition such as a broken leg or varicose veins, the claimant is not competent to provide evidence as to more complex medical questions). Moreover, there is no evidence or suggestion that he underwent medical training. Rather, the Board finds the medical evidence in which professionals with medical expertise examined the Veteran, acknowledged his reported symptoms, and described the manifestations of such disability considering the rating criteria to be more persuasive than the Veteran's reports regarding the severity of his condition. Therefore, his law statements are of low probative weight.

The Board notes that staged ratings under Hart v. Mansfield, supra are not appropriate for his insomnia disorder.  The Veteran's symptomatology has been stable through the periods on appeal. Further, neither the Veteran nor his representative has raised any other issues, nor have any other issues been reasonably raised by the record.  See Doucette v. Shulkin, 28 Vet. App. 366 (2017) (confirming that the Board is not required to address issues unless they are specifically raised by the claimant or reasonably raised by the evidence of record).

Additionally, the Board has considered whether an inferred claim for a total disability based upon individual unemployability (TDIU) has been raised pursuant to Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447 (2009). However, the Veteran reported in the June 2023 DBQ for mental disorders, that he is currently working as a police officer. There is no evidence or allegation that the Veteran is unable to obtain and maintain gainful employment due to his service connected tinnitus and/or insomnia disorder. As such, the Board finds that a claim for a TDIU is not raised in connection with the instant appeal. See Rice v. Shinseki, supra.

The Board has also considered whether extraschedular consideration is warranted. While the Board cannot assign an extraschedular rating for a disability in the first instance, it can adjudicate whether to refer a case to the VA Director of Compensation Services for an extraschedular evaluation when the issue is either raised by the claimant or is reasonably raised by the record. See Thun v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 111, 115 (2008); Barringer v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 242 (2008).

In determining whether referral for consideration of an extraschedular rating is warranted, the Board must first consider whether there is an exceptional or unusual disability picture, which occurs where the rating criteria do not reasonably describe or contemplate the severity and symptomatology of a veteran's service-connected disability. Thun, 22 Vet. App. at 115. If there is an exceptional or unusual disability picture, the Board must next consider whether the disability picture exhibits other factors such as marked interference with employment and frequent periods of hospitalization. Id. at 115-16. When these two elements are met, the appeal must be referred for an extraschedular evaluation.

The Board has compared the level of severity and symptomatology of the Veteran's service-connected tinnitus with insomnia with the established criteria found in the rating schedule. The Veteran has not reported any symptomatology that is not contemplated by the rating schedule. During the January 2023 VA examination, the Veteran indicated that he constantly hears a high pitch ringing sound.  In this case, the Veteran has not identified any symptoms that fall outside the schedular criteria, as they contemplate the functional impairment that resulted from the Veteran's tinnitus. Furthermore, the rating criteria specifically contemplates ringing in the ears, which one would expect to be bothersome. Doucette v. Shulkin, 28 Vet. App. 366 (2017).

As the schedular criteria contemplate ringing in the ears and there are no other symptoms not contemplated by the rating criteria for tinnitus, referral for consideration of the assignment of a disability evaluation on an extraschedular basis is not warranted. See Long v. Wilkie, 33 Vet. App. 167, 173 (2020); Thun v. Peake, supra.

In making its determination in this case, the Board acknowledges the Veteran's belief that his tinnitus symptoms are more severe than the current rating reflects. While the Board recognizes that the Veteran is competent to provide statements regarding his observable symptomatology, he is not competent to provide an opinion regarding the severity of his symptomatology in accordance with the rating criteria. See Woehlaert v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 456 (2007) (although the claimant is competent in certain situations to provide a diagnosis of a simple condition such as a broken leg or varicose veins, the claimant is not competent to provide evidence as to more complex medical questions).  Rather, the Board finds the medical evidence in which professionals with medical expertise examined the Veteran, acknowledged his reported symptoms, and described the manifestations of such disability considering the rating criteria to be more persuasive than the Veteran's reports regarding the severity of his condition.

Based on the foregoing, the Board finds that a rating in excess of 10 percent for tinnitus with insomnia is not warranted. To that extent, he appeal is denied. The Board also finds that a separate 30 percent rating for an insomnia disorder is warranted. To that extent, the appeal is granted. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R.                  § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, supra.

 

 

KRISTY L. ZADORA

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	B. Adeyemi, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.