Citation Nr: A25034468
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 240829-473611
DATE: April 15, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral hearing loss is denied.

FINDING OF FACT

The evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran's bilateral hearing loss began during active service or is otherwise related to an in-service injury or disease.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to service connection for bilateral hearing loss have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from April 1965 to April 1968.

A March 2018 rating decision denying entitlement to service connection for bilateral hearing loss was issued.  Thereafter, the Veteran submitted a February 2024 VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, and that claim was denied in an April 2024 rating decision.  The Veteran timely filed a May 2024 VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, and that claim has been processed under the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA).

The AOJ issued the August 2024 supplemental claim decision on appeal, which found that new and relevant evidence had been received and denied the claim based on the evidence of record at the time of that decision.  See 38?U.S.C. §?5104A; 38?C.F.R. §?3.104(c).

In the August 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Hearing docket.  The Veteran testified before the undersigned Veterans Law Judge (VLJ) at a December 2024 Board Hearing.  The claims file contains a transcript of the hearing. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the August 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) supplemental claim decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted within 90 days of the hearing. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Since no evidence was added to the file after the AOJ issued the supplemental claim decision on appeal, but prior to the Board hearing, or more than 90 days after the hearing, there is no evidence in the file that the Board cannot consider. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

The Veteran contends that he has bilateral hearing loss that is due to noise exposure during his active service.  See, e.g., December 2024 Board Hearing Tr. at 3; May 2024 VA Form 21-4138; May 2024 VA Form 21-10210 ("His hearing has been degrading for the past 12 years and I firmly believe that it is due to the early noise exposure he subjected himself to while in the service as a young man, without adequate hearing protection.").

Service connection may be granted for disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303. The three-element test for service connection requires evidence of: (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166 -67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

The question for the Board is whether the Veteran has a current disability that began during service or is at least as likely as not related to an in-service injury, event, or disease.

The Board concludes that, while the Veteran has a current diagnosis of bilateral hearing loss, and evidence shows that the Veteran had in-service acoustic trauma, the evidence of record persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran's diagnosis of bilateral hearing loss began during service or is otherwise related to an in-service injury, event, or disease. 

First, it is conceded the Veteran was exposed to acoustic trauma during service. His military occupational specialty (MOS) was a carpenter.  VA prepared a memorandum of the toxic exposure risk activities (TERAs) he would have had during service, which, in addition to noise, included exposures to industrial solvents, fuels, PCB's (Polychlorinated biphenyl used as coolant and insulating fluid), vibration, and CARC Paint (Chemical Agent Resistant Coating (CARC) used on military vehicles to resist corrosion and chemical agents). Certain chemicals are ototoxic, which means they can cause damage to the ear. This damage can lead to tinnitus, hearing loss and balance problems. 

Available VA and private treatment records show the Veteran was not diagnosed with bilateral hearing loss until July 2006, see July 2006 Private Audiological Record, decades after separation from service. The Veteran reports having experienced symptoms of reduced auditory acuity with onset at least 15 years after discharge from active service.  See February 2018 VA Examination (noting Veteran's report of "a 20 year onset of hearing loss'); July 2024 VA Examination (documenting the Veteran's report of hearing loss onset in the "early 1980s").

While the Veteran is competent to report having experienced symptoms of reduced auditory acuity with post-service onset, the Veteran is not competent to provide a diagnosis in this case or determine that these symptoms were manifestations of bilateral hearing loss that is etiologically related to acoustic trauma during his active service. The issue is medically complex, as it requires knowledge of the possible causes and diagnostic criteria for subjective loss of hearing acuity as well as the ability to interpret complicated diagnostic medical testing. Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377, 1377 n.4 (Fed. Cir. 2007). 

Further, the February 2018 VA examiner opined that the Veteran's bilateral hearing loss is not at least as likely as not related to an in-service injury, event, or disease, including conceded acoustic trauma during his active service. The rationale was that there was no threshold shift during active service and the Veteran denied any hearing loss or ear, nose, or throat problems at separation.  The examiner's opinion is probative, because it is based on an accurate medical history and provides an explanation that contains clear conclusions and supporting data. Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008).

The February 2024 VA examiner also provided a negative opinion regarding whether the Veteran's hearing loss is related to noise exposure during his active service.  The examiner's rationale was that the Veteran had normal hearing during service and there were no threshold shifts.  The examiner did not cite any scientific or medical information and gave no indication of an alternative etiology for the Veteran's hearing loss.  The Board finds the rationale is inadequate and not entitled to any probative weight.  Nieves-Rodriguez, 22 Vet. App. at 304.

The February 2024 VA examiner provided an April 2024 VA examiner's addendum opinion addressing whether the Veteran's hearing loss was related to TERA.  The opinion is not clearly stated and provides no comprehensible rationale.  Therefore, the opinion is entitled to no probative value.  Nieves-Rodriguez, 22 Vet. App. at 304.

The July 2024 VA examiner opined that the Veteran's bilateral hearing loss is not at least as likely as not related to an in-service injury, event, or disease, including conceded acoustic trauma during his active service. The rationale was that the service treatment records and separation examination are silent for hearing loss, and the Veteran reported post-separation onset of hearing decrease after exposure to recreational and/or occupational noise.  The examiner noted that noise exposure is conceded and that "the relationship between noise, auditory damage, and hearing loss is well documented, auditory damage and hearing loss are not conceded based on noise alone."  The examiner opined that there was no evidence to support concluding that the Veteran's hearing loss is related to military noise exposure and not another etiology.  The examiner's opinion is probative, because it is based on an accurate medical history and provides an explanation that contains clear conclusions and supporting data. Nieves-Rodriguez, 22 Vet. App. at 304.

A July 2024 VA examiner's opinion concluded that the Veteran's hearing loss was not caused by the Veteran's toxic risk exposure activities (TERAs), to include after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran.  The examiner noted the Veteran's conceded and potential exposures and discussed relevant scientific and medical literature.  The examiner further noted that the Veteran's primary risk factor for bilateral hearing loss is age.  The examiner opined that there "is not medical or scientific evidence available that provides any indication of a relationship between the development the [hearing loss] and the TERA."  The examiner further noted that the Institute of Medicine (IOM) has stated that there is insufficient scientific basis to conclude that permanent hearing loss directly attributed to noise exposure will develop long after noise exposure.  The IOM concluded that a prolonged delay in the onset of noise-induced hearing loss was "unlikely."  The examiner opined that there was no evidence on which to conclude that the Veteran's hearing loss was caused by or a result of the Veteran's military service, including noise exposure.  The examiner noted that there are risk factors outside of military service, such as age consistent with the Veteran's hearing loss, that outweigh the factors identified in TERA.  The examiner's opinion is probative, because it is based on an accurate medical history and provides an explanation that contains clear conclusions and supporting data. Nieves-Rodriguez, 22 Vet. App. at 304.

The Veteran submitted a January 2025 Private Opinion Letter during an applicable evidentiary window which concluded that the Veteran's hearing loss was more likely than not related to an injury, disease, or event occurring during the Veteran's military service.  The examiner noted types of in-service noise exposure and concluded: "Hearing loss pattern consistent with noise-induced hearing loss."  The examiner's opinion is probative, because it is based on an accurate medical history and provides a minimal explanation with some supporting data. Nieves-Rodriguez, 22 Vet. App. at 304.

Given there are conflicting opinions, including opinions by VA examiners that weigh against the claim and an opinion by a private audiologist in favor of the claim, the question is whether the evidence is in relative equipoise or, instead, is persuasively against the claim.  This requires a comparison of the probative value of the various opinions.

The July 2024 VA examiner who provided an opinion regarding the etiology of the Veteran's hearing loss in the context of both TERA and in-service noise exposures included an extensive and detailed rationale which relied on relevant medical and scientific literature.  The Board finds that the July 2024 VA examiner's opinion warrants the greatest probative weight of all of the opinions.  The opinion of the VA examiner who conducted the July 2024 VA audiological examination discussed the relevant facts, including post-separation onset, the lack of an in-service threshold shift, and post-service noise exposure, which is entitled to significant probative weight against the claim.  The February 2018 VA examiner's opinion has a limited rationale, but the rationale is more limited and relies primarily on the lack of in-service hearing loss and some post-service noise exposure, so the Board assigns the opinion limited probative weight.  Finally, the January 2025 private audiologist provided no rationale beyond the fact the Veteran had in-service noise exposure and his hearing loss was consistent with noise-induced hearing loss.  The private audiologist did not engage with either the scientific or medical literature cited and discussed by the VA examiners or the articles referenced by the Veteran's representatives in the May 2024 VA Form 21-4138.  The private audiologist did not discuss the Veteran's age or his post-service exposure to noise, which the VA opinions identify as other risk factors.  The private audiologist also did not discuss the lack of a threshold shift during service.  Because the private audiologist did not provide a rationale for her opinion that engaged with the basis for other examiners opinions and that failed to discuss any relevant scientific or medical literature, the Board finds the opinion is entitled to minimal probative value compared to the two July 2024 VA examiners' opinions.  See Nieves-Rodriguez, 22 Vet. App. at 304 (holding that a medical opinion obtains probative weight from "factually accurate, fully articulated, sound reasoning for the conclusion").

The July 2024 VA examiners' opinions persuasively outweigh the sole favorable opinion of the 2025 private audiologist.

In reaching this conclusion, the Board notes that the Veteran has contended that he used hearing protection during his post-service carpentry work and otherwise did not have noise exposure comparable to his in-service noise exposure.  See December 2024 Board Hearing Tr. at 3, 6-7 (stating he used ear plugs and later ear muff-like hearing protection while performing carpentry work post-service).  The VA examiners documented the Veteran's statements to them at the time of the examinations (and had available prior statements in the record) with the opportunity to ask questions to obtain clinically relevant descriptions.  The February 2018 and July 2024 VA examiners indicated that the Veteran reported to them that he had some post-service noise exposure.  The Veteran has not provided any competent evidence indicating or any argument regarding why the February 2018 or July 2024 VA examiners' conclusions based on the Veteran's descriptions of post-service noise exposure given at the examinations are undermined by his later Board hearing testimony.  

The Veteran has questioned the adequacy of the February 2024 VA examination.  See May 2024 VA Form 21-10210 (Veteran's statement); May 2024 VA Form 21-10210 (spouse's statement).  As noted above, the Board has assigned the February 2024 VA examiner's opinion no probative value for or against the claim.  And, in fact, VA scheduled an updated July 2024 VA examination and obtained updated opinions.  The Veteran has not challenged the adequacy of the July 2024 VA examination or opinions based thereon. He argues that he did not undergo any hearing testing at separation from service. However, that is not the sole basis for the VA negative opinions.

The Board also acknowledges the Veteran's submission of argument based on medical/scientific literature supporting the conclusion that noise exposure can result in hearing loss many years later.  See May 2024 VA Form 21-4138.  However, information contained within treatises is generally too abstract to prove the nexus element of a service-connection claim, although it is possible that a treatise might "discuss generic relationships with a degree of certainty" that would allow a finding of "plausible causality based upon objective facts."  See Sacks v. West, 11 Vet. App. 314, 316-17 (1998).  Here, no competent witness has applied the principles set forth in the cited articles to the facts of this case.  The January 2025 private audiologist did not cite to any literature at all, to include the articles referred to in the May 2024 submission.  The July 2024 VA examiner cited literature that contradicted that contained in the May 2024 submission.  On this record, the Board, the lay Veteran, his lay witness, and his representatives are not competent to conclude that the medical/scientific articles cited by the Veteran's representatives supports his claim.  The current record contains no basis upon which the Board could apply the principles contained in the articles to the facts of this case.

The evidence is not in approximate balance, but is persuasively against the claim, therefore there is not reasonable doubt to be resolved in favor of the Veteran.  38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Ortiz v. Principi, 274 F.3d 1361, 1364 (Fed. Cir. 2001); Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 781-82 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral hearing loss is denied.

 

 

MICHELLE L. KANE

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Hubers, Kerry

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.