Citation Nr: A25034989
Decision Date: 04/16/25	Archive Date: 04/16/25

DOCKET NO. 240716-455160
DATE: April 16, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for right ankle disability is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served in the Navy and Naval Reserves with periods of active duty from September 1985 to December 1985, and April 1987 to May 1990.

This matter comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an December 2023 rating decision issued by a VA Regional Office (RO).  

The Veteran filed an April 2024 VA Form 10182 originally appealing to the Board under the Hearing Review docket lane. Thereafter, in July 2024, the Veteran effectively switched docket lanes by filing a new Notice of Disagreement seeking review of the rating decision under the "Direct Docket" review lane. The docket-switch was effectuated and confirmed in an October 2024 letter from the Board.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the December 2023 AOJ decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

(As an aside, the Board acknowledges that after appealing the matter to the Board, the Veteran attempted to seek a Higher-Level-Review of the identical December 2023 rating decision via a May 2024 VA Form 20-0996 submission.  The agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) correctly noted the HLR could not be processed because of the pending appeal here.)

However, because the Board is remanding the claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

The Board notes that in April 2024, in addition to the issue noted above, Veteran filed a 10182 Notice of Disagreement with an April 2024 rating decision which denied service connection for right foot disability selecting the Hearing Review Docket.  In a July 2024 10182 Notice of Disagreement, he elected the Direct review docket.  As such, this appeal has been docketed separately and will be addressed in a separate Board decision.  This issue is therefore not before the Board in the present appeal and will not be addressed further herein.

Entitlement to Service Connection for Right Ankle Disability is Remanded.

The Board finds a remand is necessary as to the right ankle disability claim to correct a pre-decisional duty-to-assist error.  Namely, the November 2019 and November 2023 examiners failed to provide adequate opinions regarding the etiology of the Veteran's right ankle disability with consideration of all relevant and medical and lay evidence of record and likely relying on incomplete or inaccurate factual premises.

The Veteran's service treatment records reflect that he entered service with a preexisting foot disability.  Specifically, his May 1985 enlistment examination reflects moderate asymptomatic pes planus. Aside from the preexisting condition, his service records further confirm that in June 1987 he was treated for a right ankle/foot sprain with the Veteran favoring his right foot. Specifically, the June 1987 record reflects the Veteran complaining of hurting his right ankle after falling approximately 5 feet off a ladder.  There was no discoloration, edema, crepitus, or deformity at the time and the Veteran was able to put weight on both feet - albeit with pain on his right ankle. Nonetheless, he was instructed to follow-up in one week, and his records are thereafter silent as to any right ankle or foot complaints.  Indeed, in May 1990, the Veteran's exit examination is normal with regard to his feet and lower extremities with the Veteran noting that he is in good health and not taking medications on his May 1990 medical history report.

After service, VA outpatient treatment records confirm the Veteran complained of right ankle pain sporadically in 2018 and 2019, but largely his complaints were around a left ankle fracture which led to some post-service surgery.  In May 2019, relevantly, the Veteran was seen after the surgery to his left ankle, and right ankle x-rays taken at that time did note "fixation in place with progressive fusion across the ankle joint satisfactorily." Right ankle arthropathy status post ankle fusion was noted in a November 2019 notation - although, again, that appears inconsistent with earlier reference to a left ankle fracture. 

Strangely enough, the November 2019 VA examiner opined that the Veteran had no disability as to the right ankle, finding "normal" range of motion and no other significant abnormality. The examining nurse practitioner (NP) opined that the Veteran's right ankle disability was less likely than not (likelihood is less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) incurred in or caused by service.  She reported that the Veteran's service treatment records show a right ankle strain after a fall off a ladder in 1987, but there is no record of right ankle surgery noting that all post-service treatment records reflect left ankle treatment.

November 2021 VA treatment records indicate that the clinician noted changes in the Veteran's gait due to right ankle surgery.

A November 2023 DBQ reflects that the examining NP opined that the Veteran's right ankle disability was less likely than not (likelihood is less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) incurred in or caused by service.  She reported that while there is documentation of an acute right ankle sprain from June 1987 during service, the record is silent for chronicity of an ankle condition.  She stated that there is no objective diagnostic testing and that she is unable to locate clinical documentation in the medical records of a chronic condition, thus a nexus has not been established.  The NP concluded that without chronicity during service or after service, a post-service event, illness, or injury is considered to be a more likely etiology.  She noted a diagnosis of acute right ankle sprain from June 1987 which had resolved, and the Veteran indicated that he has experienced worsening right ankle pain, swelling, and numbness/tingling since onset.  The Veteran reported current symptoms of right ankle pain, numbness and frequent right ankle swelling.  He also indicated that when his right ankle swells up it causes him to walk with a limp.  While the DBQ indicates that the Veteran's right ankle range of motion was abnormal, the NP noted that it was normal for the Veteran's body habitus/age, and that there was no clinical significance.  She indicated that the abnormal range of motion contributes to a functional loss as it limited tasks that require full range of motion.  The NP noted some swelling along the lateral ankle, pain with plantar flexion and dorsiflexion, ankylosis, and indicated that standing for long periods of time increased pain.  The DBQ reflects that the Veteran has not had surgical procedures performed on his right ankle and there was no degenerative or post-traumatic arthritis documented.

The Board finds that the examinations in totality do not reconcile the ambiguities in the record as to whether the Veteran has a current right ankle disability and, if so, whether such ankle disability is attributable to his in-service strain or chronic pain thereafter.  Indeed, given the disparate x-ray findings and notations inconsistently referencing surgery on the left and right ankle, the AOJ should have obtained a clarification opinion, a pre-decisional duty-to-assist error.

It is worth emphasizing that the Veteran is entitled to the presumption of soundness as to the right ankle, as this condition was not noted on his entrance to service.  In contrast, the Veteran's moderate pes planus was noted on his entrance examination and as to that condition, the presumption of soundness does not attach, but only insofar as the specific pes planus condition. See 38 U.S.C. § 1111 (indicating every veteran shall be taken to have been in sound condition when examined, accepted, and enrolled for service, except as to defects, infirmities, or disorders noted at the time of examination).  

The Veteran also has a pending claim seeking service connection for a right foot disability, which may bear significant to the current appeal here.  As such the remand therein is inextricably intertwined with the remand needed here.  The examiner must also comment on whether any found right ankle disability is related to his right foot disabilities, such as the preexisting pes planus.  The examiner did not comment on this relevant factor at all. 

While the Board is remanding this matter at this time to obtain additional VA medical opinion, the Board is mindful of the holding in Smith v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 332 (2020) and the impact of implicit credibility determinations within remand orders.  The Board does not at this time make any determinations regarding the credibility of any evidence currently of record, to include those described in this remand.

The appeal is thus REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination with an appropriate clinician to determine the nature and etiology of any found right ankle disability.  

NOTE: The examiner is advised that "pain" can be a disability for VA purposes if it is manifested by some objective functional impairment.

For each right ankle disability found during the pendency of the appeal, even if resolved at the time of the examination, the clinician must opine whether it is at least as likely as not (at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) related to his noted in-service June 1987 right ankle strain injury, with consideration of the Veteran's reports of continuous symptomatology since onset in service.

The examiner must also consider the Veteran's noted preexisting pes planus on the entrance examination.

To the extent possible, the examiner must clarify whether the Veteran's right ankle has a surgical history (as opposed to the left ankle) addressing the disparate evidence of x-rays noting fusions to both ankles.  

The clinician is advised that the Veteran is competent to report his symptoms and history, and such reports must be specifically acknowledged and considered in formulating any opinions.  If such reports are discounted by the clinician, the clinician must explain why.

The clinician must provide a complete rationale for any opinion expressed, based on the clinician's clinical and medical expertise; established medical principles; and references to the evidence of record, as appropriate.

If any opinion cannot be expressed without resort to speculation, ensure that the clinician so indicates and discusses why an opinion is not possible, to include whether there is additional evidence that could enable an opinion to be provided, or whether the inability to provide the opinion is based on the limits of medical knowledge.

2. After the above development, and any additionally indicated development, has been completed, readjudicate the issue on appeal.

 

 

SHEREEN M. MARCUS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Maddox, Rolen

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.