Citation Nr: A25034271
Decision Date: 04/14/25	Archive Date: 04/14/25

DOCKET NO. 221213-304815
DATE:  April 14, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to a compensable rating for lumbar spine surgical scars is denied.

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 50 percent for post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 20 percent for left shoulder strain with AC joint osteoarthritis (hereafter, "left shoulder disability"), is remanded.

Entitlement to a compensable rating for ulnar neuropathy of the left upper extremity is remanded.

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 20 percent for lumbar spinal stenosis, degenerative arthritis, and degenerative disc disease (DDD) (hereafter, "lumbar spine disability"), is remanded. 

Entitlement to a compensable rating for neuropathy of the left lower extremity is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran's lumbar spine scars cover an approximate total area of 1.3 square (sq.) centimeters (cm) and are not unstable or painful or present with other disabling characteristics.

2. The Veteran's PTSD does not manifest through occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for a compensable rating for lumbar spine surgical scars are not met. 38 U.S.C. § 1155 (2018); 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.7, 4.118, Diagnostic Code 7802 (2024).

2. The criteria for a rating in excess of 50 percent for PTSD have not been met. 38U.S.C. §§1155, 5107 (2018); 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.7, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411 (2024).

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran had active service from December 1996 to December 2016.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from March 2022 and October 2022 rating decisions. 

In August 2022, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR), and requested review of the March 2022 rating decision, which adjudicated each of the issues identified above. The HLR request, however, only sought review of the four issues being remanded by Board. In October 2022, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the HLR decision on appeal, which considered the evidence of record at the time of the prior March 2022 decision. 

In the December 2022, VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement, "NOD"), the Veteran elected the Direct Review Docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2022 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Because the Board is remanding the claims of entitlement to increased ratings for the upper left extremity neuropathy and shoulder, lower left extremity neuropathy, and lumbar spine disability, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the re-adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Increased Rating - Lumbar Spine Surgical Scars

The Veteran maintains that his service-connected lumbar spine surgical scars, a residual of his lumbar spine surgery, warrant a compensable rating. 

The Veteran's service-connected lumbar spine scars are rated based upon Diagnostic Code 7802, which provides a rating based upon the square inch coverage area of the scar. 38 C.F.R. § 4.118, Diagnostic Code 7802 (2024).

In January 2022, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination in relation to his increased rating claim. See January 2022, VA Examination Report. That examination report reflects that the Veteran has two scars on the posterior trunk. The first scar measures approximately 4 cm in length and .1 cm in width. The second scar is approximately 3 cm in length and .3 cm in width. The examiner recorded that the scars cover an approximate total area of 1.3 sq. cm. The examiner also found that the scars are stable and do not present with underlying soft-tissue damage or otherwise present with any functional impact. During the examination, the Veteran denied that the scars are painful. 

Likewise, VA treatment records are absent of any complaints of pain or instability of the lumbar spine scars.

Given the evidence of record, the Board finds that a compensable rating is not warranted. The Veteran has two scars of the posterior trunk related to his lumbar spine surgery. They are not painful or unstable and they do not cover an area of 929 sq. cm. or greater. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.118, Diagnostic Codes 7802, 7804. There was no proffer from the Veteran, nor any evidence of record, to support a finding that the Veteran's residual scars experience frequent loss of covering of skin or present with any other disabling effects. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.118, Diagnostic Code 7805. 

In sum, the Board finds that the Veteran's symptomatology is consistent with a noncompensable rating throughout the period on appeal. Accordingly, entitlement to a compensable rating for the service-connected lumbar spine surgical scars is denied. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71, Diagnostic Code 7802.

Increased Rating - PTSD

The Veteran contends that his service-connected PTSD warrants a higher rating as his symptoms are worse than those contemplated by the currently assigned 50 percent rating. 

The Veteran underwent a VA examination in December 2021. The examiner confirmed an ongoing diagnosis of PTSD and noted that the Veteran experiences the following symptoms: depressed mood, anxiety, panic attacks that occur weekly or less often, chronic sleep impairment, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships. The examiner also noted that the Veteran appeared with appropriate affect but with a mildly dysphoric mood. His speech was found as unpressured and goal productive and he was noted as being polite and cooperative. In considering the PTSD diagnosis criteria, it was also found that the Veteran experiences persistent negative beliefs about himself or others, has markedly diminished interest or participation in significant activities, and feels detached or estranged from others. It was also reported that the Veteran has an exaggerated startle response and demonstrates hypervigilance. 

The Veteran reported that he had been pursuing a divorce and had been separated from his spouse for some time. At the time of the examination, he had been residing with his fiancé and her daughter, and his two children from his previous relationship alternated weeks with them. He conveyed that he worked as a motorcycle mechanic from December 2018 to June 2021 but was physically limited from the pain caused by his service-connected disabilities. 

Although finding that, overall, the Veteran's symptoms appeared to have worsened, the examiner found no change in the diagnosis and opined that the symptoms continue to result in no worse than occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.

VA treatment records from that same month reflect that the Veteran reported to treating physicians, "I have not had any more depression..." See December 2021, VA Treatment Record; see also See Rucker v. Brown, 10 Vet. App. 67, 73 (1997) (ascribing heightened credibility to statements made to clinicians for the purpose of treatment); Williams v. Gov. of Virgin Islands, 271 F.Supp.2d 696, 702 (V.I.2003) (noting that statements made for the purpose of diagnosis or treatment "are regarded as inherently reliable because of the recognition that one seeking medical treatment is keenly aware of the necessity for being truthful in order to secure proper care"). The Veteran also reported employment as a government contractor. The Veteran endorsed continuing difficulty with sleep patterns and feeling stressed over the pending divorce, but that his PTSD symptoms were fairly stable. He denied feelings of depression, hopelessness, worthlessness, or any suicidal ideation. Similar treatment reports are reflected in October 2021 treatment records, with the Veteran conveying mild symptoms of depression. See October 2021, VA Treatment Records. 

Based on the foregoing, the Board finds that the criteria for a rating in excess of 50 percent are not met. The most probative evidence of record, including the VA examination report and the treatment records, do not reflect that the Veteran's symptoms, during the period on appeal, have resulted in occupational or social impairment equivalent to what would be caused by the symptoms contemplated for a rating in excess of 50 percent. The VA examination report demonstrates that the frequency and severity of symptoms, as depicted by the Veteran himself, were found to result in occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity. However, the records also depict that the Veteran has maintained a healthy relationship with his fiancé, maintained healthy hygiene and employment, and has reported feelings of depression subsiding at times. There are no indications of suicidal ideation, illogical speech, or near-continuous panic or depression which impedes the Veteran's ability to function independently. There are no signs of unprovoked periods of violence, spatial orientation, or neglect of personal hygiene. 

Accordingly, the Board finds that the benefit-of-the-doubt rule is not applicable as the evidence weighs persuasively against the claim and is not in approximate balance. Therefore, entitlement to a rating in excess of 50 percent for the service-connected PTSD disability is not warranted. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc). 

REASONS FOR REMAND

While the Board sincerely regrets the additional delay, a remand for the following claims is necessary to correct pre-decisional duty-to-assist (DTA) errors. 

Increased Rating - Left Shoulder Strain

Increased Rating - Left Upper Extremity Neuropathy

In January 2022, the Veteran underwent a VA examination to determine the severity of his left shoulder disability. The Board finds, however, that the examination and resulting report are inadequate for rating purposes. Despite the Veteran reporting flare-ups of his left shoulder disability, the examiner failed to provide an estimate of range of motion of the shoulder joint during times of flare-ups. Notably, the examination was not conducted during a flare-up.

Given this lack of necessary information, the Board finds that a remand is necessary to correct the pre-decisional DTA error in failing to afford the Veteran an adequate VA examination. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802. 

In addition to the above, it is noted that the same physician who completed the examination for the left shoulder disability also completed the examination for neuropathy of the upper left extremity. The Board finds that these two disabilities are inextricably intertwined, and thus, a remand is necessary to afford an additional evaluation for neuropathy of the upper left extremity. 

Increased Rating - Lumbar Spine Disability

Increased Rating - Lower Left Extremity Neuropathy

The Veteran underwent a VA examination in relation to his lumbar spine disability in January 2022. Although the examiner considered an MRI study from October 2021, the Veteran's VA treatment records reflect that additional imaging of the spine was ordered but, at the time of the January 2021 examination report, those records had not yet been associated with the claims file by the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ). VA treatment records also confirm that the Veteran was ordered to begin physical therapy, however, those additional treatment notes were also not associated with the claims file. 

The Board finds that the AOJ failed in the DTA by not associating the pertinent records with the claims file for consideration by the VA examiner, thus, the resulting examination and opinions rendered are inadequate as they were not based upon a complete record. 

Accordingly, a remand is necessary to provide the Veteran with adequate examinations that take into consideration the entirety of the pertinent treatment records. The Board also finds that the lower left extremity neuropathy claim, as secondary to the lumbar spine disability, is inextricably intertwined therewith, and therefore, a remand of this issue is also required.

(Continued on the next page.)

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Associate all pertinent VA treatment records with the claims file. 

2. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination to determine the severity of the service-connected left shoulder disability, to include evaluation of neuropathy of the left upper extremity. The claims file must be made available to and reviewed by the examiner. Any indicated tests and studies must be performed. The examiner must elicit and take into account the Veteran's personal reporting and lay statements, in addition to the objective medical opinions and observations, in obtaining all necessary information to provide a full description of the disability as well as a report of all signs and symptoms necessary to properly evaluate the disability based upon the rating criteria. 

Specifically, the examiner should attempt to elicit information regarding the severity, frequency, and duration of symptoms, including during times of flare-ups and following repeated use over time. If it is not possible to provide a specific measurement, or an opinion regarding passive range of motion testing, flare-ups, symptoms, or functional impairment after repeated use, based on review of the record and direct observation, the examiner should provide an estimate, if at all possible, of the additional impairment based on the other evidence of record. The additional impairment should be expressed in terms of the limitation of motion and described functional loss.

If the opinion cannot be made without resort to speculation after all procurable evidence is obtained and reviewed, the examiner must state this and provide a rationale for such conclusion. 

3. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination to determine the severity of the service-connected lumbar spine disability, to include examination of the left lower extremity neuropathy. The claims file must be made available to and reviewed by the examiner. Any indicated tests and studies must be performed. The examiner must elicit and take into account the Veteran's personal reporting and lay statements, in addition to the objective medical opinions and observations, in obtaining all necessary information to provide a full description of the disability as well as a report of all signs and symptoms necessary to properly evaluate the disability based upon the rating criteria. 

Specifically, the examiner should attempt to elicit information regarding the severity, frequency, and duration of symptoms, including during times of flare-ups and following repeated use over time. If it is not possible to provide a specific measurement, or an opinion regarding passive range of motion testing, flare-ups, symptoms, or functional impairment after repeated use, based on review of the record and direct observation, the examiner should provide an estimate, if at all possible, of the additional impairment based on the other evidence of record. The additional impairment should be expressed in terms of the limitation of motion and described functional loss.

(Continued on the next page.)

If the opinion cannot be made without resort to speculation after all procurable evidence is obtained and reviewed, the examiner must state this and provide a rationale for such conclusion. 

 

 

Kristin Haddock

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Sutherell, Erienne

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.