Citation Nr: A25034674
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 240727-459973
DATE: April 15, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for hemorrhoids is granted.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for depression is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for anxiety is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a right-hand disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a right forearm disability is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran's hemorrhoids onset in service.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to service connection for hemorrhoids have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from December 2003 to September 2007.

These matters come to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a July 2023 Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) regional office (RO) rating decision.

In the July 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the July 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the psychiatric claims, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

As a final preliminary matter, the Veteran was previously represented in this appeal by an attorney; however, the attorney communicated that this representation was withdrawn in August 2024. The Veteran's attorney did not withdraw prior to filing the AMA appeal and has not complied with the requirements for a motion to withdraw under 38 C.F.R. § 20.6. Under § 20.6, a representative may not withdraw services after an AMA appeal to the Board has been filed unless good cause is shown and proper notice is given to the Veteran. The AMA appeal was filed when the July 27, 2024, VA Form 10182 was received. The representative attempted to withdraw from representation in an August 2024 letter, but they did not state any good cause for doing so. Therefore, the Board must deny the motion, and the representative will remain the representative of record for this decision.

Service Connection

Service connection will be granted for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a).  Service connection can be demonstrated for a disease diagnosed after service when all of the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).

1. Entitlement to service connection for hemorrhoids

The Veteran contends that his hemorrhoids onset in service.  After reviewing the record, the Board cannot possibly arrive at a different conclusion.

The Veteran's service treatment records show significant and continued treatment for hemorrhoids.  The Veteran was treated for rectal bleeding and hemorrhoids aboard the USS Carl Vinson in June 2007, February 2007, February 2006, July 2005, and another undated occurrence.

The Veteran's post-service treatment records show "daily bleeding from his external hemorrhoids."  They also show that his hemorrhoids are chronic and have been "present since time in Navy."  These post-service records are consistent with the Veteran's lay statements that his hemorrhoids have been constant since service.

The Veteran underwent a VA examination in June 2023.  Therein, the examiner stated that it is less likely than not related to service as "there are not enough pertinent records ... to warrant a condition which began during veteran military career as there is a significant amount of time which has lapsed since veterans discharge from the military until now."  However, the Board cannot afford the June 2023 medical opinion any probative weight as it failed to consider the numerous and obvious instances of in-service treatment for hemorrhoids and rectal bleeding as well as the Veteran's lay statements of onset and recurrence.  Reonal v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 458 (1993) (medical opinions based on an incomplete or inaccurate factual premises are not probative), Miller v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 249 (2020) (VA examiners must consider competent lay statements).  

The Veteran is competent to report hemorrhoid symptoms since separation.   Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465 (1994).  The service treatment records show numerous instances of treatment for hemorrhoids and rectal bleeding and the post-service treatment records state that his hemorrhoids have been "present since time in Navy."  Upon review of the record, the Board finds the evidence to at least be at least nearly equal.  His current hemorrhoids are the same persistent condition that he incurred during service.  Accordingly, the Board finds that service connection for hemorrhoids is warranted.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

REASONS FOR REMAND

Under the AMA, pre-decisional duty to assist errors are eligible for remand.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a)

1. Entitlement to service connection for depression is remanded.

2. Entitlement to service connection for anxiety is remanded.

Preliminarily, the Board notes that when a Veteran makes a claim for compensation, he is seeking service connection for symptoms regardless of how those symptoms are diagnosed or labeled.  See Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1 (2009).  Therefore, the Board will discuss the Veteran's claims for depression and anxiety in tandem. 

The Veteran has not been afforded a VA examination for his psychiatric disability as required by McLendon?v. Nicholson, 20?Vet. App.?79 (2006).  The pre-decisional medical evidence shows that the Veteran has been treated for "suspected" generalized anxiety disorder and that it was "stressful" while serving on board the USS Carl Vinson aircraft carrier as he "miss family and gone for months."  See April 2023 and June 2023 CAPRI records.  Remand is thus required to obtain a VA examination in compliance with 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(4) and McLendon. 

3. Entitlement to service connection for a right-hand disability is remanded.

4. Entitlement to service connection for a right forearm disability is remanded.

The June 2023 VA examiner diagnosed the Veteran with a right radial head fracture, right ulnar fracture status post open reduction internal fixation (ORIF), and a right-hand strain.  The examiner provided a negative etiological opinion citing a post-service February 2010 snowboard incident.

This examination is inadequate as it failed to consider the in-service treatment for a right-hand fracture aboard the USS Carl Vinson, to include a November 2004 ORIF of the fifth metacarpal.  See Reonal, supra.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Obtain VA examinations for the Veteran's psychiatric disability, right-hand disability, and right forearm disability.  The claims file must be reviewed in conjunction with the examinations.

Psychiatric Disability

The examiner must provide an opinion responding to the following after examining the Veteran and considering his pertinent medical history and lay statements regarding his reported symptoms:

(a)     Whether the claimed stressor is adequate to support a diagnosis of PTSD and whether the Veteran's symptoms are related to the claimed stressor.

(b)     If a diagnosis of PTSD is deemed appropriate, the examiner must identify the specific stressor underlying the diagnosis and should comment upon the link between the current symptomatology and the Veteran's claimed stressor.

(c)     If the examiner determines that the clinical evidence does not support a diagnosis of PTSD, to include that the claimed stressor does not support the diagnosis, the examiner should list all diagnosed psychiatric disorders and specifically state whether it is at least as likely as not (i.e., whether the likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that any diagnosed psychiatric disorder, to include any diagnosed at any point during the period on appeal, either began during or was otherwise caused by the Veteran's military service.

The examiner must review the April 2023 and June 2023 CAPRI records showing "suspected generalized anxiety disorder," and "stressful" service aboard the USS Carl Vinson due to "miss family and gone for months."

Right-Hand and Right Forearm

Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's right-hand disability onset in service or is otherwise related to service, to include the November 2004 in-service surgery?

Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's right forearm disability onset in service or is otherwise related to service, to include the November 2004 in-service surgery?

The Board recognizes that there may be a post-service superimposed disability related to a February 2010 snowboard accident and resultant surgery.  Nevertheless, the examiner should discuss whether the November 2004 surgery resulted in any underlying residuals to the right-hand and forearm. 

 

M. C. WILSON

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Finelli, Christopher

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.