Citation Nr: A25034729
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 240613-448095
DATE: April 15, 2025

ORDER

Prior to July 20, 2023, entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 30 percent for unspecified anxiety disorder with alcohol use disorder is denied.

Entitlement to an initial rating of 30 percent, but not higher, for hiatal hernia with gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) and herpes simplex 1 esophagitis is granted.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. Prior to July 20, 2023, the evidence weighs persuasively against finding the Veteran's unspecified anxiety disorder with alcohol use disorder manifested in occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.

2. The evidence is at least in approximate balance that the Veteran's hiatal hernia with GERD and herpes simplex 1 esophagitis manifested as persistently recurrent epigastric distress with dysphagia (difficulty swallowing), pyrosis (heartburn or reflux), and regurgitation, accompanied by substernal pain, productive of considerable impairment of health.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. Prior to July 20, 2023, the criteria for an initial disability rating in excess of 30 percent for unspecified anxiety disorder with alcohol use disorder have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.126, 4.130, Diagnostic Code (DC) 9413.

2. With reasonable doubt resolved in the Veteran's favor, the criteria for a 30 percent rating, but no higher, for hiatal hernia with GERD and herpes simplex 1 esophagitis have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.1-4.14, 4.114, Diagnostic Code (DC) 7399-7346.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from September 1999 to May 2002.

By way of history, an October 2023 rating decision found a clear and unmistakable error in the assignment of the effective date for unspecified anxiety disorder with alcohol use disorder and granted an initial 30 percent rating, effective November 11, 2021.  An evaluation of 50 percent was assigned from July 20, 2023.  A November 2023 rating decision granted service connection for hiatal hernia with GERD and herpes simplex 1 esophagitis with an evaluation of 10 percent, effective November 11, 2021.  In November 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR), and requested review of the October 2023 and November 2023 rating decisions.  In April 2024, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the HLR decision on appeal, which considered the evidence of record at the time of the October 2023 and November 2023 rating decisions.  In the June 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal, the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider evidence of record at the time of the October 2023 and November 2023 rating decisions.  The Board notes that for unspecified anxiety disorder with alcohol use disorder, the Veteran has only appealed the initial 30 percent rating.  See e.g. June 2024 VA Form 10182 and August 2024 Third Party Correspondence.  Therefore, the Board will consider whether entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 30 percent is warranted for unspecified anxiety disorder with alcohol use disorder.

Increased Rating

Disability ratings are determined by applying the criteria set forth in VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities, which is based on the average impairment of earning capacity.  Individual disabilities are assigned separate diagnostic codes.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. Part IV.  If two evaluations are potentially applicable, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating; otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7.  When reasonable doubt arises as to the degree of disability, such doubt will be resolved in the Veteran's favor.  38 C.F.R. § 4.3.

Pertinent regulations do not require that all cases show all findings specified by the Rating Schedule, but that findings sufficiently characteristic to identify the disease and the resulting disability and above all, coordination of rating with impairment of function will be expected in all cases.  38 C.F.R. § 4.21.  Therefore, the Board has considered the potential application of various other provisions of the regulations governing VA benefits, whether or not they were raised by the Veteran, as well as the entire history of the veteran's disability in reaching its decision.  Schafrath v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 589, 595 (1991).

If the positive and negative evidence is in approximate balance (which includes but is not limited to equipoise), the claimant receives the benefit of the doubt.  Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc).  If the evidence persuasively favors one side or the other, there is not an approximate balance, and the benefit-of-the-rule does not apply.  Id.

Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 30 percent, prior to July 20, 2023, for unspecified anxiety disorder with alcohol use disorder is denied.

The Veteran seeks entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 30 percent prior to July 20, 2023.  See e.g. June 2024 VA Form 10182 and August 2024 Third Party Correspondence.

The Veteran's unspecified anxiety disorder with alcohol use disorder is evaluated under the General Rating Formal for Mental Disorder, 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9413.  Under this formula, a 30 percent disability rating is assigned when there is evidence of occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks (although generally functioning satisfactorily, with routine behavior, self-care, and conversation normal), due to such symptoms as: depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks (weekly or less often), chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss (such as forgetting names, directions, recent events).  38 C.F.R. § 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9413.

A 50 percent rating requires evidence of occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to such symptoms as: flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short- and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships.  Id.

A 70 percent rating is warranted when there is occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a work like setting; inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.).  Id.

A 100 percent rating is warranted when there is total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name.  Id.

When rating a mental disorder, VA must consider the frequency, severity, and duration of the Veteran's psychiatric symptoms, the length of remissions, and the Veteran's capacity for adjustment during periods of remission.  The rating agency must assign a rating based on all the evidence of record that bears on occupational and social impairment, rather than solely on the examiner's assessment of the level of disability at the moment of the examination.  When rating the level of disability from a mental disorder, the rating agency must consider the extent of social impairment, but cannot assign a rating solely on the basis of social impairment.  38 C.F.R. § 4.126.

Furthermore, the list of symptoms under the rating criteria are meant to be examples of symptoms that would warrant the rating, but are not meant to be exhaustive, and the Board need not find all or even some of the symptoms to award a specific rating.  Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436, 442-43 (2002).  Further, simply because the Veteran has some symptoms that are contemplated at a higher rating level does not mean the impact of his psychiatric disability overall rises to that level.  Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 117 (Fed. Cir. 2013).  Instead, the Board must look to the frequency, severity, and duration of the psychiatric impairment.

In December 2021, the Veteran underwent VA examination.  The examiner best summarized the Veteran's level of occupational and social impairment as occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks, although generally functioning satisfactorily, with normal routine behavior, self-care and conversation.  The Veteran reported that he was still friends with some of his friends in service.  He also stated that the owners of a business and his father were supportive of him.  He was single and never married with no children.  He lived with a roommate and their relationship was "OK."  He worked at Christopher's Pizza, which he described as stressful because co-workers quit or did not show up.  His anxiety was currently an issue due to not knowing what was next and he liked being in control.  Being on the subway or in cars made him anxious because he was not in control.  He got about nine hours of sleep and reported that if he did not drink, his sleep was interrupted every two hours.  If he drank, he could sleep through the night.  The examiner noted symptoms of anxiety; chronic sleep impairment; mild memory loss, such as forgetting names, directions, or recent events; and impaired judgment.  The examiner observed the Veteran to be mildly anxious.  Mild tremors in hands were noted.  Speech was normal in rate tone and volume.  He was pleasant, polite, and cooperative.  He was alert and oriented on all spheres.  The Veteran's affect was congruent to mood.  There was no evidence of psychosis or thought disorder.  He was dressed and groomed appropriately.  The examiner also noted the Veteran had a low appetite.  He was deemed capable of managing his financial affairs.

In July 2022, J. H., Ph.D., a private examiner examined the Veteran via video conference and provided an August 2022 written psychosocial evaluation.  The Veteran reported being a manager of a pizza restaurant and working about 50 hours a week.  He reported he could be irritable and quick to snap at others.  He suffered from ruminating negative self-talk.  He reported not having good sleep.  He had not been receiving counseling because there was not a veteran's center close to him and he had to drive an hour to the nearest one.  He could not get off work in time.  He had not been in therapy for anxiety and alcoholism since his 2002 outpatient treatment weekly group in Manheim, Germany.  He had been drinking as self-medication to go to sleep.  If he had the time, he would get help.  He currently lived with a roommate, was not in a relationship, had no children, and no past marriages.  He drank 40 ounces of beer in one sitting and was bothered by the amount that he drank.  He suffered from the shakes, not always from not drinking.  If he had a lot of pizza to make, he would get shaky and sweat.  He did not report thoughts of harming himself.  He did not have time to spend with friends and was more of a loner because of his schedule.  Occasionally, he saw his parents who lived in a half-way house.  He had brothers and sisters but did not talk to them.  The Veteran did not endorse having any current thoughts of harming himself.  The Veteran reported that his anxiety began after 9/11 and had gotten worse then past 10 years.  He found it difficult to control his worry.  J. H. noted symptoms of restlessness or feeling keyed up or on edge, difficulty concentrating, irritability, and sleep disturbance.  It was noted that the Veteran's anxiety and worry caused clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.  The disturbance was not better explained by another mental disorder.  The Veteran described his current symptoms as always feeling nervous, anxious, and on edge.  He had difficulty controlling his worry, difficulty relaxing, relentlessness, and irritability.  He often had difficulty with coworkers.  The Veteran had difficulty with sleeping resorting to alcohol use.  He reported panic attacks once a month with no triggers.  

Following interview and examination of the Veteran as well as review of the claims file, J. H. opined that from November 11, 2021 to the present, the symptoms of the Veteran's anxiety disorder had resulted in occupational and social impairment with occasional deficiencies in work, family, and social relations.  These symptoms demonstrated in the record and from the interview included chronic anxiety; sleep impairment; mild memory loss, such as forgetting names, directions, or recent events; impaired judgment; and low appetite.  He showed a near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a work like setting); and inability to establish and maintain effective relationships..

Based on this evidence, the Board finds that, from November 11, 2021 to July 20, 2023, the frequency, severity, and duration of the Veteran's unspecified anxiety disorder with alcohol use disorder did not manifest in occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity such that a rating in excess of 30 percent is warranted.  Notably, the December 2021 VA examiner and the August 2022 private examiner best summarized the Veteran's unspecified anxiety disorder with alcohol use disorder as occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks, although generally functioning satisfactorily, with normal routine behavior, self-care and conversation.  Evidence from this period shows the Veteran suffered from irritability, anxiety, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss, such as forgetting names, directions or recent events, and panic attacks (once a month).  At worst, the Veteran's symptoms show an occasional decrease in his occupational and social functioning.  The Veteran was able to maintain his position as a manager at Christopher's Pizza and maintained good relationships with fellow service-members as well as his parents, visiting them on occasion.  Thus, the frequency, severity, and duration of his unspecified anxiety disorder's symptomatology during this period fits squarely within criteria for a 30 percent rating based on occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks.

The Board observes that the Veteran reportedly found it difficult to control his worry, could be irritable and quick to snap at others while at work, suffered from ruminating negative self-talk, had difficulty concentrating, mild memory loss, restlessness, and sleep disturbance.  He did not have time to spend with friends because of his schedule.  He did not endorse thoughts of harming himself.  Although the Veteran reported being irritable and having difficulty with coworkers, the evidence does not show such symptoms to be commensurate with impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence) under the criteria for a 70 percent disability rating.  Additionally, the Board observes the Veteran was found to have impaired judgment under the criteria for a 50 percent disability rating and that the August 2022 private examiner noted symptoms of near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively and difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a work like setting; inability to establish and maintain effective relationships) under the criteria for a 70 percent disability rating.  However, as noted above, simply because the Veteran had some symptoms that are contemplated at a higher rating level does not mean the impact of his psychiatric disability overall rose to that level.  Vazquez-Claudio, 713 F.3d at 117.  Instead, the Board looked at the frequency, severity, and duration of the symptoms.  Here, the frequency, severity, and duration of his psychiatric symptoms during this period do not reach the level occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.  Furthermore, like the December 2021 VA examiner, the August 2022 private examiner clearly opined the Veteran's unspecified anxiety disorder with alcohol use disorder resulted in occupational and social impairment with occasional deficiencies in work, family, and social relations.  Accordingly, the symptoms during this period support impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks (although generally functioning satisfactorily, with routine behavior, self-care, and conversation normal), due to such symptoms as: depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks (weekly or less often), chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss (such as forgetting names, directions, recent events), but were not of the frequency, severity, or duration demonstrating occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.

Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 10 percent for hiatal hernia with GERD and herpes simplex 1 esophagitis is denied.

The Veteran asserts that the symptoms of his hiatal hernia with GERD and herpes simplex 1 esophagitis warrant an increased disability rating.  The Veteran's service-connected hiatal hernia with GERD and herpes simplex 1 esophagitis has been rated as 10 percent disabling under 38 C.F.R. § 4.114, Diagnostic Code 7399-7346.

During the pendency of the appeal, the criteria for rating dysfunctions of the digestive system were amended effective May 19, 2024.  Because the rating criteria changed during the pendency of the appeal, the Board would ordinarily consider the rating criteria that existed prior to May 19, 2024, and that which existed after, applying whichever is more favorable to the Veteran.  However, because the period on appeal ends before the amendment took effect, the Board may not retroactively apply the post-May 19, 2024 rating criteria.  As such, only the prior rating criteria will be considered.

The hyphenated DC used in this case indicates that a digestive disorder under DC 7399 is the service-connected disorder, and DC 7346 identifies the basis for the evaluation assigned.  38 C.F.R. § 4.27.  Because there is no DC specifically for GERD, it is rated by analogy to hiatal hernia, under DC 7346.

Pursuant to DC 7399-7346, a 10 percent disability rating is warranted for two or more of the symptoms for the 30 percent evaluation, but at less severity.  A 30 percent evaluation is warranted for persistently recurring epigastric distress with dysphagia, pyrosis, and regurgitation, accompanied by substernal or arm or shoulder pain, productive of considerable impairment of health.  The maximum 60 percent evaluation is warranted for symptoms of pain, vomiting, material weight loss and hematemesis or melena with moderate anemia; or other symptom combinations productive of severe impairment of health.  38 C.F.R. § 4.114, DC 7399-7346.

The terms "severe impairment of health," "persistently recurring" and "considerable impairment of health" are not defined in the rating schedule; rather than applying a mechanical formula, VA must evaluate all the evidence to the end that its decisions are "equitable and just."  38 C.F.R. § 4.6.  However, the Board shall apply the ordinary meanings of the words.  "Considerable" is defined as "large in extent or degree."  Merriam-Webster's Collegiate Dictionary 267 (11th ed. 2012).  "Persistently recurring" is defined as "continuing to exist despite interference or treatment."  "Recurrent" is defined as "returning or happening time after time."  "Severe" is defined as "very painful or harmful."  Id. at 1140.

During a December 2021 VA examination, the Veteran reported being unsuccessful at ingesting a full meal.  The examiner indicated that the Veteran's treatment plan included taking continuous medication for his condition.  Signs or symptoms noted reflux.  The Veteran did not have an esophageal stricture, spasm of esophagus, or an acquired diverticulum of the esophagus.  His esophageal condition impacted his ability to work in that he reported having to eat slowly and drink lots of fluid to get his food down.

A June 2023 VA treatment record reflects the Veteran's report of chronic symptoms of both GERD and dysphagia.  He underwent an esophagram and EGD which showed sliding hiatal hernia and LA grade esophagitis in 2014.  He noted worsening of dysphagia within the last 6 to 8 months.  He now described a sensation of food becoming stuck at the GE junction requiring liquids to help bolus pass into the stomach.  This happened daily with all solid p.o. intake.  He denied pain with swallowing but endorsed a "dull pressure" in the area of the GE junction.  He occasionally vomited 10 to 15 minutes after eating.  He was currently taking Omeprazole 40 milligrams twice daily with little to no heartburn; however, dysphagia persisted.

In a July 2023 statement, the Veteran reported he currently underwent VA treatment for his hiatal hernia with GERD and herpes simplex 1 esophagitis.  He stated he was prescribed Omeprazole that he took once daily.  To help alleviate his symptoms, he had to sleep with his head elevated, and would also avoid eating dairy or carbonated beverages.  He experienced nausea and vomiting on days where he ate without allowing the food to pass into his stomach or if he ate breakfast too soon after he woke up.  When this happened, it could be for up to four times a day.  He had chest pains every day from his GERD and they were typically a 6 to 7 on a scale of 1 to 10.  The Veteran further reported that his GERD symptoms tended to flare up more when he was anxious.  Normally, he experienced spit up type symptoms.  He did not eat out at restaurants anymore.  He did not eat on his lunch break at work and did not eat at family functions due to these issues.

Most recently, the Veteran underwent VA examination in August 2023.  He reported intermittent indigestion, regurgitation, abdominal pain and nausea as well as dysphagia and nocturnal awakening.  He reported taking Omeprazole.  Signs and symptoms included dysphagia, pyrosis, reflux, regurgitation, substernal pain, sleep disturbance caused by esophageal reflux 4 or more times per year, lasting less than 1 day, nausea, and vomiting.  The Veteran did not have an esophageal stricture, spasm of esophagus, or an acquired diverticulum of the esophagus.  His esophageal condition impacted his ability to work in that nocturnal awakening caused significant fatigue while nausea, dysphagia and regurgitation caused decreased focus/concentration and reduced overall productivity.

After engaging in a holistic review of the record and assessing the severity, frequency, and duration of the signs and symptoms of the Veteran's hiatal hernia with GERD and herpes simplex 1 esophagitis, the Board finds that the evidence supports that the Veteran persistently manifested recurrent epigastric distress with dysphagia, pyrosis, regurgitation, and substernal pain.

As to whether there is sufficient evidence that the Veteran's combined hiatal hernia with GERD and herpes simplex 1 esophagitis symptomology is productive of considerable impairment of health, the Board finds the evidence is at least in an approximate balance.  In the December 2021 VA examination, the Veteran reported being unsuccessful at ingesting a full meal.  A June 2023 VA treatment record reflects the Veteran described a sensation of food becoming stuck at the GE junction and requiring liquids to help bolus pass into the stomach.  In a July 2023 statement, the Veteran reported that he did not eat out at restaurants anymore, did not eat on his lunch break at work, and did not eat at family functions due to his symptoms.  During the August 2023 VA examination, symptoms were noted as dysphagia, pyrosis, reflux, regurgitation, substernal pain, sleep disturbance caused by esophageal reflux 4 or more times per year, lasting less than 1 day, nausea, and vomiting.  Significantly, both the December 2021 and the August 2023 VA examiners noted the Veteran's esophageal condition caused sleep disturbances.  Specifically, the August 2023 VA examiner indicated the Veteran's esophageal condition impacted his ability to work in that nocturnal awakening caused significant fatigue.  Additionally, his nausea, dysphagia and regurgitation caused decreased focus and concentration and reduced overall productivity.  In an August 2024 correspondence, the Veteran's representative stated that these symptoms adversely affected his ability to work.  The Veteran's representative also stated that the Veteran's substernal arm and shoulder pain exacerbated his condition, contributing to considerable impairment of health.  However, review of the August 2023 VA examination report does not indicate shoulder pain, only substernal pain.  Furthermore, the Veteran's representative did not describe how this symptom exacerbated his condition to contribute to considerable impairment of health.

Nevertheless, after review of the record, the Board finds that the VA examinations and treatment records are adequate and the opinions provided by both examiners are probative.  The Board further finds that there is evidence for and against the Veteran's hiatal hernia with GERD and herpes simplex 1 esophagitis symptoms constituting a considerable impairment of health that is in at least an approximate balance.  After affording the Veteran the benefit of the doubt, the Board finds the Veteran's hiatal hernia with GERD and herpes simplex 1 esophagitis symptoms constitute a considerable impairment of health.

Accordingly, entitlement to a rating of 30 percent, but no higher, for hiatal hernia with GERD and herpes simplex 1 esophagitis is granted.

In order to warrant a higher disability rating under DC 7346, the competent evidence of record would have to show pain, vomiting, material weight loss, and hematemesis or melena, with moderate anemia, or other symptom combinations productive of severe impairment of health.  The Board acknowledges the Veteran described suffering from pain and vomiting; however, the record does not support that he suffered from hematemesis, melena, anemia, or material weight loss.  The Veteran did not display symptom combinations approximating the criteria for a 60 percent disability rating and productive of severe impairment of health.

Lastly, notwithstanding the Court holding in Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447 (2009), the Board finds that the record does not raise a claim for a total rating based on individual unemployability (TDIU).  The Veteran does not allege, and there was no indication in the record, that the Veteran's hiatal hernia with GERD and herpes simplex 1 esophagitis manifested to such a degree as to render the Veteran unable to secure and follow substantially gainful employment.

 

 

L. CHU

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Griffith, S.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.