Citation Nr: A25034199
Decision Date: 04/14/25	Archive Date: 04/14/25

DOCKET NO. 241004-479725
DATE: April 14, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for cervical spine condition is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from November 1981 to January 1985. 

In August 2024, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, and requested readjudication of service connection for a cervical spine condition, most recently addressed in an August 2024 rating decision.  In September 2024, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the supplemental claim decision on appeal, which implicitly found that new and relevant evidence had been received and denied the claim based on the evidence of record at the time of that decision.  

In the October 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the September 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of entitlement to service connection for a cervical spine condition, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Lastly, the Board notes that the Veteran selected the Direct Review docket on his October 2024 NOD and requested a direct review of the September 25, 2024, rating decision.  Williams v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 305 (2024) (holding that the Board may not decide an appeal before the deadline for requesting a docket switch has elapsed); 38 C.F.R. § 20.202 (c)(2) (providing that claimants may switch dockets by completing and submitting a new Notice of Disagreement (NOD) within one year from the date the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) mails notice of the decision on appeal, or 60 days from when the Board receives the NOD, whichever is later). 

In this case, the Veteran has not provided a waiver; neither has the Board requested a waiver to proceed with the case. However, there is no prejudice in proceeding with the appeal without requesting a waiver, as the case must be remanded due to a pre-decisional duty to assist error. By seeking a waiver from the appellant, the Board would only be causing undue delay, with no additional benefit to the appellant. See Scott v. McDonald, 789 F.3d 1375, 1381 (Fed. Cir. 2015) (noting that "[a claimant's] interest may be better served by prompt resolution of his claims rather than by further remands to cure procedural errors that, at the end of the day, may be irrelevant to final resolution and may indeed merely delay resolution"). Given the undue delay that a request for a waiver would cause and the lack of prejudice to the appellant, the Board finds that proceeding with a remand of this claim is the appropriate course of action. See 38 C.F.R. § 20.800 (c). The CAVC has distinguished a Board remand from a final Board decision on the basis that a Board remand does not contain an order granting or denying relief. Kirkpatrick v. Nicholson, 417 F.3d 1361, 1364 (Fed. Cir. 2005). Thus, remand orders are neither final nor adverse to a veteran. Stiles v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 328 (2024). Moreover, as the Veteran elected the direct review docket, the Board finds that he is seeking the quickest possible resolution of his appeal. Finally, the Veteran submitted a copy of a Board decision for another appellant that remanded the issue of service connection for a neck condition for an opinion on whether a cervical spine disability was related to an in-service left clavicle fracture. The inclusion of this document indicates that the Veteran hoped to obtain a similar remand from VA.

1. Entitlement to service connection for a cervical spine condition is remanded.

The Veteran seeks service connection for a cervical spine condition. He contends a current neck disability is related to a clavicle injury in service.  See VA Form 20-0995 Supplemental Claim Application, received in August 2023.

The September 2024 rating decision on appeal favorably found that the Veteran has been diagnosed with degenerative disc disease other than intervertebral disc syndrome. The Board is bound by this favorable finding.

His service treatment records reflect that in June 1980, he dislocated his right clavicle after falling from a bicycle. An October 18, 1982, treatment record notes "1 day s/p [status post] fight" the Veteran complained of headaches, left eye pain, and posterior head pain. He reported he had a fight and has a black eye, and hit the ground and hit his head and has had bad headaches since then. On examination there was some swelling to the back of the head and it was tender to touch. He was referred to a Physician's Assistant for further evaluation. The PA found palpable tenderness over the L occipital lobe with hematoma, and the neck was without rigidity. He was involved in a motor vehicle accident in May 1984. In December 1984, he was attacked by a German in a bar, resulting in multiple abrasions on his nose, lip, chin, chipped teeth, and a contusion on the left side near his eyes. He was prescribed aspirin for pain and advised to ice his face for 24 hours and seek follow-up dental care.

Post-service, an October 1994 treatment record notes "narrowing of the disc space of C6-C7 presumably due to degenerative changes.  

An August 1995 treatment record notes "general joint pain neck."

A September 2010 private treatment record notes neck pain onset 5 days ago and is still present.  He reported fatigue, nausea, dizziness, and cough for 5 days.  Pain was described as being moderate in degree in the area of the cervical spine and radiating to the right hand." The provider notes a history of neck and back pain.  X-ray findings of the neck revealed degenerative changes, especially at the C5 level, with anterior osteophytosis.  There was a narrowing of the C6-C7 disk space.  The C7-T1 level was not adequately seen for clearance. The report notes that an over-penetrated view may be helpful in follow-up. The visualized C1-C7 levels showed no evidence of fracture.

A January 2016 private treatment record notes treatment for pain located in the lower back, neck, and left upper extremity.  The pain began more than 9 years ago. The pain occurred after a lifting event for the lower back, without any precipitating event or trauma for the cervical spine.

A February 2018 VA treatment record notes an MRI of the neck and back was ordered. 

An April 2018 VA treatment report notes the Veteran's report that he has had epidural and nerve block procedures done to both his back and neck.  

A July 2018 VA treatment record notes the Veteran's report of neck pain with radiating numbness and tingling down both arms. He has been taking over-the-counter medicines, and they have not been effective.

In December 2020, he reported "secondary pain affecting his neck, shoulder, arms, leg, and hand." 

An April 2021 VA treatment record notes a history of neck pain, found to have a cervical 4-5 herniated disk with local spinal cord compression and a focus on intrinsic cord changes.

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in August 2022.  The Veteran reported that he suffered trauma to his neck while in the military service. He reported having neck pain after a fall during his military service and after a fight in a German club. He stated that the pain has progressively worsened over time. Additionally, he reported constant pain in his neck, described as a sharp, shooting pain that radiates from the neck down to his bilateral upper extremities. He also reported headaches and tingling/numbness in his bilateral lower extremities.

The August 2022 VA examiner opined that the claimed condition is less likely than not incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness. The examiner provided the rationale that:

During service, there were no complaints related to the cervical spine condition.  There is no evidence of a diagnosis and no evidence of chronicity of care. A nexus has not been established.  Service treatment records are negative for any complaints of a cervical spine condition. STRs are negative for an injury during service that led to the cervical spine condition.  On the day of examination, the Veteran was diagnosed with degenerative disc disease of the cervical spine.  This condition is a progressive condition that is a part of aging and is due to normal wear and tear on the body.

The Board finds that the August 2022 VA examination opinion is inadequate because, as noted above, the Veteran's service treatment records do indicate treatment for a right clavicle injury in June 1980.  An October 18, 1982, record found occipital hematoma and pain post-fight.  In December 1984, he was assaulted in a bar, resulting in multiple abrasions on his nose, lip, chin, chipped teeth, and a contusion on the left side near his eyes. The post-service treatment record reflects that, at least since 1994, the Veteran has consistently reported cervical neck pain without any trauma or injury. 

The August 2022 VA examiner failed to acknowledge or discuss favorable evidence of record, including the STRs noting a right clavicle injury in service, as well as the lay statements provided by the Veteran. The examiner failed to address the Veteran's lay statement that he injured his neck at a club in Germany and that neck pain has progressively worsened over time. A medical opinion based on an inaccurate or incomplete factual premise is not probative. Reonal v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 458, 461 (1993). The Board thus finds that the opinion is inadequate and affords the opinion no probative value beyond the examiner's confirmation of a diagnosis of a cervical spine disability. Once VA undertakes the effort to provide an examination, it must provide an adequate one or, at a minimum, notify the claimant why one will not or cannot be provided. Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007). The AOJ's failure to obtain an adequate VA opinion was a pre-decisional duty-to-assist error, requiring remand for an addendum opinion.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain an addendum opinion from an appropriate clinician to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's cervical spine disability. The examiner must review the claims file to include a copy of this remand. The clinician is requested to opine on the following.

Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's cervical spine disability:

(a.) Is related to an in-service injury, event, or disease, including a right clavicle injury in June 1980, post-fight occipital tenderness and hematoma in 1982, December 1984 motor vehicle accident, and/or a December 1984 assault in a bar, resulting in multiple abrasions on his nose, lip, chin, chipped teeth, and a contusion on the left side near his eyes?

(b.) manifested within one year after discharge from service? or 

(c.) onset during service with continuity of the same symptomatology since service? 

The examiner should consider all medical and lay evidence of record, to include the Veteran's contentions of continuous neck pain since service. 

The examiner is asked to explain the reasons behind any opinions expressed. The examiner is reminded that the term "as likely as not" does not mean "within the realm of medical possibility," but rather that the evidence of record is so evenly divided that, in the examiner's expert opinion, it is as medically sound to find in favor of the proposition as it is to find against it.

 

 

LAURA E. COLLINS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Asare, Ama K.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.