Citation Nr: A25034203
Decision Date: 04/14/25	Archive Date: 04/14/25

DOCKET NO. 240806-461158
DATE: April 14, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for headaches, to include migraines, is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran had active service from November 1986 to April 1987, from December 1990 to September 1991, and from September 1993 to July 2001, with additional Reserve service.

This matter comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a March 2024 rating decision from a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ).

In August 2024, the Veteran filed a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) and elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2024 decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. Evidence was added to the claims file during a period of time when new evidence was not allowed. See August 2024 appellate brief. As the Board is remanding the claim for further development, this additional evidence will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claim.

At the outset, the Board notes that there is medical evidence that the Veteran's claimed headaches are due to a cervical spine condition. See September 2023 private opinion. The Veteran previously filed a claim of service connection for his cervical spine condition, which was denied in a May 2013 rating decision. The Veteran did not appeal the May 2013 denial of his claim. Although VA obtained an opinion that appeared to draw a relationship between the Veteran's claimed headaches and his nonservice-connected cervical spine condition and his service, that opinion was based on the Veteran's report. See March 2024 VA examination. Moreover, as the evidence does not demonstrate the Veteran had medical expertise or training such that the Board could find him competent to establish an etiological relationship between his cervical spine condition and his service in light of the evidence showing the Veteran's first complaint relating to his neck was about 10 years after his separation from service, and, as will be discussed below, the examiner's opinion was not adequate, the Board is unable to find that a claim for the Veteran's cervical spine condition has been raised at this time. See DeLisio v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 45, 54-55 (2011). The Veteran's assertions, however, will be considered in the instant matter.

Entitlement to service connection for headaches, to include migraines is remanded.

The Veteran contends his headaches, to include migraines, are due to his service. The Veteran further contends that his headaches are secondary to lumbar spine disability, chronic pain from his service-connected disabilities, reactive airway disease, and rhinitis. See September 2023 private opinion; see also March 2024 VA examination; see also August 2024 appellate brief. 

While the Board regrets the delay, a remand is necessary to correct pre-decisional duty-to-assist errors. 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(f)(2)(A); 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a). Specifically, remand is warranted to allow VA to: (1) obtain the Veteran's outstanding service treatment records; (2) associate treatment records held in VA databases with the Veteran's claims file; and (3) obtain an adequate opinion for the Veteran's claimed headaches, to include migraines.

First, upon review of the Veteran's claims file, it appears the Veteran's service treatment records are incomplete. Although VA obtained and associated the Veteran's service records with his claims, the records do not include a report of medical examination for his separation from service in 2001. See September 2006 service treatment records; see also July 2022 DPRIS Response. No evidence of a further attempt to obtain the Veteran's service treatment records appears in the claims file. Accordingly, remand is required to allow VA to obtain the Veteran's service treatment records or, if not available, to document such a determination and afford the Veteran an opportunity to submit additional evidence showing his condition is related to his service. 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(c); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(3); Washington v. Nicholson, 19 Vet. App. 362, 369-70 (2005).

Second, although VA has attempted to obtain the Veteran's private treatment records on the Veteran's behalf and has received no response, the Veteran's VA treatment records reflect that the Veteran has previously provided some private treatment records to VA that do not appear in his claims file. Specifically, a November 2013 VA treatment record reflects that the Veteran brought 30 pages of medical records to his VA provider for review. In addition, a March 2015 VA treatment record shows the Veteran's primary care provider, Central Ohio Primary Care, faxed the Veteran's private treatment records to VA. However, these records do not appear in the Veteran's claims. As such, upon remand, VA should associate the Veteran's private treatment records previously provided to VA with his claims file. 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(c)(1)(B); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(3). 

Third, although VA obtained examinations for the Veteran's claimed headaches, to include migraines, in May 2022 and March 2024, and the Veteran has submitted a private opinion for his claim, the opinions are not adequate. Upon review of the May 2022 opinion, the Board noted that the opinion is based on incomplete service treatment records, as the examiner notes the Veteran's periods of service and relies on a 1998 report of medical examination to determine the Veteran had no headaches at the time of his separation from service. As the Board has discussed above, the Veteran last separated from service in July 2001 but no concurrent report of medical examination appears in his claims file. Moreover, the examiner notes that an October 2013 treatment record that related the Veteran's hemicranial headaches to neck pain but did not explain whether the diagnosed migraines on the May 2022 examination report were the same hemicranial headaches. As the negative May 2022 opinion was based on a finding without a factual predicate in the record, and lacked sufficient rationale, it cannot be relied upon. In addition, the March 2022 opinion obtained by VA, although positive, was not supported by the evidence of record nor by sufficient rationale. Specifically, the examiner reasoned 

Veteran is claiming service connection for migraine. During the exam, veteran was diagnosed with the claimed condition. Enlistment exam did not show claimed condition. In service records did not show the claimed condition. Separation exam did not show the claimed condition. Post service records showed record of the claimed condition in 2017. Veteran states condition was caused by neck injuries leading to bulging disc in his neck from service. States he started with low back pain, the mid back and then neck pain over time, and then developed migraines. Per medical literature, risks for the headaches includes slipped discs in the neck and these headaches may have similar symptoms as migraines including light sensitivity and nausea (https://mackinawsurgerycenter.com/orthopedic/what-is-causing-my-chronic-headaches-treatment-options-for-a-slipped-disc/#:~:text=Headaches%20from%20slipped%20discs%2C%20osteoarthritis,side%2C%20light%20sensitivity%20and%20nausea.) Records show veteran had bulging disc of back and also of neck. Although there is no documentation of headache during service, history is consistent with risk for cervicogenic headaches. Therefore, it is at least as likely as not that the claimed condition is due to military service.

Although on the DBQ the March 2024 examiner indicated the Veteran had migraines, she reasoned that the Veteran's cervicogenic headaches were related to a slipped disc in the Veteran's neck. However, the accompanying March 2024 examination report did not reflect the Veteran had cervicogenic headaches, and the examiner indicated that migraines and cervicogenic headaches have similar symptoms but did not indicate that cervicogenic headaches are migraines. Moreover, the examiner appeared to relinquish the task of determining etiology to the Veteran when relying on his statement that his low back pain developed into neck pain over time. An etiological opinion, such as this one, falls outside the realm of common knowledge of a lay person, such as the Veteran, and is precisely what the examiner is being called upon to provide. See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F. 3d 1372, 1376 (2007). It may be that the examiner agreed with the Veteran's assertion but without providing an explanation as to how the Veteran's service-connected lumbar degenerative disc disease caused or aggravated his neck condition, as well as an explanation as to why the examiner noted a diagnosis of migraines but provided a rationale for cervicogenic headaches, the Board has not been sufficiently informed of the reasoning to support the positive opinion. Finally, the Board acknowledges the Veteran's private primary care provider's opinion relating his claimed condition to his cervical issues, as well as his chronic pain from conditions caused by his military service but finds the opinion conclusory as there is no explanation to support it. As such, remand is required to obtain a new opinion as to the nature and etiology of the Veteran's claimed headaches, to include migraines. 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(d); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(4); see Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007) (once VA undertakes the effort to provide an examination or obtain an opinion in connection with a service connection claim, it must provide or obtain one that is adequate for purposes of the determination being made).

The matter is REMANDED for the following actions:

1. Obtain the Veteran's outstanding service treatment records and associate them with the Veteran's claims file, with specific attention to service treatment records near to his separation from service in July 2001, to include any reports of medical examination. Efforts to obtain these records must continue until it is determined that they do not exist or that further attempts to obtain them would be futile. Any non-existence or unavailability of the Veteran's service treatment records must be verified, and the Veteran and his representative must be duly notified. All actions must be documented and associated with the Veteran's claims file.

2. Associate the Veteran's private treatment records previously provided to VA with his claims file. See November 2013 and March 2015 VA treatment records. Document all searches and associate them with the Veteran's claims file.

3. Once the above is completed, obtain a new medical opinion as to the nature and etiology of the Veteran's claimed headaches, to include migraines. If the examiner deems it necessary, schedule the Veteran for an examination and/or additional testing. A copy of the Veteran's claims file, to include the above records as well as this REMAND, should be made available to and reviewed by the examiner.

(a.) The examiner should note the Veteran's diagnosis(es)/condition(s), to the extent possible. 

(b.) Thereafter, for each diagnosed or noted headache condition, the examiner should opine as to whether the Veteran's condition was at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher): 

(1) caused by or otherwise the result of his service, 

(2) proximately caused by his service-connected lumbar spine disability, reactive airway disease, rhinitis, and/or chronic pain from his service-connected disabilities, or 

(3) aggravated by his service-connected lumbar spine disability, reactive airway disease, rhinitis, and/or chronic pain from his service-connected disabilities. 

The examiner is advised that aggravation under 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(b) does not require that there be "permanent" worsening of the nonservice connected disability.

The examiner is also advised that 38 U.S.C. § 1110 allows for service connection of conditions that would have been less severe were it not for the service-connected disability even if the worsening of the condition occurs due to the natural progression of that condition. See Spicer v. McDonough, 61 F.4th 1360, 1364 (2023).

The examiner must provide separate opinions and rationales to address secondary causation and secondary aggravation. Atencio v. O'Rourke, 30 Vet. App. 74 (2018).

(Continued on the next page)

?

The examiner is further directed to address the Veteran's assertion that his service-connected lumbar spine disability led to his neck condition that subsequent led to his claimed headache condition, to include migraines. See March 2024 VA examination.

Each opinion expressed by the examiner should be accompanied by a complete rationale. If the examiner is unable to offer an opinion without resorting to speculation, a thorough explanation as to why an opinion cannot be rendered should be provided, including whether it is due to a limitation of general medical knowledge, the examiner's knowledge, or information about the Veteran's medical history.

 

 

L. CHU

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	D. Shorafa

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.