Citation Nr: A25034115
Decision Date: 04/14/25	Archive Date: 04/14/25

DOCKET NO. 250103-505720
DATE: April 14, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for the Veteran's cause of death, to include as due to herbicide agent exposure, is granted.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran died in July 2018 and his death certificate lists the causes of death as renal cell carcinoma and metastases to spleen, lymph nodes, and right adrenal.  

2. The Veteran's cause of death was related to his conceded exposure to herbicide agents, including 2,3,7,8 - Tetrachlorodibenzodioxin (TCDD), during his active service. 

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for service connection for the cause of the Veteran's death have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1310, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.307, 3.309, 3.312.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Air Force from March 1965 to September 1968.  The Veteran died in July 2018 and the Appellant is his surviving spouse.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a rating decision issued in August 2024 by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office, denying the Appellant's claim for service connection for the Veteran's cause of death, under the modernized appeals system known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA).  

In January 2025, the Appellant timely filed a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) and elected the Evidence Submission docket.  Based on the Appellant's election, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the August 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Appellant or her representative with, or within 90 days from receipt of, the VA Form 10182.  38 C.F.R. § 20.303.  If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal and prior to the date the Board received the VA Form 10182, or (2) more than 90 days following the date the Board received the VA Form 10182, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.303, 20.801.

If the Appellant would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Appellant may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Entitlement to service connection for the Veteran's cause of death.

The Appellant is seeking service connection for the cause of the Veteran's death, asserting his conceded exposure to herbicide agents, including 2,3,7,8 - Tetrachlorodibenzodioxin (TCDD), during his active service caused the renal cell carcinoma and metastases to spleen, lymph nodes, and right adrenal, that caused his death.  

By way of background, the Board observes that following the Veteran's July 2018 death, the Appellant filed her original claim for service connection for the Veteran's cause of death in August 2019.  An October 2019 rating decision denied the claim.  It is noted that in April 2022, the Appellant testified at a hearing before the Board in connection with a separate claim for nonservice-connected death burial benefits and in a September 2022 decision, the Board denied the appeal of that separate claim, but indicated a claim to reopen entitlement to service connection for the Veteran's cause of death had been raised during the hearing   and referred such claim to the AOJ for readjudication.

In October 2022, the Appellant's representative submitted a VA Form 20-0996 Request for Higher-Level Review (HLR) of the October 2019 rating decision, along with a request for a good cause extension of time for such filing due to COVID-19 related delays, citing VA's April 2020 letter on COVID-19 claims and appeals processing guidance.  In a December 2022 HLR return and rating decision (of which the Appellant was notified in January 2023), the AOJ identified a duty to assist error in the prior decision and ordered further development.  In a July 2024 rating decision, the AOJ again denied service connection, but the AOJ indicated that evidence of record shows the Veteran participated in a TERA and was exposed to herbicides while serving at Udorn Airfield in Thailand.  The AOJ further indicated that the Veteran's participation in a TERA is sufficient for establishing an in-service event for the purposes of obtaining an examination with a medical opinion.  These constitute favorable findings, and under the AMA, the Board is bound by the AOJ's favorable findings.  38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).  After a further duty to assist error was identified for failure to obtain a TERA opinion, such opinion was obtained in August 2024, and service connection was again denied in the August 2024 rating decision on appeal.  

Pursuant to 38 U.S.C. § 1310, Dependency and Indemnity Compensation (DIC) is paid to a surviving spouse of a qualifying Veteran who died from a service-connected disability.  Darby v. Brown, 10 Vet. App. 243, 245 (1997); 38 U.S.C. § 1310(a); 38 C.F.R. § 3.5(a)(1).  The death of a Veteran will be considered as having been due to a service-connected disability when the evidence establishes that such disability was either the principal or a contributory cause of death.  38 C.F.R. § 3.312(a).  Contributory cause of death is inherently one not related to the principal cause.  In determining whether the service-connected disability contributed to death, it must be shown that it aided or lent assistance to the production of death. 38 C.F.R. § 3.312(c).

DIC is also awarded if the Veteran's death can be service connected.  38 U.S.C. § 1310; 38 C.F.R. § 3.312.  That is, service connection for the cause of a Veteran's death is granted, postmortem, and DIC is awarded, if the evidence shows that a fatal disease or injury was actually incurred or aggravated in service, though service connection had not been granted for the disease or injury prior to a Veteran's death, and was either the principal or a contributory cause of death.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.

To establish service connection for the cause of a Veteran's death, due to a cause not already service connected, the evidence must show that a disability that either was incurred in or aggravated by service, or which was proximately due to or the result of a service-connected condition, was either a principal or contributory cause of death.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 1112, 1113, 1310; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.307, 3.309, 3.310(a), 3.312(a); see also Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439, 448 (1995); Cuevas v. Principi, 3 Vet. App. 542, 548 (1992), citing Rabideau v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 141, 143 (1992).

For a service-connected disability to be the principal cause of death, it must singularly or jointly with some other condition be the immediate or underlying cause of death or be etiologically related thereto.  38 C.F.R. § 3.312(b).

Generally, service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from a disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service.  38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.  Service connection on a direct incurrence basis generally requires evidence showing (1) a present disability; (2) an in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service - the so-called "nexus" requirement.  Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

Veterans who, during active military, naval, or air service, served in the Republic of Vietnam, to include blue water shores, during the period beginning on January 9, 1962, and ending on May 7, 1975, are presumed to have been exposed to herbicide agents.  38 U.S.C. § 1116; 38 C.F.R. § 3.307(a)(6).   Also, VA has recognized herbicide agent exposure for Veterans who served during the Vietnam War on C-123 flights, ground maintenance crews, or aeromedical crews; Korean Demilitarized Zone from September 1, 1967, to August 30, 1976; U.S. or Royal Thai military base in Thailand from January 9, 1962, to June 30, 1976; or herbicide tests and storage locations outside Vietnam.

Further, for those Veterans who have been exposed to herbicide agents, certain diseases are acknowledged to be presumptively related to such exposure.  38 U.S.C. § 1116(a)(2); 38 C.F.R. § 3.309(e).  The diseases listed at 38 C.F.R. § 3.309(e) shall have become manifest to a degree of 10 percent or more at any time after service with exceptions that are not relevant in this matter.  38 C.F.R. § 3.307(a)(6)(ii).

While renal cell carcinoma, the cause of the Veteran's death in this case, is not acknowledged to be presumptively related to herbicide agent exposure, a claimant is not precluded from establishing service connection on a direct, facts-found basis.  Combee v. Brown, 34 F.3d 1039, 1042 (Fed. Cir. 1994).

When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, the Secretary shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; see also Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49, 53 (1990).

After a review of the record, the Board finds that the evidence persuasively weighs in favor of the Appellant's claim, and thus, the Board concludes that service connection for the Veteran's cause of death is warranted.

The Veteran died in July 2018 and his death certificate reflects that the causes of death were renal cell carcinoma (RCC or kidney cancer) and its metastases to spleen, lymph nodes and right adrenal, with such diagnosis and its treatment confirmed in the Veteran's medical records prior to his death.  Although service connection had not been established for this, or any other disabilities during the Veteran's lifetime, service connection for the cause of death may be granted if the evidence demonstrates that a disability of service origin was either the principal or contributory cause of death, as noted.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 1310; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.312(a).  Here, the Appellant maintains that the Veteran's kidney cancer was related to his presumptively established in-service exposure to herbicide agents, specifically TCDD, during his service at Udorn Royal Thai Air Force Base during the applicable periods of the Vietnam War.  In that regard, the Board notes that a TERA memo dated June 2023 confirms the Veteran was presumptively exposed to TCDD during such active service in Thailand.  

It thus has been established that the Veteran's death was due to renal cell carcinoma and metastases to spleen, lymph nodes and right adrenal, and that he was exposed to herbicide agents, specifically TCDD, in service.  Accordingly, at issue before the Board is whether there is a nexus between the Veteran's cause of death and such conceded in-service herbicide agent exposure. 

Turning to the medical opinions in the record specifically addressing whether there is a nexus between the Veteran's established toxic exposures during his active service and his fatal renal cell carcinoma, there is opinion evidence both against and in support of the claim.

In August 2024, a VA medical examiner provided a TERA opinion as well as an essentially duplicative "opinion regarding conflicting medical evidence."  The examiner indicated review of the Veteran's service records, death certificate, private medical records, public information generally referring to Agent Orange (AO) and other exposures and acknowledged the finding that the Veteran qualified for presumptive exposure to the herbicide agent 2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzodioxin (TCDD) during his active military service.  The examiner also stated that the route of exposure was described as "oral," with unknown frequency, and that PPE was reportedly not used.  The examiner opined that it was less likely than not that the Veteran's conceded exposure to the herbicide agent TCDD caused the kidney cancer that then caused his death.  

The examiner opined that "Herbicide Agent - 2,3,7,8- Tetrachlorodibenzodioxin (TCDD) is not the cause of renal cell carcinoma," stating that "[a]lthough studies have shown suggesting a link between agent orange and renal cell carcinoma, . . . there are no definitive conclusion[s].  As per review of STRs, there are no objective finding[s] that currently link Herbicide Agent - 2,3,7,8 - Tetrachlorodibenzodioxin (TCDD) and renal cell carcinoma."  The examiner also stated, however, that "[t]here is no medical or scientific evidence available that provides any indication of a relationship between the development of the condition at issue and the TERA."  The examiner then proceeded to provide a general description of kidney cancer, and the following additional rationale:  "As per VA, the two active ingredients in the Agent Orange herbicide combination were equal amounts of 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid (2,4-D) and 2,4,5-trichlorophenoxyacetic acid (2,4,5-T), which contained traces of 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD).  The dioxin TCDD was an unwanted byproduct of herbicide production.  Dioxins are pollutants that are released into the environment by burning waste, diesel exhaust, chemical manufacturing, and other processes.  TCDD is the most toxic of the dioxins and is classified as a human carcinogen by the Environmental Protection Agency.  Agent Orange dries quickly after spraying and breaks down within hours to days when exposed to sunlight (if not bound chemically to a biological surface such as soil, leaves and grass) and is no longer harmful."  The examiner concluded that "[t]his is not secondary to hazardous exposure per the above resources."       

The Board finds the VA examiner's opinion to be inadequate for several reasons.  First, while acknowledging that "studies have shown" there is some evidence linking AO to renal cell carcinoma, the examiner deemed this evidence to be without "definitive conclusion," offering no further discussion of what such evidence reveals and how it might relate to the Veteran's specific case.  The examiner then stated that there is therefore "no medical or scientific evidence available that provides any indication of a relationship between the development of the condition at issue and the TERA."  The Board notes that statements are not consistent with each other.  Furthermore, the examiner's general discussion about AO and it becoming unharmful when exposed to sunlight "if not bound chemically to a biological surface such as soil, leaves and grass" is not relevant to the Veteran's specific case.  It has been conceded that the Veteran was exposed to TCDD, the examiner even stating the exposure route was "oral" with PPE reportedly not used.  Moreover, during the April 2022 hearing in connection with the Appellant's separate claim for burial benefits, noted above, the Appellant's representative further discussed various ways in which the Veteran would have been "sprayed" or otherwise directly exposed during the service in Thailand upon which his presumed exposure is based.  The examiner did not address these statements.  Moreover, the examiner's allusion to AO breaking down and becoming unharmful relates only to circumstances that have nothing to do with direct exposure of TCDD (acknowledged by the examiner to be the most toxic dioxin and a known carcinogen), including to situations limited to when the herbicide agent is exposed to sunlight but not chemically bound to biological surfaces, such as soil, leaves, and grass.  In sum, therefore, the August 2024 VA examiner's medical opinion is internally inconsistent, fails to address all relevant evidence and draws conclusions without adequately applying pertinent medical and scientific principles to the facts specific to the Veteran's individual circumstances.  For at least the foregoing reasons, therefore, the opinion is inadequate.

On the contrary, the Board assigns significant weight to a private medical opinion provided by the Appellant that is in favor of a nexus.  The opinion is dated January 9, 2025, and was associated with the claims file on March 7, 2025, and thus was submitted within the evidentiary window applicable to the Evidence Submission docket selected by the Appellant.  The private examiner has both M.D. and Ph.D. degrees, with training and experience that includes internal medicine, neurology, pharmacology, toxicology, and experimental therapeutics, with numerous peer-reviewed articles in these and related fields.  In providing the opinion, the examiner indicated a review of the Veteran's file and set forth a comprehensive account of the Veteran's history, specifically as it related to the kidney cancer that caused his death, as well as a detailed chemical discussion of the specific toxin, TCDD, to which it has been conceded the Veteran was exposed.  The examiner also presented a broader discussion of the class of which this toxin is a member, and further addressed the pharmacodynamics of these toxins in the human body, and the scientific mechanisms regarding the same.  In providing the rationale, the examiner referenced multiple publications in the scientific literature in support of a positive nexus and noted that organic solvents, including dioxin "are retained in some body tissues for a long time, so target organ exposure continues even after external exposure ceases."  Further, as per the examiner, "[a] brief external exposure can involve protracted exposure of many organs.  Disease induction, the point at which initiation of the disease occurs (the disease might not be apparent or detectable at this point), might even occur after external exposure ceases.  Benzene and its inherent properties have the propensity to stay dormant in the human body for decades before symptoms are apparent."  The Board notes that as explained by the examiner, dioxin is a derivative of benzene, and the terms are used interchangeably in the pertinent toxicant research, given their similar actions on the human body.  The examiner further stated that epidemiological and experimental studies show there is a concrete causal relationship between occupational hazards including solvent exposure and cancer of the kidney and that there is evidence that shows dioxin causes damage at the DNA level, leading to genetic expression changes (cancer).  "This is consistent with [the Veteran's] medical history where literature supports dioxin as a cause of RCC," and that in the examiner's opinion, "dioxin itself is a strong enough risk factor that one cannot deny its nexus to this disease.  Thus, it is my medical opinion the Veteran's RCC is at least as likely as not secondary to the Veteran's dioxin exposures." 

The Board finds this private medical opinion to be highly probative because it is based on accurate medical history, reflects thorough consideration of the relevant facts relating specifically to the Veteran's condition and circumstances, and provides an explanation that contains clear conclusions and supporting data based on detailed medical and scientific principles and mechanisms supporting a connection between the Veteran's cause of death and the conceded in-service exposure to the herbicide agent TCDD.  Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 302-305 (2008).  

As there are no contrary negative opinions adequate for review, the only competent evidence of record weighs in favor of the Appellant's claim for service connection for the Veteran's cause of death.  Accordingly, as the Board finds that the evidence persuasively weighs in favor of a finding that a disability of service origin was a principal cause of the Veteran's death, the benefit of the doubt doctrine does not apply.  Service connection for the cause of the Veteran's death is thus warranted and the Appellant's appeal is granted.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

 

 

Melanie J. Mann

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Skacel, Patrick T.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.