Citation Nr: A25034497
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 241006-480089
DATE: April 15, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for hypertension is granted.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for cholecystectomy is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for dyspnea is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for solitary nodule of lung is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

Resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, his hypertension began during active service.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for service connection for hypertension are met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran had honorable active service with the United States Army from November 1986 to January 1990.

In the October 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the September 2024 and August 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decisions on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of service connection for GERD, lung nodule, dyspnea, and cholecystectomy, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

The Board interprets the Veteran's statements as reflecting an intent to have this matter reviewed in an expeditious manner, which the Board finds to be an implicit waiver of the Veteran's right to change Board dockets under Williams v. McDonough, 37?Vet. App.?305 (2024), especially in this case where a grant of service connection for hypertension is warranted and other claims are remanded due to pre-decisional duty to assist the Veteran errors. 

Service Connection

Generally, service connection will be granted for a disability resulting from an injury or disease caused or aggravated by active military service. 38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a). A grant for service connection for a disability requires: (1) a present disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability; (2) an in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship ("nexus") between the present disability and the in-service event, injury, or disease. 38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303; Walker v. Shinseki, 708 F.3d 1331 (Fed. Cir. 2013).    

Service connection may be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge, when all the evidence, including the evidence pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d). Additionally, service connection may be granted for specified chronic diseases when shown in service with subsequent manifestations at a later date, however remote, unless clearly attributable to intercurrent causes. 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303(b), 3.307.  

Some chronic diseases are subject to presumptive service connection, although, not otherwise established as incurred or aggravated by service if manifest to a compensable degree, within an applicable time limit, provided that the rebuttable presumptive provisions of § 3.307 are also satisfied. See also 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.309. 

In this case, the Board has reviewed all the evidence of record, with an emphasis on the evidence relevant to this appeal.  Although the Board has an obligation to provide reasons and bases supporting its decision, there is no need to discuss, in detail, every piece of evidence of record.  Gonzales v. West, 218 F.3d 1378, 1380-81 (Fed. Cir. 2000) (holding that VA must review the entire record but does not have to discuss each piece of evidence). Hence, the Board will summarize the relevant evidence where appropriate and the Board's analysis below will focus specifically on what the evidence shows, or fails to show, as to the claim on appeal.

When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, the Secretary shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b). This benefit-of-the-doubt rule applies if the competing evidence is nearly equal but does not apply when the evidence persuasively favors one side or the other. See Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

Entitlement to service connection for hypertension

In this case the Veteran seeks entitlement to service connection for hypertension. 

The favorable findings in the September 2024 rating decision stated that the Veteran had a diagnosis of hypertension. See Rating Decision-Narrative, Favorable Findings, received September 2024.

The Veteran's service records show that he was advised that he had hypertension and show elevated blood pressure readings. For example, in May 1989, the Veteran's service records contain a supplemental medical data sheet and in that sheet the Veteran was advised that he had hypertension with a blood pressure reading of 120/70. See STR-Medical Received February 2015. 

Additionally, treatment at the VA from April 2008 noted that the Veteran had a medical history of hypertension. At that time, he was using medication for hypertension including Atenolol. See Medical Treatment Record-Government Facility received June 2008.  

The law is clear. When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding the merits of an issue material to the determination of the matter, the Veteran shall be afforded the benefit of the doubt and prevail upon the issue. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b).

Resolving any reasonable doubt in favor of the Veteran, the Board finds that the Veteran's hypertension reasonably incurred in his service and that the condition continued afterwards. Accordingly, the Veteran's claim for service connection for hypertension is granted.

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to service connection for GERD is remanded.

Although further delay is regrettable, a remand is necessary to fulfill a pre-decisional duty to assist the Veteran.

The VA has a duty to assist Veterans in obtaining records. In particular, the VA will make as many requests as are necessary to obtain relevant records from a federal department or agency. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(2). The VA's duty to obtain missing federal records also includes the duty to notify the Veteran if they are reasonably certain that records do not exist or further attempts to find them would be futile. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(e)(1).

Here, the Veteran reported that he had treatment in Lebanon, PA as early as 2000. See VA 21-4138 received December 2008. He also reported that he had treatment with the VA for GERD between 1990 and 2006 and suggested that treatment was missing from immediately after his service. See Form 9 received July 2010.   

On review of the Veteran's records, while some early treatment was available in the records, this treatment all appeared to be specific to the Veteran's upper extremity condition. Some available VA treatment suggested that the Veteran should have additional VA treatment in the records. For example, VA treatment in 2006 stated that the Veteran had been previously seen in the clinic and had a prior Nissen fundoplication surgery. He also had a long history of GERD. See Medical Treatment Record-Government Facility received December 2008. A VA examination in January 2009 also noted that the Veteran had a fundoplication surgery at the VA in 2001. See VA Examination received January 2009. 

Therefore, the Board remands the claims for missing relevant VA treatment records from 1990 to around 2006. If these records are unavailable the Veteran should be notified as described above. This is a pre-decisional duty to assist the Veteran.    

2. Entitlement to service connection for cholecystectomy is remanded.

See section 4. 

3. Entitlement to service connection for dyspnea is remanded.

See section 4. 

4. Entitlement to service connection for solitary nodule of lung is remanded.

Although further delay is regrettable, a remand is necessary to fulfill a pre-decisional duty to assist the Veteran.

The VA must provide an examination when there is: (1) competent evidence of a current disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability; (2) evidence establishing that an event, injury, or disease occurred in service or establishing certain diseases manifesting during an applicable presumptive period for which the claimant qualifies; (3) an indication that the disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability may be associated with the Veteran's service or with another service-connected disability, but (4) insufficient competent medical evidence on file for VA to make a decision on the claim. See McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(4)(i) (2018).

The Veteran filed a supplemental claim for service connection for a lung nodule, dyspnea, and cholecystectomy related to his exposure to burn pits. He also reported that he was exposed to various toxins related to his in-service duties. See VA 21-4138 received April 2024. 

The Veteran has current diagnoses for all conditions, and the VA has conceded that he had some toxic exposure related to his job as a cannon crewmember. 

Considering the totality of the evidence, the record contains insufficient competent medical evidence, to decide the claim. The last requirement of the McLendon analysis is satisfied and the VA must provide a competent medical opinion.  

The Board notes that the Veteran has not attended some scheduled examinations. 

However, even if the Veteran fails to attend examinations, the AOJ should obtain a competent medical opinion based on the records. 

In October 2024, the Veteran stated that he would attend an examination at the VA but not at a contractor. 

While it is unclear to the Board whether a VA practitioner is available to perform VA examinations and provide opinions, for the above claims, the Veteran has expressed an interest to attend examinations. 

However, the Board must remind the Veteran that he has a duty to assist with his claims. VA's duty to assist is not always a one-way street. See Wood v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 190, 193 (1991). With emphasis, the Veteran must cooperate in VA's efforts to obtain evidence needed to adjudicate his claims, including keeping his contact information up to date, attending scheduled VA examinations, and promptly communicating with VA why he cannot attend a scheduled VA examination.

The Board will remand the claims because it finds that the failure of the AOJ to obtain medical opinions was a pre-decisional duty to assist error. 

The Veteran is advised, that if he fails to attend scheduled examinations in the future without good cause this may impact negatively on his claims, as an opinion may be obtained without an examination. 

Therefore, the Board remands the claims to attempt to obtain VA examinations with medical opinions. This is a pre-decisional duty to assist error. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Take all appropriate actions to attempt to obtain potentially VA treatment records, focusing on treatment from 1990 to 2006. Although all relevant VA treatment records should be obtained if available. Please include any imaging, surgery notes, specialist treatment, or imaged records. 

As discussed above, the Veteran has reported treatment previously for GERD, including a fundoplication surgery. 

All reasonable attempts should be made to obtain such records.  If any records cannot be obtained after reasonable efforts have been made, issue a formal determination that such records do not exist or that further efforts to obtain such records would be futile, which should be documented in the claims file.  The Veteran must be notified of the attempts made and why further attempts would be futile, and allowed the opportunity to provide such records, as provided in 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(b)(2) and 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(e). 

2. Schedule the Veteran for an examination regarding the likely etiology of his lung nodule. 

If the Veteran fails to attend the examination an opinion is still required based on the available evidence to adjudicate the Veteran's claims.

All relevant evidence of record should be reviewed by the examiner before providing an opinion. The examiner should take a full history from the Veteran and make note of the history in his or her report. The examiner should also perform all indicated tests and studies and should completely document the examination including all the diagnoses noted during the examination in his or her report. Please note that the Veteran claims that this condition is related to exposures in service which he has claimed included burn pits and toxins as a cannon crewmember. The VA has conceded that he had some toxic exposure related to his job as a cannon crewmember. The VA has also conceded that he has this current disability. 

(a.) Following review of the relevant evidence, the examiner shall determine whether the Veteran's lung nodule is caused by, aggravated by, or otherwise related to toxic exposure risk activity associated with the Veteran's active service.

(b.) In answering this question, the examiner must consider the total potential exposure through all applicable deployments and the synergistic, combined effect of all of his toxic exposure risk activities.

(c.) Is the lung nodule otherwise at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) related to service? Why or why not?

(d.) The examiner must provide a complete rationale for all opinions.

3. Schedule the Veteran for an examination regarding the likely etiology of his dyspnea. 

If the Veteran failed to attend the examination and opinion is still required based on the available evidence to adjudicate the Veteran's claims.

All relevant evidence of record should be reviewed by the examiner before providing an opinion. The examiner should take a full history from the Veteran and make note of the history in his or her report. The examiner should also perform all indicated tests and studies and should completely document the examination including all the diagnoses noted during the examination in his or her report. Please note that the Veteran claims that this condition is related to exposures in service which he has claimed included burn pits and toxins as a cannon crewmember. The VA has conceded that he had some toxic exposure related to his job as a cannon crewmember. The VA has also conceded that he has this current disability.

(a.) Following review of the relevant evidence, the examiner shall determine whether the Veteran's dyspnea is caused by, aggravated by, or otherwise related to toxic exposure risk activity associated with the Veteran's active service.

(b.) In answering this question, the examiner must consider the total potential exposure through all applicable deployments and the synergistic, combined effect of all of his toxic exposure risk activities.

(c.) Is the dyspnea otherwise at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) related to service? Why or why not?

(d.) The examiner must provide a complete rationale for all opinions.

4. Schedule the Veteran for an examination regarding the likely etiology of his cholecystectomy. 

If the Veteran failed to attend the examination and opinion is still required based on the available evidence to adjudicate the Veteran's claims.

All relevant evidence of record should be reviewed by the examiner before providing an opinion. The examiner should take a full history from the Veteran and make note of the history in his or her report. The examiner should also perform all indicated tests and studies and should completely document the examination including all the diagnoses noted during the examination in his or her report. Please note that the Veteran claims that this condition is related to exposures in service which he has claimed included burn pits and toxins as a cannon crewmember. The VA has conceded that he had some toxic exposure related to his job as a cannon crewmember

(a.) Following review of the relevant evidence, the examiner shall determine whether the Veteran's cholecystectomy is caused by, aggravated by, or otherwise related to toxic exposure risk activity associated with the Veteran's active service.

(b.) In answering this question, the examiner must consider the total potential exposure through all applicable deployments and the synergistic, combined effect of all of his toxic exposure risk activities.

(c.) Is the cholecystectomy otherwise at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) related to service? Why or why not?

(d.) The examiner must provide a complete rationale for all opinions.

 

 

B. MULLINS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Parnell, C. E.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.