Citation Nr: A25034609
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 241001-479576
DATE: April 15, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for a heart disability to include arteriosclerotic heart disease and myocardial infarction residuals is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a recurrent right wrist disability to include injury residuals and degenerative arthritis is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. Service connection has been established solely for migraine. 

2. A heart disability was not shown in service or for many years thereafter. 

3. The diagnosed coronary artery disease and myocardial infarction residuals have not been shown to have originated during active service and may not be presumed to have been incurred in active service.  

4. The diagnosed coronary artery disease and myocardial infarction residuals have not been shown to be related to the service-connected migraine.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for service connection for a heart disability to include coronary artery disease and myocardial infarction residuals have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 1112, 1113, 1131, 1137, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.307, 3.309, 3.310(a).  

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran had active service from July 1975 to March 1977. 

In October 2023, the Agency of Original Jurisdiction denied service connection for  for service connection for a heart disability and a right wrist arthritic disability.  In October 2024, the Veteran submitted a Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), VA Form 10182, and elected Direct Review docket.  The Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the Agency of Original Jurisdiction decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  If evidence was submitted during the period after the Agency of Original Jurisdiction issued the decision, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  If the Veteran would like Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim, VA Form 20-0995, and submit or identify this evidence.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  Specific instructions for filing a supplemental claim are included with this decision.  However, as the Board is remanding the claim of service connection for a right wrist disability, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the Agency of Original Jurisdiction in the adjudication of that claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Service Connection for a Heart Disability 

The Veteran asserts that service connection for a heart disability is warranted as the diagnosed coronary artery disease and myocardial infarction residuals were incurred as the result of "exposure" or due to the diagnosed hypertension.  

Service connection may be granted for recurrent disability arising from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service.  38 U.S.C. § 1131.  Service connection may be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge, when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).  

Where a veteran served continuously for ninety days or more during a period of active service and arteriosclerosis to include coronary artery disease becomes manifest to a degree of ten percent within one year of termination of such service, such disease shall be presumed to have been incurred in service even though there is no evidence of such disease during the period of service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 1112, 1113, 1137; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307, 3.309.

Service connection may be granted for disability, which is proximately due to, or the result of a service-connected disease or injury.  38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a).  Service connection shall be granted on a secondary basis under the provisions of 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a) where it is demonstrated that a service-connected disorder has aggravated a nonservice connected disability.  Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439 (1995).  Service connection has been established solely for migraine.  Service connection for hypertension since the disability neither occurred in nor was caused by service and his service treatment records did not contain complaints, treatment, or diagnosis for this disability.  

The service treatment records do not refer to a heart disability or a cardiovascular disability.  

Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) clinical documentation dated in June 2019 indicate that the Veteran underwent cardiac catheterization.  The Veteran was found to have sustained a myocardial infarction.  

The report of an April 2023 heart examination conducted for VA states that the Veteran was diagnosed with "arteriosclerotic heart disease (coronary artery disease" and a myocardial infarction in 2019.  The examiner concluded that "the claimed condition was less likely than not (likelihood is less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness."  The nurse practitioner commented that "the review of the service treatment records is silent for the report or treatment of heart condition" and "therefore the Veteran claimed old myocardial infarction and atherosclerotic heart disease is less likely than not (likelihood is less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness."  

In the Veteran's Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), VA Form 10182, the Veteran's attorney asserts that "heart condition as per 38 C.F.R. 3.310 and/or due to exposure and/or due to recurring hypertension onset in service" and "the Veteran's heart condition has several avenues of possible service connection which were not fully adjudicated."  The Board observes that service connection for hypertension has been denied.  The Veteran has identified no specific "exposure" which caused the diagnosed coronary artery disease and myocardial infarction.  

The Veteran asserts that the diagnosed cardiovascular disability is related to active service.  Lay assertions may serve to support a claim for service connection by establishing the occurrence of observable events or the presence of disability or symptoms of disability subject to lay observation.  38 U.S.C. § 1154(a); 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a); Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372 (Fed. Cir. 2007); Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331 (Fed. Cir. 2006).  Lay evidence can be competent and sufficient to establish a diagnosis or etiology when: (1) a lay person is competent to identify a medical condition; (2) the lay person is reporting a contemporaneous medical diagnosis; or (3) lay testimony describing symptoms at the time supports a later diagnosis by a medical professional.  Davidson v. Shinseki, 581 F.3d 1313 (Fed. Cir. 2009).  The Veteran did not offer any medical qualifications.  The Board finds that the lay statements do not constitute competent evidence to establish that the diagnosed coronary artery disease and myocardial infarction originated during active service.  The question of the etiology of such cardiovascular disability requires medical training and is too complex to be addressed by a layperson. 

Coronary artery disease and myocardial infarction residuals were initially manifested many years after service separation.  No competent evidence conveys that the disability originated during active service. Therefore, the Board finds that service connection for a heart disability to include coronary artery disease and myocardial infarction residuals is not warranted.

REASONS FOR REMAND

Entitlement to service connection for a right wrist disability to include injury residuals and degenerative arthritis is remanded.

The Veteran asserts that a recurrent right wrist disability is warranted as he sustained recurrent right wrist injury residuals during active service. 

VA duty to assist includes, in appropriate cases, the duty to conduct a thorough and contemporaneous medical examination which is accurate and fully descriptive.  McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006); Green v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 121 (1991).  When VA undertakes to obtain an evaluation, it must ensure that the evaluation is adequate.  Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 312 (2007). 

The service treatment records reflect that the Veteran was seen for right wrist trauma.  A July 1976 treatment record states that the Veteran reported having sustained a right forearm strain or sprain.  On examination, the Veteran exhibited right arm limitation due to pain, localized tenderness, "misalignment slightly noticeable," and slight swelling.  An impression of "possible fractured wrist" was advanced.  Contemporaneous right wrist X ray studies were reported to be normal.  

The report of an April 2023 wrist examination conducted for VA states that the Veteran was diagnosed with right wrist degenerative arthritis.  The examiner concluded that "the claimed condition was less likely than not (likelihood is less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness."  The nurse practitioner commented that: "review of the VA memo indicates that the service treatment records showed that the Veteran was seen for right forearm and right wrist condition with negative X ray result thus nexus" and "however, the review of the service treatment records and post service record is silence for the report of wrist/forearm condition thus no chronicity or continuity established."  The nurse practitioner did not address whether the diagnosed right wrist degenerative arthritis was related to the documented in service right wrist trauma.  Considering such deficiency, the Board finds that the examination report is of limited probative value.  Further VA wrist evaluation is needed.  That is a pre-decisional error. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Schedule the Veteran for a VA wrist examination conducted by a medical doctor to assist in determining the relationship between the diagnosed right wrist degenerative arthritis and active service.  The examiner must review the record and should note that in the report.  A rationale for all opinions should be provided.  The examiner should:

(a.) Identify all recurrent right wrist disabilities found.

(b.) Opine whether it is at least as likely as not (at least an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence) that the diagnosed right wrist degenerative arthritis had its onset during active service or is related to any incident of service to include the documented in service right wrist trauma.

 

 

J. T. HUTCHESON

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	S. Smith, Associate Counsel 

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.