Citation Nr: A25034680
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 240710-456503
DATE: April 15, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral lower extremity peripheral neuropathy is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for urinary frequency is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

The available evidence does not establish that the Veteran's bilateral lower extremity peripheral neuropathy is related to her active service.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for service connection for bilateral lower extremity peripheral neuropathy are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Air Force from May 1986 to May 1990.

These matters come before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from December 2023 and January 2024 rating decisions by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In July 2024, the Veteran timely filed a VA Form 10182 Notice of Disagreement (NOD) appealing the decisions to the Board and requesting Direct Review by a Veterans Law Judge (VLJ). See 38 U.S.C. § 5104C; 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.301-20.303. (The NOD also purported to appeal a June 2023 decision-however, the appeal was not timely for that decision, and so the issues in the June 2023 decision are not currently on appeal.)

Under Direct Review, the record on appeal is limited to the record that was before VA on the date the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (in this case, the RO) issued the decision on appeal. In general, evidence may not be added to the record after that date; furthermore, a Direct Review appellant is not entitled to a hearing before the Board. See 38 U.S.C. § 7113; 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. In this case, the record on appeal has been closed from December 12, 2023 for the issue of entitlement to service connection for a psychiatric disability, and from January 10, 2024 for the issues of entitlement to service connection for bilateral lower extremity peripheral neuropathy, and entitlement to service connection for urinary frequency.

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral lower extremity peripheral neuropathy

Entitlement to service connection on a direct basis requires (1) evidence of current nonservice-connected disability; (2) evidence of in-service incurrence or aggravation of disease or injury; and (3) evidence of a nexus between the in-service disease or injury and the current nonservice-connected disability. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a); Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

VA has conceded that the Veteran has current diagnoses of right and left lower extremity peripheral neuropathy. Therefore, the first element of direct service connection is met.

VA found that the Veteran participated in a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA) during service-specifically, that her duties involved handling and the storage of flammable and otherwise hazardous materials. Therefore, the second element of direct service connection is met.

In October 2023, a VA examiner stated that the Veteran's bilateral lower extremity peripheral neuropathy was at least as likely as not related to her military service, but unfortunately did not support this conclusion with adequate rationale:

Veteran had no issues related to the claimed NERVE CONDITION prior to military service. Current diagnosis of NEURO PERIPHERAL NERVE is related to the [in-service injury, event, or illness]. There is evidence of chronicity, and a nexus has been established. Neuro peripheral nerve conditions, also known as peripheral neuropathy, can exhibit various degrees of chronicity, ranging from acute and transient to chronic and long-lasting. Chronicity of Neuro peripheral Nerve Conditions 

Acute: Some peripheral neuropathies can occur suddenly and resolve on their own, often associated with temporary factors like viral infections or medication side effects. 

Chronic: Many cases of peripheral neuropathy are chronic, meaning they persist over an extended period, often for months or years.

Association with In-Service Injury, Event, or Illness: Toxic Exposures, Injuries, Infections, Chronic Illnesses, Medications.

The October 2023 VA examiner offered no explanation for the "established" nexus between the Veteran's service and her peripheral neuropathy, other than the fact that the Veteran did not have peripheral neuropathy prior to entering service. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.304(b). While they stated that there was "evidence of chronicity," they had stated in an earlier part of the examination report that the Veteran's peripheral neuropathy had its onset in 2005, 15 years after her separation from service. The October 2023 VA examiner had also opined in an earlier section that the Veteran's bilateral lower extremity peripheral neuropathy was secondary to diabetes; the Veteran was denied service connection for diabetes in an unappealed June 2023 decision. Because of the vagueness and inconsistency of the October 2023 VA medical opinion, the Board cannot rely on it as evidence. See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 301-304 (2008) (an adequate medical opinion must support its conclusions with sufficient data and reasoning).

Due to the deficiencies of the October 2023 VA examination, the RO deferred adjudication of the issue of entitlement to service connection for bilateral lower extremity peripheral neuropathy in December 2023, and a new VA examination was obtained in January 2024. 

The January 2024 VA examiner opined that the Veteran's peripheral neuropathy was less likely than not secondary to in-service toxic exposures, reasoning that there was "no pathophysiologic relationship between the indicated toxic exposure risk activity(ies)... and the current diagnosis." The January 2024 VA examiner went on to say that the Veteran's "outside risk factors" (specifically, her non-service-connected diabetes) "far outweigh those of the TERA exposure." The Board finds the January 2024 VA medical opinion to be probative evidence, as it is based upon consideration of the Veteran's full medical history and supports its conclusions with sufficient data and reasoning. See Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 123 (2007); Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 301-304 (2008).

There is no other evidence of record that appears to support a link between the Veteran's military service, including her in-service toxic exposures, and her bilateral lower extremity peripheral neuropathy. As the evidence weighs substantially against finding a nexus between the Veteran's in-service injury and the claimed condition, the third requirement of direct service connection is not met, and entitlement to service connection for bilateral lower extremity peripheral neuropathy is denied. See 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.3; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

REASONS FOR REMAND

Entitlement to service connection for a psychiatric disability is remanded

The Board finds that remand is necessary for a new VA medical examination regarding the etiology of the Veteran's acquired psychiatric condition, as the previous examination of record is inadequate.

VA has a duty to ensure that any medical examination or opinion it provides is adequate. Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 312 (2007). A medical opinion is adequate where it is based upon consideration of the full medical history and describes a disability in sufficient detail so that the Board's evaluation will be fully informed. Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 123 (2007). The medical opinion must support its conclusions with sufficient data and reasoning. Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 301-304 (2008). Failure to ensure a VA medical examination is adequate is a duty to assist error, warranting remand. See 38 C.F.R. § 20.802.

The Veteran underwent her first and only VA examination evaluating her psychiatric condition in September 2023. The September 2023 VA examiner found that the Veteran had adjustment disorder with anxiety, and stated that this condition was at least as likely as not related to her military service. However, the VA examiner's only support for this opinion was a medical journal article describing a link between chronic pain and anxiety. The Veteran is not currently service connected for a pain disorder, or any other disability, and the September 2023 VA examiner did not specifically opine that the Veteran's chronic pain was service connected. Therefore, the September 2023 VA examination did not clearly answer the question of whether the Veteran's psychiatric condition was related to her military service, and a remand is necessary to obtain an adequate medical opinion.

Entitlement to service connection for urinary frequency is remanded.

In January 2024, a VA examiner opined that the Veteran's bladder condition was less likely than not related to her in-service toxic exposures, and more likely related to her "other risk factors," including "stress" and "PTSD." As the examiner indicated that the Veteran's bladder condition may be at least partially caused by her claimed psychiatric condition, the issues of entitlement to service connection for urinary frequency and entitlement to service connection for a psychiatric disability are inextricably intertwined, and must be remanded together. See Harris v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 180 (1991).

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Obtain an opinion from an appropriate clinician to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's claimed psychiatric disability. If the clinician believes a new in-person or telehealth examination is necessary to properly evaluate the Veteran, one should be scheduled. After reviewing the entire claims file, including a copy of this remand, the examiner should answer the following:

(a)	Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's psychiatric disability was caused or aggravated by an injury, disease, or event during her active service?

The examiner must provide a complete rationale for all opinions, supported by evidence and citing any records or medical literature relied upon. The examiner must consider relevant evidence of record, including lay testimony. If the above requested opinion cannot be made without resorting to speculation, the examiner must explain why. 

 

 

DELYVONNE M. WHITEHEAD

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Shermila A. Sundquist

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.