Citation Nr: A25034160
Decision Date: 04/14/25	Archive Date: 04/14/25

DOCKET NO. 240401-430129
DATE: April 14, 2025

ORDER

An evaluation of 70 percent, but no higher, for adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood (previously rated as insomnia disorder), is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

Throughout the period under review, the severity, frequency, and duration of the Veteran's symptoms more closely approximated occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

With reasonable doubt resolved in the Veteran's favor, the criteria for a disability rating of 70 percent for adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.126, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9440.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served in the Army Reserve and had active duty from March 2010 to August 2010. This matter is before the Board following her appeal of a January 2024 rating decision. 

A supplemental claim decision was issued in the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA) system, by the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) in September 2022. The Veteran requested higher-level review (HLR) of that decision in September 2023. In January 2024, the AOJ issued an HLR decision, which is the decision on appeal. 

In the April 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal, the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the September 2022 supplemental claim decision. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301.

If evidence was associated with the claims file during a period of time when additional evidence was not allowed, the Board has not considered it in this decision. See 38 C.F.R. § 20.300.

An evaluation of 70 percent, but no higher, for adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood (previously rated as insomnia disorder) is granted, effective March 14, 2022.

The Veteran is seeking a higher rating for her service-connected psychological disorder, which is currently evaluated as 50 percent disabling. She contends that her condition and its symptoms warrant a 70-percent rating, based on an independent medical examination that she submitted with her supplemental claim. See VA Form 20-0995, September 2022. Following a review of the evidentiary record, the Board finds that the Veteran's symptoms cause occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such that a 70 percent rating, but no higher, is warranted.

Disability ratings are determined by evaluating the extent to which a Veteran's service-connected disability adversely affects their ability to function under the ordinary conditions of daily life, including employment, by comparing their symptomatology with the criteria set forth in the Schedule for Rating Disabilities (Rating Schedule). See 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.10. If two ratings are potentially applicable, the higher rating will be assigned if the disability more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating; otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.7. Any reasonable doubt regarding the degree of disability will be resolved in favor of the Veteran. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.3.

In evaluating the severity of a particular disability, it is essential to consider its history. 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.41. However, where an increase in the disability rating, rather than the propriety of the initial rating, is at issue, the present level of disability is of primary importance, and past medical reports should not take precedence over current findings. Francisco v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 55, 58 (1994). Regardless of whether an appeal stems from disagreement with the initial rating assigned following an award of service connection or from disagreement with the rating assigned following a claim for increase, separate ratings can be assigned for separate periods of time based on the facts found. Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505, 509-10 (2007) (citing Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119, 126 (1999)).

The Veteran's service-connected psychological disorder is currently rated under Diagnostic Code 9440, which follows the General Formula for Mental Disorders (General Formula). 38 C.F.R. § 4.130. Under the General Formula, the Board must conduct a "holistic analysis" that considers all associated symptoms, regardless of whether they are listed as criteria. Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 10, 22 (2017); 38 C.F.R. § 4.130. The Board must determine whether unlisted symptoms are similar in severity, frequency, and duration to the listed symptoms associated with specific disability percentages. Then, the Board must determine whether the associated symptoms, both listed and unlisted, caused the level of impairment required for a higher disability rating. Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 114-118 (Fed. Cir. 2013). 

The issue in this appeal is whether the Veteran's associated symptoms during the period under review caused the level of impairment required for a disability rating in excess of 50 percent. 

Turning to the General Rating Formula criteria, a noncompensable rating is assigned when a mental condition has been formally diagnosed, but symptoms are not severe enough to either require continuous medication, or to interfere with occupational and social functioning.

A 10 percent rating is assigned when mild or transient symptoms, which decrease work efficiency and ability to perform occupational tasks only during periods of occasional stress, or symptoms controlled by medication, cause occupational and social impairment.

A 30 percent rating is assigned when symptoms such as depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks (weekly or less often), chronic sleep impairment, or mild memory loss (such as forgetting names, directions, or recent events), cause occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks (although generally functioning satisfactorily, with routine behavior, self-care, and normal conversation).

A 50 percent rating is assigned when symptoms such as flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; or difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships cause occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.

A 70 percent rating is assigned when symptoms such as suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals that interfere with routine activities; intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant speech; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a worklike setting); or inability to establish and maintain effective relationships cause occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood.

A 100 percent rating is assigned for total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; or memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation or own name.

In this case, the AOJ provided medical examinations in March 2022 and September 2022. The Veteran also submitted a medical examination from an independent provider, which was conducted in June 2022. The independent examination is by far the most comprehensive, stating-based on the Veteran's lay statements-that the Veteran's symptomatology includes panic attacks, difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, impaired sleep, decreased participation in physical and social activities, social withdrawal, irritability, fatigue, and memory/cognitive impairment. See Medical Treatment Record - Non-Government Facility, received September 2022. The examiner concludes that the Veteran demonstrates occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, and mood. Id. 

By contrast, the September 2022 VA examination noted only depressed mood, anxiety, chronic sleep impairment, and mild memory loss. Those more-moderate symptoms resulted in occupational and social impairment with occasional decreases in work efficiency and intermediate periods of ability to perform occupational tasks, according to the VA Examiner. However, where the private examination relies on a lengthy statement from the Veteran regarding her symptoms, the VA examination includes only limited statements from the Veteran in the History section of the disability benefits questionnaire. Moreover, the September 2022 VA examination does not address the Veteran's separate lay statements. See Forms VA 21-4138, received March 2022 and June 2022. 

The March 2022 VA examiner came to the same conclusion regarding the Veteran's level of social and occupational impairment but provided more detail regarding the examiner's behavioral observations and the Veteran's history. The assessments in both VA examinations approximate the criteria in the 30 percent rating category for mental health. Nonetheless, the AOJ granted a 50 percent rating, with an effective date of March 2022, the date the Veteran initially sought an increased rating for her psychological disorder. 

But, as noted above, the Board must conduct a holistic analysis that includes all associated symptoms. In this case the Veteran's March 2022 lay statement details occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas, all due to her mental health diagnosis. Specifically, the Veteran states, "I have called out or left early 4 times in the past month because of my Mental Health Condition." VA 21-4138 Statement in Support of Claim, September 2022. The Veteran also states, "I've experienced sudden bouts of shortness of breath, a tight chest, and an overwhelming sense of anxiety 4 times in the last month. During these times I often feel scared, confused, and need to find a safe place until it passes." Id. Finally, the Veteran states, "I often find myself withdrawn from others. If I do make plans to interact with other people, I usually just cancel them and keep to myself so that I don't have to go out." Id. 

Those lay statements are consistent with the chart notes, which state the Veteran will "rarely leave her home unless asked to go somewhere by a close friend," and that "she has strained relationships with her brothers and sisters because they are critical." Mental Health Triage Note, May 2022. The symptoms noted by the Veteran's independent examiner are reflected in her treatment notes, which focus on insomnia, depression, and anxiety. See Mental Health Note, July 2022. 

Overall, the documentation supports a rating of 70 percent for the Veteran's service-connected psychological disorder. When a claimant has both service-connected and nonservice-connected disabilities, the Board must attempt to discern the effects of each disability and, where such distinction is not possible, attribute such effects to the service-connected disability. See Mittleider v. West, 11 Vet. App. 181 (1998). Looking specifically at the Veteran's lay statements, the Board finds there is support in the evidentiary record for occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, due to such symptoms as near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately, and effectively. Additionally, the Veteran shows difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work), and an inability to establish and maintain effective relationships. See General Rating Formula, 38 C.F.R. § 4.130. 

Although the VA examinations in March and September 2022 generally list symptoms that are consistent with a 50-percent rating, the evidence, as a whole, supports some overlap with the 70-percent rating criteria. 

The Board finds that a 100 percent rating is not warranted throughout the rating period on appeal.  In this regard, the March 2022 VA examination noted that the Veteran was employed, enrolled in school, and had a good relationship with her son.  During the September 2022 VA examination, the Veteran reported that she was still employed.  The Board finds that the evidence does not reveal that the Veteran suffers from total occupational and social impairment.  

Resolving reasonable doubt in favor of the Veteran, the higher rating is warranted, and the Veteran's request for a 70-percent rating is granted. See 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7. 

 

 

S. Merrick

Acting Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Musgrave, Stan M.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.