Citation Nr: A25034473
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 240924-476756
DATE: April 15, 2025

ORDER

Service connection for tinnitus is granted.

REMANDED

The appeal regarding entitlement to service connection for bilateral hearing loss is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran's tinnitus began in service and has continued to the present.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria to establish service connection for tinnitus have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1111, 1131, 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran had active service from April 1960 to April 1962.  

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from a March 2024 rating decision by the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).  

The Veteran submitted VA Form 10182 in September 2024, electing the hearing Board review option.  A Board hearing was held in January 2025.  A transcript is of record.

The Veteran seeks service connection for tinnitus.  He has testified that during service, he was exposed to constant weapons fire.  See Board Hearing Tr. at 3.  He indicates that he was qualified on 30 and 50 caliber weapons and that he trained on them regularly.  See Id. at 6.  He also indicates that his tinnitus began during service and continued thereafter.  See Id. at 7.  Service personnel records reflect that the Veteran qualified as a sharpshooter.  

The Veteran has a diagnosis of tinnitus.  See February 2024 VA examination report.  

Entitlement to VA compensation may be granted for disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active duty.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110 (wartime service), 1131 (peacetime service); 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.

To establish a right to compensation for a present disability, a Veteran must show: "(1) the existence of a present disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service"-the so-called "nexus" requirement.  Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

Service connection may be granted for any disease initially diagnosed after service, when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).

The Board observes that in Charles v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 370, 374-375 (2002), the Court specifically held that tinnitus is a condition which is capable of lay observation.  Because tinnitus is a condition capable of lay observation, and because the Veteran has credibly reported that his in-service symptoms developed following noise exposure and continued following service, service connection for tinnitus is granted.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran asserts that he had diminished hearing during service after noise exposure from weapons training, and that it worsened over time.  See Board Hearing Tr. at 8.    

On VA examination in February 2024, the diagnosis was bilateral sensorineural hearing loss.  The audiologist provided an opinion regarding whether the Veteran's hearing loss was related to his exposure to various toxins during service.  No opinion was provided regarding whether hearing loss was related to the Veteran's reported noise exposure during service.  The opinion is therefore inadequate for the purpose of deciding the Veteran's claim.  Remand is necessary to obtain an adequate opinion and to correct this pre-decisional duty to assist error.  

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Schedule the Veteran for an examination to determine the nature and etiology of his bilateral hearing loss.  

The evidentiary record, including a copy of this remand, must be made available to and reviewed by the examiner.  The examination report must include a notation that this record review took place.

The examiner is to elicit a complete history from the Veteran.

Any medically indicated tests should be accomplished, and all pertinent symptomatology and findings must be reported in detail.

After the record review and examination of the Veteran, the examiner should provide an opinion regarding whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's bilateral hearing loss was incurred in or is otherwise related to active service.

In providing the requested opinion, the examiner is directed to consider and discuss the Veteran's reported noise exposure during service.  Specifically, the Veteran has testified that he was in proximity to weapons fire, and that he was qualified with and trained on .30 and .50 caliber weapons.  The examiner is also directed to consider and discuss the Veteran's report of diminished hearing during service.  

The examiner is advised that the Veteran is competent to report his symptoms and history.  Such reports must be acknowledged and considered in formulating any opinion.  If the examiner rejects the Veteran's reports, he or she must provide an explanation for such rejection.  The examiner is not to improperly discount the Veteran's lay statements or mistakenly rely on an absence of medical evidence in the record to support his or her conclusions.

The complete rationale for all opinions should be set forth, and a discussion of the facts and medical principles involved would be of considerable assistance to the Board.

If an opinion cannot be provided without resorting to mere speculation, the examiner must provide a complete explanation for why an opinion cannot be rendered.  In so doing, the examiner must explain whether the inability to provide a more definitive opinion is the result of a need for additional information, or that he or she has exhausted the limits of current medical knowledge in providing an answer to that particular question.

 

 

DONNIE R. HACHEY

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	J. Barone, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.