Citation Nr: A25034558
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 240529-444911
DATE: April 15, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for chronic gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) has been withdrawn and is dismissed.

REMAND

Entitlement to service connection for residuals from in-service pleurisy and pneumonia is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

In December 2024, prior to the promulgation of a decision by the Board, the Board received notification that the Veteran requested withdrawal of his appeal for entitlement to service connection for chronic GERD.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for withdrawal of an appeal by the Veteran have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 7105; 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.205. 

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from June 1984 to August 1984 and from December 1986 to August 1991.

In the March 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim(s), considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Entitlement to service connection for chronic GERD is dismissed.

The Board may dismiss any appeal which fails to allege specific error of fact or law in the determination being appealed.  38 U.S.C. § 7105.  An appeal may be withdrawn as to any or all issues involved in the appeal at any time before the Board promulgates a decision.  38 C.F.R. § 20.205.  Withdrawal may be made by the appellant or by his or her authorized representative. Id.  

In a December 9, 2024, Report of General Information, a VA employee documented that the Veteran called to say he would like to cancel his service connection claim for chronic GERD and continue with the appeal for service connection for pleurisy.     

The Veteran's withdrawal of his appeal is memorialized in the clear language of the December 2024 Report of General Information prepared contemporaneously with his request.  See Hanson v. Brown, 9 Vet. App. 29 (1996) (accepting a Report of 

 

Contact as satisfying withdrawal criteria).  Hence, there remain no allegations of errors of fact or law for appellate consideration of entitlement to service connection for chronic GERD.  

Accordingly, the Board does not have jurisdiction to review the appeal for entitlement to service connection for chronic GERD and it is dismissed. 

REASONS FOR REMAND

Entitlement to service connection for residuals from in-service pleurisy and pneumonia is remanded.

In January 2023, the Veteran filed a VA-21-526 EZ Fully Developed Claim for entitlement to service connection for pleurisy among other claims. The Veteran contends that his pleurisy and pneumonia, which occurred during service, led to his current chronic lung problems, including chest and thoracic pain.  

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131. Generally, the evidence must show: (1) the existence of a present disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166-67 

An April 2023 Rating Decision denied the Veteran's claim, finding that the pleurisy disability has not been "clinically diagnosed" and that, "Although there is a record of treatment inservice for pleurisy, no permanent residual or chronic disability subject to service connection is shown by the service medical records or demonstrated by evidence following service." 

The AOJ made the favorable finding that, "A nexus, or link, has been established between your claimed issue and an in-service event or injury. Your service treatment records show that you were treated for pneumonia and pleurisy." The Board is bound by this favorable finding.

?

In 1990, while stationed in Germany, the Veteran spent five days in the hospital for pleurisy and pneumonia.  See service treatment records (STRs), submitted March 2023.  The Veteran's enlistment examination does not show any prior lung or breathing issues.  

In October 2024, the Veteran filed a Supplemental Claim, attaching VA medical records showing ongoing lung and chest problems, including the note that "Patient's history not concerning for ACS, but more likely pleurisy."  See VAMC Other Output/Reports, February 6, 2023.  The Veteran stated that he has continuing and residual lung issues to the current day. The Veteran also stated, "please note that my medical records . . . reflect ongoing chronicity stemming from this convention. Please note that I've also had significant lung issues, shortness of breath and hypertension occurring in concert with this condition, significantly affecting my quality of life." October 2024 Supplemental Claim.

The March 2024 Rating Decision confirmed the previous denial of entitlement to service connection, finding that the Veteran does not have a current diagnosis of pleurisy and, erroneously finding that the Veteran's STRs did not show a diagnosis or treatment of pleurisy. The AOJ also made the favorable findings that the Veteran participated in a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA) as a Light Vehicle Mechanic during service, and that he had pneumonia during service.

The Veteran underwent two (2) VA examinations. In the March 2023 VA examination, the examiner opined that although the Veteran was hospitalized due to pleurisy and pneumonia, the Veteran fully recovered without residuals per medical records. The VA examiner opined that the Veteran's acute respiratory failure was the residual of COVID exposure and mentioned that the Veteran was a smoker.  However, the records before the VA examiner indicated that the Veteran's lungs had "bilateral effusions of unknown etiology" and a "scattered, thickened band of opacities within both lungs which may be secondary to segmental atelectasis and or scarring. However other etiologies cannot be excluded." See CAPRI records, submitted February 2023.  

?

A March 2024 VA examination gave opinions based on medical aggravation of a condition that existed prior to service and TERA.  As noted above, there is no evidence in the Veteran's record that he had any lung issues, including pleurisy, prior to service. Regarding the TERA opinion, the Board notes that the Veteran is presumed to have participated in a TERA must provide a VA examination or medical opinion when there exists evidence of a disability and evidence of TERA.  However, the Veteran asserts that his current lung and chest issues are residuals caused by the inservice pneumonia and pleurisy. The VA examiner did not address direct service connection in this opinion.

Both VA examinations were inadequate.  The March 2023 decision did not address the medical records on file and only addressed the Veteran's diagnosis of COVID-19.  The March 2024 VA examination did not address direct service connection and erroneously found that the Veteran's pleurisy and pneumonia existed prior to service.

Where VA provides the Veteran with an examination in a service connection claim, the examination must be adequate. Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007). Generally, a medical opinion should address the appropriate theories of entitlement. Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 123-24 (2007).  A medical examination report must contain not only clear conclusions with supporting data, but also a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two. Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 301 (2008).

Because the March 2024 Rating Decision relied on an inadequate examination, there is a pre-decisional duty to assist error that must be corrected through remand. 

(Continued on next page)

?

Accordingly, the matter is REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination, by an examiner with appropriate expertise who has not previously examined the Veteran or provided an opinion in the appeal, to determine the nature and etiology of any current respiratory or chest pain disabilities.  The entire claims file, including a copy of this remand, should be made available to the VA examiner.  The examiner must perform any indicated tests and studies, including diagnostic imaging.

2. Identify all respiratory disabilities, to include any chest pain disabilities.  In the identification of currently present diagnoses, the examiner must note any diagnoses that could be residuals of pleurisy and/or residual pleuritic pain, and of pneumonia.

3. For each disability diagnosed the examiner must opine whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's diagnosed respiratory or chest pain disabilities are etiologically related to his active-duty service. In forming the opinions, the examiner must consider the Veteran's lay statements regarding the onset and continuity of his symptoms.

A complete and detailed rationale must be provided for all opinions expressed.

If the examiner is unable to provide any required opinion, he or she should explain why.

If the examiner cannot provide an opinion without resorting to mere speculation, he or she shall provide a complete explanation as to why this is so.

If the inability to provide a more definitive opinion is the result of a need for additional information, the examiner should identify the additional information that is needed.

 

MARJORIE A. AUER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Newton, A.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.