Citation Nr: A25034383
Decision Date: 04/14/25	Archive Date: 04/14/25

DOCKET NO. 241021-484110
DATE: April 14, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an initial rating of 30 percent, but not higher, for gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) is granted.

Entitlement to service connection for atopic dermatitis is granted.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. During the appeal period, the Veteran's GERD manifested as persistently recurrent epigastric distress, pyrosis, reflux, regurgitation, substernal pain, and sleep disturbance, productive of considerable impairment of health.

2. The Veteran's atopic dermatitis is related to his in-service toxic exposure risk activity (TERA).

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1.  The criteria for an initial 30 percent rating, but no higher, for GERD have been met for the entire appeal period. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 4.114, Diagnostic Code (DC) 7346.

2. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for atopic dermatitis have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served in the Army from September 17, 2001, to September 16, 2004. 

In the October 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decisions on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. The AOJ made a decision on the Veteran's atopic dermatitis claim in a February 2024 rating decision and his GERD claim in a September 2024 rating decision. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decisions on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

In the February 2024 decision on appeal, the AOJ initially stated that new and relevant evidence was not received. However, the AOJ then concluded that new and relevant evidence was received and readjudicated the claim. Consequently, the Board finds new and relevant evidence was received and proceeds to the merits of the claim.

1. Entitlement to an increase rating for GERD.

The Veteran contends that he is entitled to a higher rating for his service-connected GERD because his current rating does not reflect the severity of his GERD. 

Continuous Pursuit

Under the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), a claim can be continuously pursued by filing an appropriate administrative review option to an AMA decision, generally within one year from when the decision was issued. For purposes of determining the effective date of an award, the date of application shall be considered the date of the filing of the initial application for a benefit if the claim is continuously pursued by filing, as relevant here, a supplemental claim within one year in which the AOJ issues a decision, then the higher-level review request within one year in which the AOJ issues a decision and followed by his notice of disagreement within one year in which the AOJ issues a decision. 38 U.S.C. § 5110 (a)(2)(a)-(c).

If a claim is continuously pursued, it will be considered filed as of the date of the first claim in the continuously pursued chain, not the date the most recent request for review was received. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.2500 (c)(h).

Here, service connection for GERD was originally granted in an August 2023 rating decision and a noncompensable rating was assigned, effective from May 11, 2022. Thereafter, the Veteran submitted a supplemental claim in August 2023 seeking a higher initial rating for GERD. Pursuant to an October 2023 rating decision, the AOJ continued the noncompensable rating. In November 2023, the Veteran submitted another supplemental claim, continuously pursuing his claim. The AOJ continued the noncompensable rating for the Veteran's GERD in a January 2024 rating decision. In February 2024, the Veteran submitted a request for higher-level review, continuously pursuing his claim. In a May 2024 Higher-Level Review rating decision, the AOJ again continued the noncompensable rating. In July 2024, the Veteran submitted a third supplemental claim, continuously pursuing his claim. In a September 2024 rating decision, which is the subject of this appeal, the AOJ again continued the noncompensable rating. 

Based on the foregoing, the Board finds that the Veteran continuously pursued his claim for entitlement to higher initial rating for GERD.  As such, the Veteran's initial May 11, 2022, date of claim for which he originally sought service connection for GERD is preserved and the issue becomes whether he is entitled to an initial compensable rating for his GERD throughout the entire period on appeal (i.e., from May 11, 2022, to September 4, 2024 (date of issuance of the September 2024 rating decision.

Rating Criteria

Regarding the evaluation, disability ratings are determined by applying the criteria set forth in the VA Schedule of Rating Disabilities (Rating Schedule) and are intended to represent the average impairment of earning capacity resulting from disability. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1. Separate diagnostic codes identify the various disabilities. Where there is a question as to which of two evaluations shall be applied, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7. Disabilities must be reviewed in relation to their history. 38 C.F.R. § 4.1.

When the AOJ granted service connection for GERD, it assigned a noncompensable rating pursuant to DC 7346. See August 2023 Rating Decision - Code sheet. 

Pursuant to DC 7346, a 10 percent disability rating is warranted for two or more of the symptoms for the 30 percent evaluation of less severity. A 30 percent evaluation is warranted for persistently recurring epigastric distress with dysphagia, pyrosis, and regurgitation, accompanied by substernal or arm or shoulder pain, productive of considerable impairment of health. The maximum 60 percent evaluation is warranted for symptoms of pain, vomiting, material weight loss and hematemesis or melena with moderate anemia; or other symptom combinations productive of severe impairment of health.

"Considerable" is defined as "large in extent or degree." See www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/considerable. "Severe" is defined as "very painful or harmful." See www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/severe. The term "persistent" may be defined as "continuing to exist despite interference or treatment." See https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/persistent.

During the pendency of the appeal, amendments to 38 C.F.R. § 4.114, the Schedule of Ratings for the Digestive System, were enacted, effective May 19, 2024. Under the amended criteria, a new DC (DC 7206) was added for GERD.

Under DC 7206, a noncompensable evaluation is assigned for documented history without daily symptoms or requirement for daily medications. A 10 percent rating is assigned for documented history of esophageal stricture(s) that requires daily medications to control dysphagia otherwise asymptomatic. A 30 percent rating is assigned for documented history of recurrent or refractory esophageal stricture(s) causing dysphagia which requires at least one of the following (1) dilatation 3 or more times per year, (2) dilatation using steroids at least one time per year, or (3) esophageal stent placement. A 50 percent rating is assigned for documented history of recurrent or refractory esophageal stricture(s) causing dysphagia which requires dilatation no more than 2 times per year. A maximum 80 percent rating is assigned for documented history of recurrent or refractory esophageal stricture(s) causing dysphagia with at least one of the symptoms present: (1) aspiration, (2) undernutrition, and/or (3) substantial weight loss as defined by § 4.112(a) and treatment with either surgical correction or percutaneous esophago-gastrointestinal tube (PEG tube).

VA has held that where a law or regulation changes during the pendency of a claim for a higher rating, the Board must first determine whether the revised version is more favorable to the Veteran. In so doing, it may be necessary for the Board to apply both the old and new versions of the regulation. If the revised version of the regulation is more favorable, the retroactive reach of that regulation under 38 U.S.C. § 5110 (g) can be no earlier than the effective date of that change. The Board must generally apply both the former and the revised versions of the regulation for the period prior and after the regulatory change, but an effective date based on the revised criteria may be no earlier than the date of the change.

VA thus must consider the claim for a higher rating pursuant to the former and revised regulations during the latter part of this appeal. See VAOPGCPREC 3 2000, 65 Fed. Reg. 33,422 (2000); DeSousa v. Gober, 10 Vet. App. 461, 467 (1997). Therefore, the Board will consider the old criteria prior to May 19, 2024, and both the old and new rating criteria from May 19, 2024. The criteria that is more favorable will be applied from the date of the change in rating criteria.

Evidence

The Veteran has refused to participate in VA examinations. The Veteran has stated that he does not wish to participate with any exams by unknown third-party companies. The Veteran has repeatedly said he was examined by a physician in person and that no further medical evidence is needed. See June 2022 VA Form 21-4138 Statement in Support of Claim. Based on the Veteran's communication regarding scheduled examinations, the Board finds that the Veteran was properly notified of the examination and failed to report. 

The claim on appeal here is an original compensation regarding the initial rating evaluation. In an initial rating claim, when the Veteran fails to report for an examination, the case shall be rated on the evidence of record rather than denied, because an initial rating claim is an original compensation claim under 38 C.F.R. § 3.655 (b). Turk v. Peake, 21 Vet. App. 565, 570 (2008) (a claim for a higher initial rating is an "original compensation claim" and not a "claim for increase" for purposes of 38 C.F.R. § 3.655 (b)). Thus, the Board's decision below addresses the Veteran's initial evaluation claim based upon the evidence currently of record. 

Turning to the evidence, the Veteran submitted a June 2022 Esophageal Conditions Disability Benefits Questionnaire (DBQ) completed by a private physician, Dr. J.R. Dr. J.R. stated that the Veteran was examined in person. Dr. J.R. said the Veteran's GERD caused symptoms productive of considerable impairment of health and symptoms combination productive of severe impairment of health. Specifically, he noted the Veteran has symptoms such as persistently recurrent epigastric distress, dysphagia, pyrosis, reflux and/or regurgitation, substernal or arm or shoulder pain, sleep disturbances 4 times a year lasting 1-9, nausea 4 times a year lasting 1-9 days, and vomiting 3 times year lasting 1-9 days. The examiner did not note that the Veteran experiences hematemesis or melena with moderate anemia. Regarding how the Veteran's GERD impacts his work, Dr. J.R. noted that the Veteran has to take additional breaks, adjust shifts, and at times, calls out of work. The examiner did not state the frequency or length of time that the Veteran's work is impacted. The examiner stated that the Veteran reported severe sleep disturbance due to GERD. See June 2020 DBQ - Veteran Provided.   

In July 2024, the Veteran submitted another DBQ completed by a private physician, Dr. E.E. Dr. E.E. noted that the Veteran was examined in a virtual appointment. Dr. E.E. said the Veteran's GERD symptoms caused him symptoms combination productive of severe impairment of health. Specifically, he noted the Veteran has symptoms such as persistently recurrent epigastric distress, dysphagia, pyrosis, reflux and/or regurgitation, substernal or arm or shoulder pain, sleep disturbances 4 times a year lasting 1-9 days, nausea 4 times a year lasting 1-9 days, and vomiting 3 times year lasting 1-9 days, nausea, and vomiting. Regarding how the Veteran's GERD impacts his work, Dr. E.E. noted that the Veteran has to take additional breaks, adjust shifts, and at times, call out of work. The examiner did not state the frequency or length of time that the Veteran's work is impacted. See July 2024 DBQ - Veteran Provided.   

Regarding VA opinions, VA obtained a records review DBQ in October 2023. The VA examiner concluded that the Veteran's GERD only caused pyrosis. To support her findings, the examiner cited to an August 19, 2020, treatment note that stated "Gastrointestinal: denies dysphagia, reflux/heartburn, early satiety hematemesis/hematochezia/melena, nausea/vomiting/constipation/diarrhea, change in bowel habits or stool diameter/color, gallstones, jaundice".  See October 2023 VA Examination. VA obtained a second records review DBQ in August 2024. The August 2024 DBQ was largely blank due to the Veteran not reporting for the examination. See August 2024 VA Examination.    

The Board acknowledges the VA opinions in this case. However, the opinions do not address the private examinations and reported symptoms in any manner. Additionally, they do not take into account the Veteran's continued private medical care for his GERD. Rather, the opinions are based on reported symptoms in August 2020, almost two years prior to the Veteran filing the current claim. Thus, although these opinions are somewhat probative, they appear to be based on an incomplete history. The Board assigns more probative weight to the private examiner's opinion. The examinations and opinions were based on either an in-person or a virtual examination of the Veteran and contain sufficient detail for the Board to properly rate the Veteran under the applicable DC.

Analysis

Upon review of the record, the Board finds that the Veteran's overall disability picture more nearly approximated the criteria required for a 30 percent disability rating under DC 7346. Specifically, the evidence reflects the Veteran's GERD is manifested by persistently recurrent epigastric distress with pyrosis, reflux, regurgitation, and substernal pain. In light of such symptoms, the Board finds that an initial 30 percent disability rating is warranted.

However, the evidence shows that the Veteran's overall disability picture does not more nearly approximate the criteria for a 50 percent evaluation under the new criteria or a 60 percent evaluation under the old criteria during any period of the appeal. 

Specifically, the Board notes that, of the symptoms expressly listed in the 60 percent rating under the old criteria, the Veteran only reported or was observed to have experienced pain and vomiting. The evidence of record does not reveal the extent of the Veteran's reported pain. At no point during the appeal period did he report or was he observed to have material weight loss or hematemesis or melena with moderate anemia, as required for the next higher. The examinations did not reveal that the Veteran had an esophageal stricture, spasm or esophagus, or an acquired diverticulum. Aside from sleep disturbance (which is independently addressed below), the Veteran did not endorse or exhibit any symptom not expressly contemplated by DC 7346. Additionally, the Board finds that there is no indication that the Veteran has symptoms combination of such severity as to approximate "severe impairment of health." The Board acknowledges that the June 2022 and July 2024 private examiners stated that the Veteran's has symptoms combination that result in severe impairment of health. However, the evidence of the record does not support these conclusions. The lay and medical evidence does not demonstrate that the Veteran's GERD is "very painful or harmful." Instead, the evidence of record contains general statements regarding the Veteran's GERD symptoms, statements that do not contain enough information for the Board to determine that the Veteran's GERD symptoms result in severe, defined as very painful or harmful, impairment of health. Based on the foregoing, the Board finds that the Veteran's overall disability picture did not more nearly approximated the criteria required for a 60 percent rating under DC 7346.  

To the extent the Veteran experiences sleep impairment as a symptom of his service-connected GERD, the Board notes that he is already compensated for sleep impairment as a symptom of his service-connected psychiatric disability, which is rated at 70 percent throughout the appeal period. Assigning a higher rating for his GERD based on his reported sleep impairment would compensate the Veteran twice for the same symptomatology, which is prohibited. Lyles v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 107, 117-121 (2017) (holding that 38 C.F.R. § 4.14 prohibits compensating a veteran twice for the same symptoms or functional impairment); Esteban v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 259, 261-62; 38 C.F.R. § 4.14.

Additionally, there is no evidence of documented history of recurrent or refractory esophageal strictures causing dysphagia which requires dilatation no more than 2 times per year as required for the next higher, 50 percent rating under the new criteria. Moreover, there is no evidence that the Veteran's symptoms are productive of severe impairment of health, with consideration of medical records and lay statements of record. Thus, an initial rating higher than 30 percent is not warranted under either the former or revised criteria.

For the foregoing reasons, an initial 30 percent rating is warranted for GERD. The evidence is neither evenly balanced nor approximately so with regard to whether an initial rating higher than 30 percent is warranted. Rather, the evidence persuasively weighs against such a rating, and the benefit of the doubt doctrine is therefore not for application in this regard. Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 781-82 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc) (only when the evidence persuasively favors one side, or the other is the benefit of the doubt doctrine not for application)).

2. Entitlement to service connection for atopic dermatitis.

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active military, naval, or air service. 38 U.S.C. § 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (a). Service connection may be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge, when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (d). As a general matter, service connection for a disability requires evidence of: (1) the existence of a current disability; (2) the existence of a disease or injury in service; (3) a relationship or nexus between the current disability and any injury or disease during service. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

The February 2024 rating decision found that the Veteran has a current diagnosis of atopic dermatitis and that the Veteran participated in a TERA while in service. Thus, the first and second elements of service connection are met.

Regarding the third element, VA obtained a medical opinion in October 2023. The examiner stated that the Veteran's atopic dermatitis is as least as likely as not caused by the Veteran's TERA. The examiner stated that the Veteran's record notes that he was exposed to airborne hazards and open burn pits in 1990 during his service. The examiner cited to an article published in Dermatology Therapy, which reports that the skin's normal barrier function may be interrupted by several pollutants, including polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, volatile organic compounds, particulate matter, gaseous pollutants, carbon monoxide, ozone, sulfur oxide, nitric oxides. See October 2023 VA Medical Opinion. There are no other opinions of record to rebut this finding.

This opinion is probative, because it is based on an accurate medical history and provides an explanation that contains clear conclusions and supporting data. Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008).

In sum, the Board finds the weight of the evidence indicates that the Veteran's atopic dermatitis is related to his service. Accordingly, after resolving all doubt in favor of the Veteran, the Board finds that service connection for atopic dermatitis is warranted. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

 

Cory M. Picton

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Welch, Joshua H.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.