Citation Nr: A25034611
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 231007-382782
DATE: April 15, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for a right knee disability is dismissed.

Entitlement to service connection for a left knee disability is dismissed.

Entitlement to service connection for a right shoulder disability is dismissed.

Entitlement to service connection for a left shoulder disability is dismissed.

Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 50 percent for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), is denied.

Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 10 percent for tinnitus is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea is remanded. 

Entitlement to service connection for erectile dysfunction is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a headache disorder is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. A September 2024 rating decision awarded service connection for degenerative joint disease, right knee, which encompasses the entire appeal period at issue for the appeal herein as to service connection for a right knee disability; the appeal herein is rendered moot because there is no justiciable case or controversy for active consideration by the Board.

2. A September 2024 rating decision awarded service connection for degenerative joint disease, left knee, which encompasses the entire appeal period at issue for the appeal herein as to service connection for a left knee disability; the appeal herein is rendered moot because there is no justiciable case or controversy for active consideration by the Board.

3. A September 2024 rating decision awarded service connection for impingement syndrome with rotator cuff tendonitis, and glenohumeral and acromioclavicular joint osteoarthritis, right shoulder, which encompasses the entire appeal period at issue for the appeal herein as to service connection for a right shoulder disability; the appeal herein is rendered moot because there is no justiciable case or controversy for active consideration by the Board.

4. A September 2024 rating decision awarded service connection for impingement syndrome with rotator cuff tendonitis and glenohumeral and acromioclavicular osteoarthritis, left shoulder, which encompasses the entire appeal period at issue for the appeal herein as to service connection for a left shoulder disability; the appeal herein is rendered moot because there is no justiciable case or controversy for active consideration by the Board.

5. Throughout the initial appeal period, the severity, frequency, and duration of the Veteran's psychiatric symptoms do not more closely approximate occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, or total occupational and social impairment.

6. The Veteran's tinnitus is assigned a single 10 percent rating, which is the maximum evaluation authorized under Diagnostic Code 6260.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for dismissal of the appeal as to the issue of entitlement to service connection for a right knee disability have been met.  38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. § 20.104.

2. The criteria for dismissal of the appeal as to the issue of entitlement to service connection for a left knee disability have been met.  38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. § 20.104.

3. The criteria for dismissal of the appeal as to the issue of entitlement to service connection for a right shoulder disability have been met.  38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. § 20.104.

4. The criteria for dismissal of the appeal as to the issue of entitlement to service connection for a left shoulder disability have been met.  38 U.S.C. § 7105; 38 C.F.R. § 20.104.

5. The criteria for an initial rating in excess of 50 percent for PTSD have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.1, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411.

6. The criteria for initial rating in excess of 10 percent for tinnitus have not been met.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1, 4.3, 4.87, Diagnostic Code 6260.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Navy from February 1982 to February 1985, the United States Air Force from April 1994 to October 1994, and the United States Army from October 2009 to August 2010.  The Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) thanks the Veteran for his service to our country.

As to the claim for an increased initial rating for tinnitus, the rating decision on appeal was issued in December 2022 and constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.

As to the claim for increased initial rating for PTSD, the rating decision on appeal was issued in December 2022 and constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies. Further, the Board acknowledges that the record includes additional rating decisions related to the PTSD rating issued in the year prior to the filing of the VA Form 10182, specifically a supplemental claim decision, dated in September 2023. However, in accordance with Terry v McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 1 (2023), which held that where a Veteran "expressly sought only to appeal" one specific rating decision (in a situation where, as here, more than one rating decision had been issued in the year prior to the filing of the VA Form 10182), the Board cannot construe the Veteran's appeal to be a disagreement with another rating decision within that year. Therefore, as the Veteran has identified the December 2022 rating decision as the decision on appeal in the October 2023 VA Form 10182, the Board finds the December 2022 rating decision is the appealed decision before the Board.

As to the claims for service connection obstructive sleep apnea, erectile dysfunction, and a headache disorder, the rating decision on appeal was issued in October 2023 and constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the AMA, applies.

As to the claims for service connection a right knee disability and a left knee disability, in April 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR), and requested review of an April 2023 rating decision as to these claims.  A July 2023 rating decision identified a duty to assist error during the higher-level review for a right knee disability and a left knee disability, and transferred these claims to the supplemental claim lane for additional development.  Then, in August 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, and again requested review of the April 2023 rating decision based on new and relevant evidence as to these claims. Given the development pursuant to the April 2023 review request remained ongoing, no action should have been taken on the concurrent August 2023 claim. Nonetheless, an October 2023 rating decision found new and relevant evidence had not been received as to these claims.  Then, as discussed below, following receipt of the Veteran's October 2023 VA Form 10182 at issue here, a September 2024 rating decision awarded service connection for a right knee disability and a left knee disability.  

As to the claims for service connection a right shoulder disability and a left shoulder disability, in April 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR), and requested review of an April 2023 rating decision as to these claims.  A July 2023 rating decision identified a duty to assist error during the higher-level review for a right shoulder disability and a left shoulder disability, and transferred these claims to the supplemental claim lane for additional development.  Then, as discussed below, following receipt of the Veteran's October 2023 VA Form 10182 at issue here, a September 2024 rating decision awarded service connection for a right shoulder disability and a left shoulder disability.  

In the October 2023 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the respective AOJ decisions on appeal as to the claims for obstructive sleep apnea, erectile dysfunction, and a headache disorder, and the claims for increased initial ratings for tinnitus and PTSD.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims for increased initial ratings for tinnitus and PTSD, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of service connection for obstructive sleep apnea, erectile dysfunction and a headache disorder, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

In his October 2023 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), as to the claims for a right knee disability and a left knee disability, the Veteran expressed disagreement with both April 2023 and October 2023 rating decisions, and as to the claims for the right shoulder disability and left shoulder disability, he expressed disagreement with the April 2023 rating decision.  However, the Veteran did not withdraw his April 2023 VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR) as to these claims.  In this regard, a veteran or appellant is only able to file for one review option (higher-level review, supplemental claim, or Board appeal), and while that review is pending final adjudication, he may not file for review under a different option.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2500(b).  In other words, a concurrent election of Board review, supplemental claim review, and/or a higher-level review on the same issue is prohibited.  Thus, October 2023 VA Form 10182 is not valid as to the April 2023 rating decision as to these claims.  Further, the August 2023 VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim should not have been accepted as to the April 2023 rating decision, as again, the Veteran did not withdraw his April 2023 VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR) as to the claims for a right knee disability and a left knee disability.  Nonetheless, as discussed below, as these claims have been granted in full, there are dismissed on this basis.  

As a final initial matter, regarding the characterization of the issues on appeal as to as to the Veteran's PTSD and tinnitus, in the October 2023 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran expressly limited his disagreement as to the initial evaluation assigned for these disabilities stating, as to each claim he disagreed with "service connection, [ ] disability, [ ] Never mentioned burned pits but denied as if i did" rather than the effective dates assigned for service connection.  Accordingly, the claims on appeal as to the Veteran's PTSD and tinnitus are limited to increased initial evaluations.

DISMISSALS

1. Entitlement to service connection for a right knee disability

2. Entitlement to service connection for a left knee disability

3. Entitlement to service connection for a right shoulder disability

4. Entitlement to service connection for a left shoulder disability

Following receipt of the Veteran's October 2023 VA Form 10182 at issue here, a September 2024 rating decision awarded service connection for degenerative joint disease, right knee, and service connection for degenerative joint disease, left knee, each effective February 13, 2023.  These grants of service connection represent a complete grant of the benefits sought on appeal for a right knee disability and a left knee disability, as they encompass the entire appeal period at issue.  

Specifically, original claims for service connection for a right knee disability and a left knee disability were received by VA on February 13, 2023, via a VA Form 21-526EZ, Application for Disability Compensation and Related Compensation Benefits, and these claims were continuously pursed and, as discussed above, were attempted to be appealed by the Veteran in his October 2023 VA Form 10182.  Thus, as September 2024 rating decision awarded entitlement to service connection for service connection for degenerative joint disease, right knee, and service connection for degenerative joint disease, left knee, each from February 13, 2023, this represents a complete grant of the benefits sought on appeal in this case as it encompasses the entire appeal period at issue for each claim.  

Similarly, following receipt of the Veteran's October 2023 VA Form 10182 at issue here, the September 2024 rating decision also awarded service connection for impingement syndrome with rotator cuff tendonitis, and glenohumeral and acromioclavicular joint osteoarthritis, right shoulder, and service connection for impingement syndrome with rotator cuff tendonitis and glenohumeral and acromioclavicular osteoarthritis, left shoulder, each effective September 29, 2022.  These grants of service connection, represent a complete grant of the benefits sought on appeal for a right shoulder disability and a left shoulder disability, as they encompass the entire appeal period at issue.  

Specifically, original claims for service connection for a right shoulder disability and a left shoulder disability were received by VA on September 29, 2022, via a VA Form 21-526EZ, Application for Disability Compensation and Related Compensation Benefits, and these claims was continuously pursed and, as discussed above, were attempted to be appealed by the Veteran in his October 2023 VA Form 10182.  Thus, as September 2024 rating decision awarded entitlement to service connection for service connection for impingement syndrome with rotator cuff tendonitis, and glenohumeral and acromioclavicular joint osteoarthritis, right shoulder, and service connection for impingement syndrome with rotator cuff tendonitis and glenohumeral and acromioclavicular osteoarthritis, left shoulder, each from September 29, 2022, this represents a complete grant of the benefits sought on appeal in this case as it encompasses the entire appeal period at issue for each claim.  

Where an appealed claim for service connection is granted during the pendency of the appeal, a second NOD must be timely filed to initiate appellate review of the claim concerning "downstream" issues such as the compensation level assigned for the disability and effective date.  A NOD was not received as to the initial ratings or effective dates assigned for the Veteran's degenerative joint disease of right knee and left knee, and his impingement syndrome with rotator cuff tendonitis, and glenohumeral and acromioclavicular joint osteoarthritis of the right shoulder and left shoulder, although appeal period these claims have not yet expired.  See Grantham v. Brown, 114 F.3d 1156, 1158-59 (Fed. Cir. 1997).  Consequently, no case or controversy remains for the Board's consideration.  See 38 U.S.C. § 7105.

The Board also acknowledges the notice provisions regarding a jurisdictional defect under 38 C.F.R. § 20.104(c) but does not find that this is for application here.  It is unequivocal that the awards of service connection for a right knee disability, a left knee disability, a right shoulder disability, and a left shoulder disability, in the September 2024 rating decision encompassed the entire appeal period at issue for the claims herein and there is no justiciable case or controversy for active consideration by the Board.  

Further, as discussed above, the Veteran did not withdraw his April 2023 VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR) as to these claims as the time of his August 2023 VA Form 20-0995, as to claims for a right knee disability and a left knee disability, or at the time of October 2023 VA Form 10182 as to the claims right knee disability, left knee disability, a right shoulder disability and a left shoulder disability.  Accordingly, applying the notice provision would serve no useful purpose and there is no indication that the additional delay to do so would actually avail the Veteran of any benefit.  Thus, for reasons and bases discussed above, entitlement to service connection for a right knee disability, a left knee disability, a right shoulder disability, and a left shoulder disability, are dismissed.

INCREASED RATINGS

Disability evaluations are determined by comparing a veteran's symptoms with criteria set forth in VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities, which are based on average impairment in earning capacity.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1.

5. Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 50 percent for PTSD

The Veteran contends a higher initial rating is warranted for his service-connected PTSD. 

Under the AMA, the Board is bound by favorable findings of the AOJ in the absence of evidence of clear and unmistakable error.  38 C.F.R. § 3.104.  The December 2022 rating decision on appeal did not provide any favorable findings as to this claim.

Under the General Formula for Mental Disorders (General Formula), the Board must conduct a "holistic analysis" that considers all associated symptoms, regardless of whether they are listed as criteria.  Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 10, 22 (2017); 38 C.F.R. § 4.130.  The Board must determine whether unlisted symptoms are similar in severity, frequency, and duration to the listed symptoms associated with specific disability percentages.  Then, the Board must determine whether the associated symptoms, both listed and unlisted, caused the level of impairment required for a higher disability rating.  Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 114-118 (Fed. Cir. 2013).

Here, service connection for PTSD was awarded effective August 23, 2022, and the decision on appeal was issued on December 22, 2022.  Thus, the appeal period for consideration is from August 23, 2022 to December 22, 2022.

To the extent the Veteran's medical records endorsed psychiatric diagnoses other than PTSD, medical evidence reflects they are related to his PTSD.  The Board has considered all psychiatric symptomatology, however diagnosed, as part of his service-connected disability.  Mittleider v. West, 11 Vet. App. 181 (1998) (to the extent symptoms of nonservice-connected psychiatric disabilities cannot be separated from symptoms of the Veteran's service-connected PTSD, they are considered part of the service-connected symptomatology.  

Throughout the initial appeal period, the Veteran's PTSD has been rated 50 percent disabling, under Diagnostic Code 9411 for PTSD.  38 C.F.R. § 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411.

Under Diagnostic Code 9411, a 10 percent rating is assigned when mild or transient symptoms which decrease work efficiency and ability to perform occupational tasks only during periods of occasional stress, or symptoms controlled by medication cause occupational and social impairment.

A 30 percent rating is assigned when symptoms such as depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks (weekly or less often), chronic sleep impairment, or mild memory loss (such as forgetting names, directions, or recent events), cause occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks (although generally functioning satisfactorily, with routine behavior, self-care, and normal conversation).

A 50 percent rating is assigned when symptoms such as flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; or difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships cause occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.

A 70 percent rating is assigned when symptoms such as suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant speech; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a worklike setting); or inability to establish and maintain effective relationships cause occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood.

A 100 percent rating is assigned for total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; or memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation or own name.

After careful review of the evidence, the Board finds the Veteran's psychiatric symptoms did not more closely approximate the symptoms associated with a 70 percent rating, nor did they result in a level of impairment that most closely approximated the level of impairment associated with a 70 percent, or higher, rating.  

In this regard, a September 2022 VA examiner provided a finding that Veteran's psychiatric symptomology with regard to all mental diagnoses was best summarized as occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks (although generally functioning satisfactorily, with routine behavior, self-care, and normal conversation).  While the September 2022 VA examiner endorsed a symptom of impaired impulse control, such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence, associated with a 70 percent rating, his symptoms did not result in a level of impairment that most closely approximated the level of impairment associated with a 70 percent, or higher, rating.  

The September 2022 VA examiner's findings, and the Veteran's lay statements, show that the Veteran's psychiatric disability was generally manifested by symptoms no more severe than those associated with a 50 percent rating, or lesser ratings, including depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss, such as forgetting names, directions or recent events, disturbance of mood and motivation, and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships. 

Moreover, to the extent that any of the symptoms contemplated in the rating criteria for a 100 percent evaluation or symptoms of similar severity may be shown or argued, the Board finds that the Veteran's PTSD, has not been productive of total occupational and social impairment.  The Board emphasizes that a 100 percent disability evaluation requires both total social and occupational impairment.  See Melson v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 334 (1991) (use of the conjunctive "and" in a statutory provision meant that all of the conditions listed in the provision must be met); cf. Johnson v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 95 (1994) (only one disjunctive "or" requirement must be met in order for an increased rating to be assigned).

The Board acknowledges that there is evidence of some social impairment; however, the evidence does not persuasively show that such impairment is total.  In this regard, a September 2022 VA examiner documented the Veteran reported he was married to a teacher, that they had been together for 12 years, with no other children, but had some step children.  Thus, the evidence demonstrate the Veteran did not have total social impairment.   

As to occupational impairment, a September 2022 VA examiner documented the Veteran reported he had worked in banking and sales and was working for a marketing company.  

Further, the Board also recognizes the Veteran has been prescribed medication for his psychiatric symptomology.  For example, a November 2022 VA treatment record documented the Veteran was issued 20 tablets of the Ambien 10mg/night to use as needed.  However, to the extent the Veteran may believe the Board should not consider the ameliorative effects of medication when evaluating his psychiatric symptomology, the Board notes that the plain language of the criteria for a 10 percent rating under the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders specifically contemplates the effects of medication.  Consequently, Jones v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 56 (2012) does not apply, and the Board's evaluation of the Veteran's PTSD, may include the ameliorative effects of medication.  See McCarroll v. McDonald, 28 Vet. App. 267, 271-73 (2016).

Further, while the Veteran, as a layperson, is competent to report the symptoms he has experienced, he has not been shown to have the requisite knowledge or training to be deemed competent to identify a specific level of disability for his psychiatric disability according to the rating criteria.  Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 (Fed. Cir. 2007).  Such competent evidence concerning the nature and extent of the Veteran's psychiatric disability has been provided by the September 2022 VA examiner's findings, which directly address the criteria under which the Veteran's disability is evaluated.  The Board finds the September 2022 VA examiner's findings to be competent, objective, and probative evidence of record, and are therefore accorded greater weight than the Veteran's subjective complaints of symptomatology related to his psychiatric disability.

Additionally, the Veteran has not raised any other issues, nor have any other issues been reasonably raised by the record with his respect to his psychiatric disability.  See Doucette v. Shulkin, 28 Vet. App. 366 (2017).

Accordingly, for the reasons and bases discussed, the evidence is persuasively against finding an initial rating in excess of 50 percent is warranted. As there is not an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence, to warrant a schedular initial rating in excess of 50 percent, the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine is not applicable.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 781-82 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

6. Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 10 percent for tinnitus

The Veteran contends a higher initial rating is warranted for his tinnitus but has not provided any argument as to why an initial higher rating is warranted. 

Under the AMA, the Board is bound by favorable findings of the AOJ in the absence of evidence of clear and unmistakable error.  38 C.F.R. § 3.104.  The December 2022 rating decision on appeal did not provide any favorable findings as to this claim.

Here, service connection for tinnitus was awarded effective September 29, 2022, and the decision on appeal was issued on December 9, 2022.  Thus, the appeal period for consideration is from September 29, 2022 to December 9, 2022.

Throughout the entire initial rating period on appeal, the Veteran has been in receipt of a 10 percent disability rating for his bilateral tinnitus.  Under Diagnostic Code 6260, a single 10 percent rating is assigned for tinnitus, whether the sound is perceived as being in one ear, both ears, or in the head.  38 C.F.R. § 4.87, Diagnostic Code 6260, Note 2.  The maximum schedular rating available for tinnitus is 10 percent.  38 C.F.R. § 4.87; see also Smith v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1344 (Fed. Cir. 2006).  Further, as tinnitus is specifically contemplated by the Rating Schedule, it may not be rated by analogy.  Copeland v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 333, 337 (2015).

Neither the Veteran nor his representative has raised any other issues, nor have any other issues been reasonably raised by the record.  See Doucette, 28 Vet. App. at 370-71. 

Thus, as the maximum schedular rating for tinnitus has already been assigned, there is no legal basis upon which to award a higher schedular evaluation, the Veteran's appeal must be denied.  Sabonis v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 426 (1994). 

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea is remanded.

Under the AMA, the Board is bound by favorable findings of the AOJ in the absence of evidence of clear and unmistakable error.  38 C.F.R. § 3.104.  The October 2023 rating decision on appeal provided a favorable finding that the evidence showed that the Veteran performed service in Southwest Asia.

The claim for obstructive sleep apnea was received by VA on June 7, 2023.

The Board recognizes the time that the Veteran has devoted to this appeal process and appreciates his patience; however, remand is required due to a pre-decisional duty-to-assist error.

Specifically, the Board finds a pre-decisional duty to assist error exists as to this claim, specifically that the AOJ erred insofar as it relied on inadequate VA examination report addressing the claim.  Specifically, under any theory of entitlement, the threshold question for the Board is whether the Veteran has had obstructive sleep apnea at any time during or approximate to the pendency of either claim.  In this regard, a June 2023 VA examiner found the Veteran did not have and had not ever had sleep apnea, but did endorse a symptom of persistent daytime hypersomnolence.  A June 2023 home sleep study was also negative for obstructive sleep apnea but also documented home sleep apnea testing did not definitively rule out obstructive sleep apnea, and to consider in laboratory polysomnography to reassess for the presence of obstructive sleep apnea.  However, no laboratory polysomnography is of record.  Further, the June 2023 VA examiner did not address an earlier June 2023 private opinion which found the Veteran had a diagnosis of obstructive sleep apnea based a "STOP-Bang Questionnaire" which argued meta-analysis confirmed the high performance of the STOP-Bang Questionnaire in the sleep clinic and surgical population for screening of obstructive sleep apnea, and the higher the STOP-Bang score the greater was the probability of moderate to severe obstructive sleep apnea.  The AOJ's failure to obtain an adequate VA examination addressing whether the Veteran had a diagnosis of obstructive sleep apnea is a pre-decisional error.  Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 309 (2011).  Accordingly, remand is necessary to obtain another VA examination to determine whether the Veteran has a diagnosis of obstructive sleep apnea.

Also, the June 2023 private opinion is not sufficient to provide a diagnosis of obstructive sleep apnea based the "STOP-Bang Questionnaire" as it relied upon a statistical analysis of the sleep clinic and surgical population for screening of obstructive sleep apnea rather than the Veteran's specific case.

The Board also advises that, at this time, it intimates no opinion as to the credibility or probative value of any lay statements in relation to the Veteran's claim for service connection for obstructive sleep apnea and defers any credibility determinations until final adjudication of this claim. 

2. Entitlement to service connection for erectile dysfunction is remanded.

Under the AMA, the Board is bound by favorable findings of the AOJ in the absence of evidence of clear and unmistakable error.  38 C.F.R. § 3.104.  The October 2023 rating decision on appeal provided favorable findings, specifically that the evidence showed that the Veteran performed service in Southwest Asia, and that he had been diagnosed with a disability of erectile dysfunction.

The claim for erectile dysfunction was received by VA on June 13, 2023.

The Board recognizes the time that the Veteran has devoted to this appeal process and appreciates his patience; however, remand is required due to two pre-decisional duty-to-assist errors.

First, Board finds a pre-decisional duty to assist error exist as to this claim, specifically that the AOJ erred insofar it did not obtain an adequate opinion as to whether the Veteran's erectile dysfunction was proximately due to, or the result of, his service-connected PTSD, and no opinion addressed whether the Veteran's erectile dysfunction was aggravated by his service-connected PTSD.  

In this regard, a September 2023 VA examiner endorsed a diagnosis of erectile dysfunction and found the claimed condition was less likely than not proximately due to or the result of Veteran's service connected condition.  As a rationale, the September 2023 VA examiner explained psychogenic erectile dysfunction was the inability to achieve or maintain an erection during sex due to psychological factors such as PTSD, and about 40 percent of erectile dysfunction cases were considered psychogenic.  The September 2023 VA examiner explained the claims file was silent for a diagnosis of psychogenic erectile dysfunction, and while PTSD may be a contributing factor to the Veteran's erectile dysfunction, it was unlikely to be the direct and sole cause, and further explained the cause of erectile dysfunction was often multifactorial.

However, the September 2023 VA examiner's explanation that while PTSD may be a contributing factor to the Veteran's erectile dysfunction, it was unlikely to be the direct and sole cause, is not the correct standard as only relative equipoise needed to be reached.  Thus, the April 2022 VA examiner's opinion lacks probative value, and the AOJ's failure to obtain an adequate opinion on this basis is a pre-decisional error.  See Barr, 21 Vet. App. at 311-12.  Accordingly, remand is warranted for a supplemental opinion.

Further, no opinion was not obtained to as to whether the Veteran's erectile dysfunction was aggravated by his service-connected PTSD, and the AOJ's failure to obtain an opinion on this basis is a pre-decisional error.  See El Amin v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 136, 140 (2013).  Accordingly, remand is warranted for a supplemental opinion.

Second, the record reflects the Veteran is a Persian Gulf War veteran.  Specifically, in January 2023 VA issued Memorandum which indicated the Veteran was a covered veteran under 38 U.S.C. § 1117.  However, no VA examiner addressed whether the Veteran's erectile dysfunction, as diagnosed by a September 2023 VA examiner, qualified as a medically unexplained chronic multisystem illness (MUCMI) as no opinions on the pathophysiology or etiology of the disability were provided.  See Stewart v. Wilkie, 30 Vet. App. 383 (2018).  Accordingly, remand is warranted for supplemental opinions to address whether the Veteran's erectile dysfunction qualifies as a MUCMI attributable to Gulf War service.  McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006); see also 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(4).

The Board also advises that, at this time, it intimates no opinion as to the credibility or probative value of any lay statements in relation to the Veteran's claim for service connection for erectile dysfunction and defers any credibility determinations until final adjudication of this claim.

3. Entitlement to service connection for a headache disorder is remanded.

Under the AMA, the Board is bound by favorable findings of the AOJ in the absence of evidence of clear and unmistakable error.  38 C.F.R. § 3.104.  The October 2023 rating decision on appeal provided favorable findings, specifically that the evidence showed that the Veteran performed service in Southwest Asia, and that he had been diagnosed with a disability of acute tension headaches.

The claim for a headache disorder was received by VA on June 13, 2023.

The Board recognizes the time that the Veteran has devoted to this appeal process and appreciates his patience; however, remand is required due to two pre-decisional duty-to-assist errors.

First, Board finds a pre-decisional duty to assist error exist as to this claim, specifically that the AOJ erred insofar it did not obtain an adequate opinion as to whether the Veteran's tension headaches were proximately due to, or the result of, his service-connected PTSD, and no opinion addressed whether the Veteran's tension headaches was aggravated by his service-connected PTSD.  

In this regard, a September 2023 VA examiner endorsed a diagnosis acute intermittent tension headaches and found the claimed condition was less likely than not proximately due to or the result of Veteran's service connected condition.  As a rationale, the September 2023 VA examiner explained tension headaches were the most common type of headache, that the exact mechanism that caused a tension headache was not known, but several factors, such as genetics and environment, were thought to be involved.  The September 2023 VA examiner also explained muscle contractions in the head and neck were considered a major factor in the development of a tension headache.  The September 2023 VA examiner also stated some people get tension headaches in response to stressful events or hectic days, and noted the claims file was silent for diagnosis or treatment of a chronic headache condition, and a nexus could not be established.

However, the September 2023 VA examiner's explanation that some people get tension headaches in response to stressful events or hectic days, seemly supports a relationship to PTSD, and contradicts the finding that a nexus could not be established.  Thus, the April 2022 VA examiner's opinion lacks probative value, and the AOJ's failure to obtain an adequate opinion on this basis is a pre-decisional error.  See Barr, 21 Vet. App. at 311-12.  Accordingly, remand is warranted for a supplemental opinion.

Further, no opinion was not obtained to as to whether the Veteran's acute intermittent tension headaches were aggravated by his service-connected PTSD, and the AOJ's failure to obtain an opinion on this basis is a pre-decisional error.  See El Amin, 26 Vet. App. at 140.  Accordingly, remand is warranted for a supplemental opinion.

Second, the record reflects the Veteran is a Persian Gulf War veteran.  Specifically, in January 2023 VA issued Memorandum which indicated the Veteran was a covered veteran under 38 U.S.C. § 1117.  However, no VA examiner addressed whether the Veteran's acute intermittent tension headaches, as diagnosed by the September 2023 VA examiner, qualified as a medically unexplained chronic multisystem illness (MUCMI) as no opinions on the pathophysiology or etiology of the disability was provided.  See Stewart v. Wilkie, 30 Vet. App. 383 (2018).  Accordingly, remand is warranted for supplemental opinions to address whether the Veteran's tension headaches qualify as a MUCMI attributable to Gulf War service.  McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006); see also 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(4).

The Board also advises that, at this time, it intimates no opinion as to the credibility or probative value of any lay statements in relation to the Veteran's claim for service connection for a headache disorder and defers any credibility determinations until final adjudication of this claim. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following actions:

1. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination for the obstructive sleep apnea to include considering whether laboratory polysomnography was needed.

The examiner is asked to determine whether the Veteran has a diagnosis of sleep apnea, with consideration of laboratory polysomnography as suggested by the June 2023 home sleep study report, which negative for obstructive sleep apnea but also documented home sleep apnea testing did not definitively rule out obstructive sleep apnea, and a June 2023 private opinion, which found the Veteran had a diagnosis of obstructive sleep apnea based a "STOP-Bang Questionnaire".

2. Obtain medical opinions to address the claim for service connection for erectile dysfunction.  The clinician is asked to provide a response, with a rationale, to the following:

(a.) Whether it is at least as likely as not (the likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher), the Veteran's erectile dysfunction, as diagnosed by a September 2023 VA examiner, is proximately due to or the result his service-connected PTSD?  Please explain why or why not. Please note PTSD does not need to be the sole cause of erectile dysfunction.

(b.) Whether it is at least as likely as not (the likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher), the Veteran's erectile dysfunction, as diagnosed by a September 2023 VA examiner, is at least as likely as not aggravated (any increase in disability) by his service-connected PTSD?  Please explain why or why not.

(c.) Is the etiology of the Veteran's erectile dysfunction, as diagnosed by a September 2023 VA examiner, at least partially understood?  Please explain why or why not.  This determination must be based on the Veteran's specific case and cannot be based on the etiology of the disease or disability population as a whole.

(d.) Is the pathophysiology of the Veteran's erectile dysfunction, as diagnosed by a September 2023 VA examiner, at least partially understood?  Please explain why or why not.  This determination must be based on the Veteran's specific case and cannot be based on the pathophysiology of the disease or disability population as a whole.

3. Obtain medical opinions to address the claim for service connection for a headache disorder.  The clinician is asked to provide a response, with a rationale, to the following:

(a.) Whether it is at least as likely as not (the likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher), the acute intermittent tension headaches, as diagnosed by a September 2023 VA examiner, are proximately due to or the result his service-connected PTSD given the September 2023 VA examiner's explanation that some people get tension headaches in response to stressful events or hectic days?  Please explain why or why not.

(b.) Whether it is at least as likely as not (the likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher), the Veteran's acute intermittent tension headaches, as diagnosed by a September 2023 VA examiner, are at least as likely as not aggravated (any increase in disability) by his service-connected PTSD?  Please explain why or why not.

(c.) Is the etiology of the Veteran's acute intermittent tension headaches, as diagnosed by a September 2023 VA examiner, at least partially understood?  Please explain why or why not.  This determination must be based on the Veteran's specific case and cannot be based on the etiology of the disease or disability population as a whole.

(d.) Is the pathophysiology of the Veteran's acute intermittent tension headaches, as diagnosed by a September 2023 VA examiner, at least partially understood?  Please explain why or why not.  This determination must be based on the Veteran's specific case and cannot be based on the pathophysiology of the disease or disability population as a whole.

 

 

M. C. GRAHAM

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	M. Espinoza, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.