Citation Nr: A25034453
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 240123-411026
DATE: April 15, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for chronic sinusitis with mild right-sided nasal septum deviation (sinusitis), is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran's sinusitis disability is caused or aggravated by his service-connected allergic rhinitis. 

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to service connection for sinusitis have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1112, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.310.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Marine Corps from November 1993 to November 1997, with additional service in the Marine Corps Reserve from December 1997 to October 2001. 

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a January 2024 rating decision by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO), also known as the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ). 

In the January 23, 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal, the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time notification of notification of the January 23, 2024, rating decision. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Service connection

In general, service connection may be established for a disability resulting from a disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service. See 38 U.S.C. § 1110; 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303. Service connection requires evidence showing: (1) a current disability; (2) incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury in service; and (3) a nexus between the current disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated in service. See Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004). 

In rendering a decision on appeal, the Board must analyze the credibility and probative value of the evidence, account for the evidence which it finds to be persuasive or unpersuasive and provide the reasons for its rejection of any material favorable to the claimant. Gabrielson v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 36, 39-40 (1994); Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49, 57 (1990). Competency of evidence differs from weight and credibility. Competency is a legal concept determining whether testimony may be heard and considered by the trier of fact, while credibility is a factual determination going to the probative value of the evidence to be made after the evidence has been admitted. Rucker v. Brown, 10 Vet. App. 67, 74 (1997); Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 469 (1994).

The Board must also fully consider the lay assertions of record. Competent lay evidence is any evidence not requiring that the proponent have specialized education, training, or experience. Lay evidence is competent if it is provided by a person who has knowledge of facts or circumstances and conveys matters that can be observed by a lay person, to include observable symptoms. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(a)(2); Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372 (Fed. Cir. 2007). Further, a lay witness may opine on questions of diagnosis and etiology, provided that such matters are amenable to a lay person's observation. Davidson v. Shinseki, 581 F.3d 1313, 1316 (Fed. Cir. 2009).

VA is responsible for determining whether the evidence supports the claim or is in relative balance, with a claimant prevailing in either event. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102. The claimant is entitled to the benefit of the doubt when there is an "approximate" (meaning nearly equal) balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any material determination. See Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021); Ortiz v. Principi, 274 F.3d 1361 (Fed. Cir. 2001). If the evidence persuasively weighs against a claim, the claim is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for sinusitis.  

The Veteran contends that his current sinusitis disability is related to service. See October 2022 Application for Disability Compensation and Related Compensation Benefits (Form VA 21-526EZ); January 2024 VA Form 10182. Specifically, he asserts that his disability began in service. Id. 

The Board concludes that service connection is warranted because the Veteran's sinusitis disability began in service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a). 

Regarding the first element of service connection, the record contains conflicting evidence on the question of whether the Veteran has had chronic sinusitis since filing his claim for service connection in October 2022. 

January 2021 private treatment records show that the Veteran was prescribed fluticasone and cetirizine for allergic rhinitis. In July 2021, the Veteran denied congestion, ear discharge, ear pain, postnasal drip, rhinorrhea, sinus pressure and pain, sneezing and sore throat. In July 2021, the Veteran denied congestion, ear pain, postnasal drip, rhinorrhea, sinus pressure and pain, sneezing, and sore throat. He was assessed with allergic rhinitis. January 2022 private treatment records show the Veteran was seen for a follow-up regarding allergic rhinitis.

In October 2022, the Veteran submitted a private Disability Benefits Questionnaire dated September 2022, completed by R.T. The clinician diagnosed the Veteran with chronic sinusitis and allergic rhinitis and mild right-sided deviated nasal septum. The Veteran reported near constant sinusitis symptoms frequented by headaches, pain, tenderness of the affected sinus and purulent discharge, particularly in the mornings upon waking. He used cetirizine and fluticasone daily. See September 2022 Private Disability Benefits Questionnaire (DBQ); April 2023 Private Examination.

The December 2022 VA examiner reviewed the Veteran's records and concluded that the majority of the medical evidence is more consistent with an intermittent acute sinus condition rather than a chronic one. 

In April 2023, private clinician Dr. J.E. confirmed the Veteran's diagnoses of allergic rhinitis and chronic sinusitis. 

In December 2023 VA treatment records, the Veteran reported difficulty sleeping due to allergic rhinitis and a possible sinus infection. It started with a runny nose all day and a stuffed-up nose all night that prevented him from using his CPAP mask. He reported sinus pressure and a cough with the drainage in the morning. He denied fever or chills. 

The private and VA clinicians are all competent to provide diagnoses in this case and the Board gives them probative weight. While the December 2022 VA examiner found the Veteran did not have chronic sinusitis, the requirement for service connection is only that the disability have existed at some point at the time of or after filing the claim for benefits. Here, the December 2022 VA examiner found the Veteran had sinusitis and the private examiner confirmed the Veteran had a diagnosis of sinusitis. Accordingly, the probative evidence weighs in favor of finding that the first element is met. 

Regarding the second element of service connection, the AOJ made a favorable finding that the Veteran's service treatment records (STRs) show complaints of nasal congestion and upper respiratory infection (URI) in service. STRs and a buddy statement support the favorable finding.

STRs show that in October 1993 the Veteran reported in his medical prescreening form that he had taken medications for colds and flus but had no problems. In an October 1993 enlistment report of medical history, the Veteran denied sinusitis, ear, nose, or throat trouble, chronic or frequent colds, hay fever, and chronic cough. The October 1993 report of medical examination found his nose, sinuses, mouth, throat, and ears were normal. The Veteran complained of congestion and slight cough for one week in January 1994. His turbinates were erythematous with mucous and he was diagnosed with a URI and prescribed sudafed and afrin. In June 1994, the Veteran complained of fever and chill with sinus congestion. His sinuses were not tender and he was diagnosed with viral syndrome. He was next treated for symptoms of positive pressure to frontal/maxillary sinuses in February 1996. A March 1996 report of medical examination found the Veteran's nose, sinuses, mouth and throat were normal. In the March 1996 report of medical history, the Veteran denied sinusitis, chronic of frequent colds, ear, nose or throat trouble, and chronic cough. He was seen for nasal congestion and headaches in October 1996 and diagnosed with an upper respiratory infection and prescribed sudafed and robitussin. In February 1997 he complained of runny nose, productive cough, sore throat, and sneezing. His turbinates were within normal limits and he was diagnosed with a URI. He had pressure in his maxillary sinus. He was then seen for sinus pressure, running nose, and nasal congestion in June 1997. The Veteran's October 1997 separation medial history shows that the Veteran denied recurrent ear infections, chronic or frequent colds, sinusitis, allergic rhinitis, and chronic cough. The October 1997 report of medical examination found the Veteran's nose, sinuses, mouth and throat were normal. 

A fellow service member, M.K.S., provided a statement in August 2013 that the Veteran reported symptoms of sinusitis, including headaches and sinus and ear pain and pressure, in service. M.K.S. is competent to report that the Veteran complained of headache, sinus area, and ear pain and pressure in service, as he is competent to report what was told to him. Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372 (Fed. Cir. 2007).

The AOJ also made a favorable finding that the Veteran had toxic exposure risk activity (TERA) in service based on his military occupational series of machine gunner. Specifically, he was exposed to chemicals that were emitted from weapons and used to clean weapons. 

Accordingly, the remaining question for the Board is whether there is a nexus between the Veteran's current sinusitis disability and his active service, to include complaints of nasal congestion and URI in service and his exposure to chemicals that were emitted from weapons and used to clean weapons. 

Private treatment records show that the Veteran sought treatment for symptoms of nasal congestion, postnasal drip, and sinus pressure or pain from 2003 forward.

December 15, 2003 private treatment records show the Veteran complained of chronic sinus infections. He stated that he was seen by PrimeCare and was told he had a virus or sinus infection and wanted a second opinion. Dr. G.P. examined imaging of the Veteran's paranasal sinuses and found evidence to suggest moderate chronic ethmoid sinusitis. Other sinus structures appeared normal. The examination also suggested mild right-sided nasal septal deviation. 

August 2005 private treatment records show the Veteran complained of ear and nasal congestion with onset four days ago. He reported rhinorrhea, postnasal drip, ears popping, a productive cough and itchy, watery eyes. His nose was within normal limits but his throat was red. He was diagnosed with allergic rhinitis and instructed to restart Claritin and Nasonex. In September 2005 private treatment records, the Veteran complained of sinus and chest congestion with productive cough and fever. He complained of pressure in his sinuses and headaches for two days. He also reported earache and wheezing. He took Nasonex. He was diagnosed with bronchitis. 

In February 2006 private treatment records the Veteran complained of sore throat, draining, a non-productive cough, and ear pressure for 5 days. He reported that he was using sudafed and Mucinex but it was not helping his sinusitis. His nose and throat were red and he had sinus tenderness. He was diagnosed with allergic rhinitis and sinusitis. In March 2006 private treatment records, the Veteran complained of a sore throat for two days. A physical examination showed his nose and throat were red. He was diagnosed with an upper respiratory infection and pharyngitis, non-strep. April 2006 private treatment records show the Veteran complained of chest congestion and cough that started last week. He also reported having pressure in both ears. He was assessed with an upper respiratory infection. In private treatment records from September 2006, the Veteran reported that he took Claritin, sudafed, and Nasonex. In June 2007, he reported taking Nasacort. He reported a past medical history of sinus infections.

A February 2008 private clinical image of the paranasal sinuses showed that they were well aerated, with no mucosal thickening or air-fluid levels seen. The bony nasal septum was in the midline. The impression was negative. A March 2008 private MRI of the brain shows that the Veteran's paranasal sinuses were well aerated. The Veteran completed a diary regarding periods of dizziness and reported pain and pressure in the left ear in May 2008, pressure in both ears in June and July of 2008. He reported aural pressure in both ears in August 2008 and November 2008, sudden ear pain in February 2009, pressure in both ears in March 2010, ear pressure in October 2010 and January 2011, and ear pain in December 2011.

March 2013 private treatment records show the Veteran was evaluated for Meniere's disease. He denied otalgia and otorrhea. A physical examination showed his septum was deviated. In June 2013 private treatment records, the Veteran reported headaches that occurred after an attack of dizziness and denied otalgia and otorrhea. A physical examination showed his septum was deviated to the right 2+/4 and his inferior turbinates were hypertrophied +2. Mucosa were bilaterally congested and crusting. July 2013 private treatment records show the Veteran denied headache, otalgia, otorrhea, recurrent ear infections, and recurrent sinusitis. He reported nasal congestion and a physical examination was similar to the one from June 2013.

During a March 2014 VA examination, the Veteran reported a history of occasional ear and sinus infections. During a November 2015 VA examination, the Veteran reported having been diagnosed with Meniere's syndrome or endolymphatic hydrops in August 2014 based in part on symptoms of aural pressure episodes over several years.

In November 2019, the Veteran complained of sinus congestion, sinus pressure, fatigue, drainage, and loss of appetite for two days. A physical examination showed the Veteran's nose was red with sinus tenderness. 

January 2020 private treatment records show the Veteran went to a follow-up appointment for anxiodepression, which was a chronic stable problem known to the clinician. His past medical history did not list sinusitis. He did not have any complaints regarding that diagnosis, but he did complain of right frontal pressure for one week with postnasal drip, "ST", nasal congestion, and purulent rhinorrhea (yellow mucous), scratchy throat, and nonproductive cough. He denied ear pain. A physical examination showed mucosal edema and rhinorrhea were present and the right sinus exhibited frontal sinus tenderness. There was also posterior oropharyngeal erythema present. The Veteran was diagnosed with sinusitis and prescribed cefdinir.

In May 2020, private treatment records show the Veteran had an annual physical examination. He did not report any headaches or nasal or ear symptoms. July 2020 private treatment records show that the Veteran complained of sinus pressure on the right maxillary sinus, ear fullness, and nasal congestion that started the day after he mowed the grass. He reported that Claritin has helped alleviated some congestion. He reported congestion, ear pain, postnasal drip, rhinorrhea, sinus pressure and pain, and sneezing. A physical examination showed mucosal edema was present and the right sinus exhibited maxillary sinus tenderness and frontal sinus tenderness. He was diagnosed with sinusitis and prescribed a Z-pak. 

In December 2020, private treatment records show the Veteran complained of congestion starting two days earlier. He stated he had taken sudafed and Mucinex D without relief. He reported congestion, ear pain (fullness) and sinus pain. A physical examination showed rhinorrhea was present and the right and left sinuses exhibited frontal sinus tenderness. He was diagnosed with acute rhinosinusitis and prescribed amoxicillin, cetirizine, and fluticasone. 

January 2021 private treatment records show that the Veteran was prescribed fluticasone and cetirizine for allergic rhinitis. He denied congestion, ear discharge, ear pain, postnasal drip, rhinorrhea, sinus pressure and pain, sneezing and sore throat. In July 2021, the Veteran again denied congestion, ear discharge, ear pain, postnasal drip, rhinorrhea, sinus pressure and pain, sneezing and sore throat. In July 2021, the Veteran denied congestion, ear pain, postnasal drip, rhinorrhea, sinus pressure and pain, sneezing, and sore throat. He was assessed with allergic rhinitis. January 2022 private treatment records show the Veteran was seen for a follow-up regarding allergic rhinitis.

In December 2023 VA treatment records, the Veteran reported difficulty sleeping due to allergic rhinitis and a possible sinus infection. It started with a runny nose all day and a stuffed-up nose all night that prevented him from using his CPAP mask. He reported sinus pressure and a cough with drainage in the morning. He denied fever or chills. 

In addition, the Veteran has consistently asserted that his symptoms of sinusitis began in active service and continued after service. See March 2014 Statement in Support of Claim; October 2022 Form VA 21-526EZ; June 2023 Statement in Support of Claim. The Veteran is competent to report that his symptoms of sinus pain and pressure and postnasal drip began in service and that he had occasionally or intermittently experienced them since service. Further, the record shows that the Veteran consistently reported or sought treatment for similar reports from at least 2003 forward. As noted above, the Veteran separated from service in 1997. Accordingly, the Board finds the Veteran's reports credible and probative. However, the Board finds the Veteran is not competent to provide a specific diagnosis of sinusitis at any point, nor a nexus opinion linking his sinusitis to service. These questions are medically complex, involving multiple overlapping systems in the body, and require medical experience and training. 

The record contains conflicting opinions on the question of a nexus. 

In October 2022, the Veteran submitted a private Disability Benefits Questionnaire dated September 2022, completed by R.T. The clinician diagnosed the Veteran with chronic sinusitis and allergic rhinitis and mild right-sided deviated nasal septum in 2003. The clinician noted the Veteran reported chronic sinusitis in service and noted the Veteran had been a patient of the clinician's clinic since 2003 when he reported with symptoms of chronic sinusitis, which were verified by diagnostic testing as chronic ethmoid sinusitis. His private treatment records noted chronic ethmoid sinusitis with periodic resistance to antibiotic treatment and allergic rhinitis. The Veteran reported near constant sinusitis symptoms frequented by headaches, pain, tenderness of the affected sinus and purulent discharge, particularly in the mornings upon waking. He used cetirizine and fluticasone daily. The clinician did not provide a nexus opinion.

In April 2023, private clinician Dr. J.E. confirmed the Veteran's diagnoses of allergic rhinitis and chronic sinusitis. Dr. J.E. noted that the Veteran started experiencing nasal congestion, drainage, sore throat, and earaches with a dry cough during basic training from exposure to smoke, fumes, and dust coming from the gas chamber, control, and smoke grenades. Dr. J.E. noted that the Veteran went to the medic and received decongestants and antihistamines. The Veteran reported that his symptoms were worse when he was in the field training in the woods, which caused him to have acute URIs and sinusitis. The Veteran continued having sinus infections after service and got at least three to four severe sinus infections characterized by purulent sinus drainage, fever, facial pain, and headaches. He was prescribed Flonase and Zyrtec for allergic rhinitis and got antibiotics, steroids, and Mucinex to help with sinus infections. At one time, his x-rays showed ethmoid sinusitis. Dr. J.E. opined that the Veteran's allergic rhinitis and chronic sinusitis are more likely than not service connected because of exposure to airborne irritants during service. Dr. J.E. explained that histamine release from the mast cells lining the respiratory mucosa led to excessive secretion, inflammation, and drainage, resulting in allergic rhinitis. The mucosal edema and obstruction in the ostiomeatal complex are the risk factors for chronic sinusitis. The alteration in sinus ostial patency, ciliary function, and the quality of secretions led to stagnation of secretions, decreased pH, and decreased oxygen tension within the sinus, making it a favorable environment for bacterial growth.

The December 2022 VA examiner reviewed the Veteran's records and opined that the claimed condition was less likely than not incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event or illness. The rationale was that chronic sinusitis is defined as an inflammatory condition involving the paranasal sinuses and linings of the nasal passages which persists for 12 weeks or longer. The examiner noted that the Veteran described sinusitis started in January 1994 and being persistent to present and described extreme signs and symptoms and reported antibiotic resistance. The examiner reviewed STRs, private treatment records from 2003 through 2006 from the Heartland clinic, private treatment records from the Norton facility, and the October 2022 private opinion of R.T. The examiner concluded that the notes did not indicate persistence of sinusitis signs or symptoms longer than 12 weeks. The suggestion of ethmoid sinusitis on x-ray in 2003 was no longer there by 2008 when an MRI of the head, which included the sinuses, did not show it being present any longer. The examiner found the degree of symptomatology described in the lay statements and the lay evidence provided to the VA examiner was not congruent with the lay evidence described in the private examiner's report. The December 2022 VA examiner concluded that, based on the available evidence, the majority of the medical evidence regarding the sinus claims is more consistent with an intermittent acute condition than a chronic one. The medical evidence shows he had multiple episodes of URI or similar, lasting for a brief period. None of the episodes lasted 12 or more weeks, which is consistent with an acute and transitory condition rather than a chronic one. Additionally, there were at least four dates when the Veteran specifically denied that he had sinusitis or related problems, including his enlistment, dental, airborne, and separation examination. In summary, the available evidence does not support the Veteran's contention that he had chronically disabling sinusitis on active duty. The examiner concluded that there is not a medically reasonable connection between the Veteran's current condition and his military service because it was not chronically disabling during active duty. 

The July 2023 VA examiner reviewed the Veteran's claims file and noted the Veteran was treated for several acute URIs that were treated and resolved in service and denied hay fever and sinus/ENT problems at separation. The examiner noted that he was diagnosed with allergic rhinitis in 2005 and again in 2021. The examiner opined that the Veteran's claimed condition was less likely than not incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness. The rationale was that the Veteran had several acute URIs in service that were treated and resolved. This is a typical number of acute URIs that any person would have in a four-year time period. There was no chronic allergic rhinitis or sinusitis diagnosed in service. His separation examination shows he denied hay fever, sinusitis or ENT problems and there was no chronic rhinitis or sinusitis condition diagnosed. The Veteran was diagnosed with allergic rhinitis in 2005 and again in 2021 with chronicity seen in the 2020s. 

The Board finds the two VA examiners' opinions less probative and persuasive than the April 2023 private examiner's opinion. The April 2023 private examiner's opinion considers the Veteran's lay statements and the diagnosis and assessment from September 2022 DBQ completed by one of the Veteran's treating clinicians. The December 2022 VA examiner appeared to add a requirement that the Veteran's diagnosis of sinusitis be chronic rather than that the existence of the Veteran's sinusitis has been recurring over time. The examiner concluded that each individual diagnosis of sinusitis the Veteran has had was acute but failed to address whether the Veteran's exposure to chemicals in service caused him to have acute episodes of sinusitis intermittently over a long period of time. The July 2023 VA examiner's opinion is also less probative because the examiner appeared to primarily address rhinitis and did not provide a clear opinion regarding sinusitis itself. Further, neither examiner addressed whether the Veteran's service-connected allergic rhinitis caused or aggravated his sinusitis. 

The April 2023 private opinion is more probative because the clinician addressed the Veteran's lay reports, considered his exposure to irritants in service, and addressed the relationship between the Veteran's acute URIs and rhinitis, noting that rhinitis caused alterations that were risk factors for developing chronic sinusitis. Hence, the Board finds the opinion highly probative and, taken in conjunction with the lay and medical evidence of record, attaches significant weight to the opinion on the matter of nexus between the Veteran's current disability and his service-connected allergic rhinitis. See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008); Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 124 (2007). Accordingly, the Board finds that the most probative evidence weighs in persuasively in favor of finding that the Veteran's service-connected allergic rhinitis caused or aggravated his current sinusitis disability. 

(Continued on the next page)

?

Service connection is granted.

 

Marissa Caylor

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	M. Michel-Rossi

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.