Citation Nr: A25034164
Decision Date: 04/14/25	Archive Date: 04/14/25

DOCKET NO. 240814-463335
DATE: April 14, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an initial 100 percent rating for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) with alcohol use disorder, opioid use disorder, and gambling disorder, is granted.  

FINDING OF FACT

Since the award of service connection, the Veteran's service-connected psychiatric disability more nearly approximated a disability picture that resulted in total occupational and social impairment.  

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

The criteria for an initial 100 percent rating for PTSD with alcohol use disorder, opioid use disorder, and gambling disorder, have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411.  

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from November 1986 to June 1991.  

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an August 2023 rating decision of a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO), the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ), which continued a 70 percent rating for PTSD.  

In August 2024, the Veteran, through his attorney, Kent A. Eiler, of the Law offices of Carpenter Chartered, submitted a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request:  Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) on which he identified the August 2023 rating decision and elected the Direct Review docket.  

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the August 2023 AOJ decision.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  If evidence was submitted during the period after the August 2023 AOJ decision, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 70 percent for PTSD.    

Disability ratings are determined by applying the criteria set for in the VA Schedule for Rating Disabilities (Rating Schedule).  38 C.F.R. Part 4.  The Rating Schedule is primarily a guide in the evaluation of disability resulting from all types of diseases and injuries encountered as a result of or incident to military service.  The ratings are intended to compensate, as far as can practicably be determined, the average impairment of earning capacity resulting from such diseases and injuries and their residual conditions in civilian occupations.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1.  Separate diagnostic codes identify the various disabilities.  Disability ratings are determined by applying the criteria set forth in the VA Schedule for Rating Disabilities.

If two disability ratings are potentially applicable, the higher rating will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that evaluation.  Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7.  in view of the number of atypical instances, it is not expected, especially with the more fully described grades of disabilities, that all cases will show all the findings specified.  38 C.F.R. § 4.21.  It is the defined and consistently applied policy of VA to administer the law under a broad interpretation, consistent, however, with the facts shown in every case.  Any reasonable doubt regarding the degree of disability is resolved in favor of the Veteran.  38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.3.

When the appeal arises from an initial rating assigned following the award of service connection, evidence contemporaneous with the claim for service connection and with the rating decision granting service connection would be most probative of the degree of disability existing at the time that the initial rating was assigned and should be the evidence used to decide whether an initial rating on appeal was erroneous.  Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119, 126 (1999).  If later evidence obtained during the appeal period indicates that the degree of disability increased or decreased following the assignment of an initial rating, staged ratings may be assigned for separate periods of time based on facts found.  Hart v. Mansfield 21 Vet. App. 505, 509-10 (2007).

The record on appeal reflects that in a July 2020 rating decision, the RO granted service connection for PTSD and assigned an initial 70 percent rating, effective March 3, 2020.   

On December 29, 2020, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 21-526EZ, Application for Disability Compensation and Related Compensation Benefits, on which he sought a temporary total rating based on a period of hospitalization which began on December 8, 2020.  On February 11, 2021, he submitted another VA Form 21-526EZ, Application for Disability Compensation and Related Compensation Benefits, on which he sought a temporary total rating based on a period of hospitalization in excess of 21 days.  

In a February 2021 rating decision issued in response to the Veteran's December 2020 and February 2021 claims, the RO denied a temporary total rating for PTSD based on a period of hospitalization in excess of 21 days.  

Thereafter, on February 25, 2021, the Veteran submitted another VA Form 21-526EZ, Application for Disability Compensation and Related Compensation Benefits, on which he sought a temporary total rating based on a period of hospitalization in excess of 21 days, based on a period of hospitalization which began on January 5, 2021.  He also claimed entitlement to TDIU and submitted a VA Form 21-8940 that same day on which he claimed that he had been unable to work due to PTSD since October 15, 2020.

In a May 2021 rating decision issued in response to the February 25, 2021, claim  the RO assigned a temporary total rating for PTSD from January 5, 2021 to May 5, 2021, based on a period of hospitalization in excess of 21 days.  The RO continued the 70 percent rating for PTSD from May 6, 2021.  In addition, the RO denied TDIU.  In a subsequent May 2021 rating decision, the RO again continued the 70 percent rating for PTSD.  

In June 2021, the Veteran's attorney submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review, seeking review of the July 2020 rating decision assigning an effective date of March 3, 2020, for the award of service connection for PTSD.  He neglected to sign the form.  

In a June 2021 letter, the RO advised the Veteran that his Higher-Level Review request could not be processed because it was not signed.  He was further advised that if VA received a signed review request within 60 days of the original request, VA would consider his claim filed as of the date of receipt of the original request. 

Later that month, the Veteran's attorney submitted another VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review, again seeking review of the July 2020 rating decision assigning an effective date of March 3, 2020.  The form was signed by the Veteran's attorney.  

In an August 2021 Higher-Level Review rating decision, the AOJ denied an effective date earlier than March 3, 2020, for the award of service connection for PTSD.  

In May 2022, the Veteran's attorney filed a VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, seeking readjudication of the May 2021 rating decisions that denied entitlement to a TDIU and continued the 70 percent rating for PTSD.  The Veteran's attorney also sought review of the August 2021 HLR rating decision which denied an effective date earlier than March 3, 2020, for the award of service connection for PTSD, although the Veteran's attorney rather confusingly characterized that issue as "Effective date of April 8, 2019, rather than March 3, 2020, for permanent 70 percent (or higher) rating for evaluation for PTSD" and it does not appear that the RO addressed the contention.  

In a May 2022 rating decision, the RO continued the 70 percent rating for PTSD and determined that new and relevant evidence had not been received sufficient to readjudicate the previous denial of entitlement to a TDIU.  

In May 2023, the Veteran's attorney submitted a VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, seeking readjudication of the May 2022 rating decision.  On the form, the Veteran's attorney described the Specific Issue(s) as "Entitlement to an effective date of no later than April 8, 2019 for 70 percent (or higher) rating evaluation for service-connected mental health condition characterized as posttraumatic stress disorder with alcohol use disorder, opiod use disorder in remission and pathological gambling in remission (PTSD); Entitlement to an evaluation in excess of 70 percent for PTSD from April 8, 2019; and, in the alternative, entitlement to a total rating based on Individual Unemployability (TDIU) from no later than October 15, 2019."  

In an August 2023 rating decision, the RO continued the 70 percent rating for PTSD.  The RO deferred adjudication of the issue of entitlement to a TDIU.  

In a June 2024 rating decision, the RO increased the rating for the Veteran's PTSD to 100 percent, effective May 25, 2023, denied an earlier effective date for the 70 percent rating for PTSD.  The RO also determined that basic eligibility for Dependents' Educational Assistance (DEA) benefits was established from May 25, 2023, and that entitlement to a TDIU was moot.  

In August 2024, the Veteran's attorney submitted a VA Form 10182 on which he identified the August 2023 rating decision and the issue as "Initial rating evaluation in excess of 70% for service-connected disability characterized as posttraumatic stress disorder with alcohol use disorder, opinion use disorder in remission and pathological gambling."  

Based on the foregoing, the Board finds that the period under review in this appeal is from March 3, 2020, the effective date of the award of service connection, to May 25, 2023, when the RO granted a 100 percent rating for PTSD.  The Board finds that the Veteran has continuously pursued the issue of entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 70 percent from the effective date of the award of service connection.  

As detailed above, in a July 2020 rating decision, the RO granted service connection for PTSD and assigned an initial 70 percent rating, effective March 3, 2020.  Although the Veteran did not file a VA Form 21-0995, Decision Review Request:  Supplemental Claim, a VA Form 21-0996, Decision Review Request:  Higher Level Review, or a VA Form 10192, Decision Review Request:  Board Appeal within one year of that decision, on February 25, 2021, he filed a VA Form 21-8940 on which he claimed that he had been unable to work due to PTSD since October 15, 2020.

Despite the requirement set forth in 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501 for filing a Supplemental Claim on a form prescribed by the Secretary, i.e. VA Form 21-0996, the U.S. Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) has held that a Veteran's request for TDIU can serve as a supplemental claim following VA's denial of an increased rating claim for the same disability.  Chisholm v. Collins, No. 22-7028, 2025 U.S. App. Vet. Claims LEXIS 336 (March 13, 2025).  Thus, although this fact was not raised by the Veteran's attorney, the Board nonetheless finds the Veteran has continuously pursued the issue of entitlement to a rating in excess of 70 percent for PTSD from the effective date of the award of service connection.  

Although, liberally construed, the Veteran's attorney previously requested review of the effective date of the award of service connection at the RO, this issue was not addressed and the Veteran's attorney did not appeal that issue, or the RO's failure to adjudicate it, to the Board.  Thus, it will not be addressed herein.     

The Veteran's PTSD has been rated under the criteria contained in the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders at 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411.  Under those criteria, a 50 percent rating is warranted for occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to such symptoms as: flattened affect, circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short-and long-term memory (e.g. retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships. Id.

A 70 percent rating is assigned when there is objective evidence demonstrating occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately, and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a worklike setting); inability to establish and maintain effective relationships. Id.

A 100 percent rating is warranted when there is total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place, memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name. Id.

Under the General Rating Formula, the Board must conduct a "holistic analysis" that considers all associated symptoms, regardless of whether they are listed as criteria.  Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 10, 22 (2017); 38 C.F.R. § 4.130.  The Board must determine whether unlisted symptoms are similar in severity, frequency, and duration to the listed symptoms associated with specific disability percentages.  Then, the Board must determine whether the associated symptoms, both listed and unlisted, caused the level of impairment required for the higher rating.  Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 114-118 (Fed. Cir. 2013).

In Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436 (2002), the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) held that use of the term "such as" in 38 C.F.R. § 4.130 demonstrates that the symptoms after that phrase are not intended to constitute an exhaustive list, but rather are to serve as examples of the type and degree of the symptoms, or their effects, that would justify a particular rating. Accordingly, the evidence considered in determining the level of impairment under section 4.130 is not restricted to the symptoms provided in the diagnostic code. Rather, VA must consider all symptoms of a claimant's condition that affect the level of occupational and social impairment, including, if applicable, those identified in the American Psychiatric Association's Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders.

The standard of proof to be applied in decisions on claims for VA benefits is set forth in 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b). Under that provision, VA shall consider all information and lay and medical evidence of record in a case before the Secretary with respect to benefits under laws administered by the Secretary. When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, the Secretary shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); see also Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

The Veteran is currently in receipt of an initial 70 percent rating for PTSD from March 3, 2020, to January 4, 2021, a temporary total rating based on hospitalization over 21 days from January 5, 2021 to May 5, 2021, a 70 percent rating from May 6, 2021 to May 24, 2023, and a 100 percent rating thereafter.  

Turning to the evidence, the VA treatment records reflect that the Veteran has a history of inpatient treatment for alcohol use disorder since at least 2017.  In June 2018, the Veteran completed the Substance Abuse Recovery and Rehabilitation Program (SARRP) at the Kansas City VA Medical Center.  See October 2018 VA treatment note.  He was then transferred to a residential treatment program at the Eisenhower VA Medical Center, from which he was discharged in October 2018.  Id.  The Veteran reported that he worked full time but was on short-term disability during his stay in the residential treatment program.  Id.  At discharge, the Veteran reported that his goals included taking care of his DUI and getting his job back.  Id.  

A November 2018 VA mental health note reflects the Veteran's report that he had traumatic nightmares and Prazosin has been helping.  He reported that he had not had a drink since May 2018.  He also reported that his wife and daughter were living in a different state while he was in the residential program.  He reported that his wife was supportive, and they were working on building back their relationship.  From December 2018 to March 2019, the Veteran's VA clinicians attempted to schedule the Veteran for follow-up mental health and primary care but were unsuccessful in contacting him.  A March 2019 VA mental health note reflects the Veteran's report that he had not had any alcohol in a week.  The clinician noted that the Veteran's PTSD caused traumatic nightmares, numbing, and hypervigilance, and that he had continued insomnia.  Between April 2019 and April 2020, the Veteran's VA clinicians attempted to schedule the Veteran for follow-up mental health and primary care but were unsuccessful in contacting him.

In June 2020, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination, at which time the examiner confirmed diagnoses of PTSD, alcohol use disorder, opioid use disorder in remission 15 years, and pathological gambling in recent remission.  The Veteran endorsed symptoms of depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, chronic sleep impairment, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work like setting, inability to establish and maintain effective relationships, suicidal ideation, and impaired impulse control.  With respect to his family and social situations, the Veteran reported that his wife and daughter moved out two years ago.  He reported that they were still married and talked on the phone but that she had no desire to return.  He reported that he has no relationship with his children.  With respect to his work, the Veteran reported that he had worked at an oil plant since 1991 but worried that if he had to seek additional treatment for alcohol misuse he could be fired.  He reported that he has had multiple DUI's and that he must use a breathalyzer in his car for another year.  He also reported drinking one and a half pints of vodka at night because he cannot sleep, despite taking Trazodone and Seroquel.  The examiner noted that the Veteran has been up and down getting help for his drinking.  He also noted that he is "a depressed man who lives with a lot of PTSD symptoms and even hears noises and fears an attack."  The examiner concluded that the Veteran's mental disorder symptoms caused occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.  

A December 2020 VA treatment note reflects that the Veteran had been re-admitted to the SARRP program at the Kansas City VA Medical Center and was scheduled for a December 29, 2020 discharge.  The Veteran reported that, after his discharge, he wished to re-enter the residential treatment program because he needed "some structured living for a little while longer.  I need some more sobriety time before I go back home.  I don't think 21 days is long enough for me."  The Veteran reported that he began drinking again in November 2020 and that he had been drinking three pints of vodka daily for the previous month.  The Veteran reported that his PTSD stems from combat exposure in Iraq and that he was currently experiencing occasional nightmares and flashbacks.  

In January 2021, the Veteran was re-admitted to the residential treatment program.  A January 2021 VA treatment note reflects the Veteran's report that he was on short-term disability until April 2021 and feared losing his job because of his drinking.  He reported that he felt on guard most of the time and had poor concentration and memory.  The clinician noted that the Veteran had written the time of the appointment on his hand so as not to forget it.  The Veteran also reported depression, isolation, poor sleep, paranoia and nightmares four out of seven days a week.  He reported two previous instances where he was intoxicated and stuck a gun in his mouth.  The Veteran denied having auditory verbal hallucinations but reported that he saw shadows at the corner of his eyes and gets easily startled. The clinician listed the Veteran's mental health medication trials and noted that he was mostly non-compliant regarding his medication.  The clinician also administered the SLUMS memory test and noted that the Veteran scored a 20, indicating he was on the border of dementia and major neurocognitive disorder.  With regard to PTSD, the clinician noted that it was chronic and that the Veteran will continue with Prazosin, Trazodone, and Quetiapine, taper off Sertraline, and start Fluoxetine.  

A February 2021 mental health note reflects the Veteran's continued memory problems.  He reported forgetting to eat meals, difficulty doing laundry, and an inability to focus.  The Veteran reported that his memory has been getting gradually worse but that it had not changed since he entered residential treatment.  The clinician noted that he had discussed the Veteran's memory problems with other members of the care team and they all agreed that the Veteran was unemployable, especially at his job at the oil refinery.  The Veteran also reported nightmares and flashbacks that occurred once a day each.  

In February 2021, the Veteran submitted a letter from his daughter about the severity of his symptoms.  She stated that during his PTSD episodes, the Veteran does not know who she or her mother are.  She recalled one occasion when her mother was gone and the Veteran thought people were coming to get him and started swinging a gun around.  She stated that she took the gun from him, unloaded it, and talked him down.  She also stated that when he drinks, he has more episodes and yells at her and her mother.  She stated that he has nightmares where he speaks in German and jerks and yells.  She also recalled a time when she was leaving for college and the Veteran started crying because he thought she was a soldier he saw get killed.  

In February 2021, the Veteran also submitted a letter from his VA treating psychiatrist in which he opined that the Veteran is unable to obtain or maintain gainful employment based on his PTSD and ongoing memory decline.  He noted that the Veteran must keep a journal so he does not forget tasks, will often go back and forth during an interview, and will forget a task and start a new one.  He noted that the Veteran also has difficulty with meal times and doing laundry.  He also noted that recent memory testing places the Veteran at borderline between dementia and mild neurocognitive decline and that he highly recommends the Veteran not return to work as it would be a danger to himself and others.  

In February 2021, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 21-8940, Application for Increased Compensation Based on Unemployability, on which he stated he last worked in October 2020 and had to leave his job because of his chronic PTSD symptoms.  

In April 2021, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination, at which time the examiner confirmed diagnoses of PTSD, alcohol use disorder (moderate), opioid use disorder (in sustained/full remission), and gambling disorder (in remission).  The Veteran endorsed symptoms of depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss, such as forgetting names, directions or recent events, impairment of short and long term memory, for example, retention of only highly learned material, while forgetting to complete tasks, difficulty in understanding complex commands, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work like setting, inability to establish and maintain effective relationships, suicidal ideation, and impaired impulse control, such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence.  The examiner noted that the Veteran's PTSD is associated with the majority of his impairment given the controlled environment/sobriety while in treatment, but that he could not rule out the possibility that alcohol use disorder has been associated with some portion of his impulse control, sleep, and memory problems.  He also noted that all addiction disorders "are believed to be, as likely as not secondary to chronic PTSD."  With respect to his family situation, the Veteran reported that he is married but still separated and that he has very little contact with his children.  With respect to his work, the Veteran reported that he wanted to return to work at the oil refinery, but his psychiatrist strongly advised against it due to his memory problems.  He reported that he had made errors while working on control valves, and as things got more computerized, he made mistakes because he could not keep up with new learning on the job.  He reported that his co-workers would cover for him and fix his mistakes.  With respect to his suicidal ideation, the Veteran reported he worried if he returned to work, this could exacerbate planning.  He also reported "extreme confusion to help himself get dressed and get ready" due to his lack of focus.  The examiner noted that the Veteran demonstrated loss of train of thought several times, and each time expressed exacerbation at himself.  He also noted that the Veteran forgot the beginning question three times.  The examiner concluded that the Veteran's mental disorder symptoms resulted in occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking and/or mood. He also indicated that the Veteran had moderate to severe impairment in the following areas: sustaining attention, concentration, and persistent with reasonable rest and break periods; sustaining a reasonably productive pace without noticeable problems with productivity or efficiency; memory, learning, and retention of occupational information; adapting to complex task commands.  

An April 2021 mental health note reflects that the Veteran presented with moderate to severe cognitive communication deficits with impairments observed in the areas of memory (immediate and short-term), language and attention, and warranted speech language pathology services and use of a memory tool to aid in storing information.  

The Veteran was discharged from residential treatment in May 2021.  His discharge note indicates that, due to his mental health, he is not able to return to his previous employment and would benefit from ongoing speech therapy services for his memory problems.  

A September 2021 VA treatment note reflects the Veteran transferred his care to the Oklahoma City VA Medical Center. He reported living with his wife and daughter.  He reported that his last drink of alcohol was October 2020.  In October 2021, the Veteran was referred to VA psychiatry for evaluation of his mental health medication needs.  His chief complaint was "memory problems" which he reported started quite a few years back.  He reported that he used to write on his hand to help him remember things and "used to lose whole blocks of time."  The Veteran's plan of care included Fluoxetine, Trazodone, Quetiapine, and Prazosin.  An October 2021 mental health note indicates that the Veteran had been sober for a year and had improved his relationship with his wife and daughter.  A subsequent October 2021 mental health note reflects the Veteran's report that some days are more difficult than others and that after a recent phone call where he received bad news about his long-term disability benefits, he was so down and depressed that he could not attend his group counseling session.  He reported that his mood continues to be up and down and that, although he is working to keep things stable, there are many difficult moments.  A November 2021 mental health note reflects the Veteran's report of increased anxiety and stress around his application for Social Security benefits and the uncertainty about his future.  A December 2021 mental health note reflects the Veteran's report of increased depression related to the amount of paperwork required for his disability applications.  He reported that he has so much worry that he just stops and never completes a task.  He recalled that in the previous week, he received a packet from Social Security and got so overwhelmed that he went off and did other tasks like cleaning the kitchen floor and working on a plumbing issue. A February 2022 mental health note reflects the Veteran's report of increased stress and sleep problems related to the uncertainty of his benefits applications and whether he and his wife will stay in Oklahoma or move back to Kansas.  He reported elevated depression and difficulty implementing positive thinking and mindfulness.  He also reported that his stress is affecting his sleep and ability to concentrate and make decisions.  

A March 2022 VA treatment note reflects that the Veteran was seen for a consultation with a neurologist.  He reported that his memory problems have been present for five years and have been progressive for the past two years.  The Veteran reported that he was forgetful of recent events, forgets to turn the stove off, lets faucets run, and sometimes leaves the front door open.  He reported that he loses his temper easily, gets frustrated, and does not sleep well.  Upon examination and testing, the psychiatrist determined that the Veteran showed signs of mild to moderate dementia and that there may be residual cognitive damage from excessive alcohol use.  

A subsequent March 2022 mental health note reflects the Veteran's report of increased depression, low energy, little interest in things he once enjoyed, sleeping too much, and decreased appetite.  He also reported trouble concentrating and feeling as though he is not doing what he needs to do to take care of his family.  The Veteran's PHQ-9 Depression Scale score was 20, indicating severe depression.  

In May 2023, the Veteran submitted an April 2022 letter from the Social Security Administration verifying that the Veteran had been determined to be disabled under their rules effective October 15, 2020.  

The Board has thoroughly reviewed the record and has given full consideration to 38 C.F.R. § 4.7 (where there is a question as to which of two evaluations shall be applied, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating.  Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned) and 38 C.F.R. § 3.102 (when there is an approximate balance of evidence regarding the merits of an issue material to the determination of the matter, the benefit of the doubt in resolving each issue shall be given to the veteran).  In determining whether the Veteran meets the schedular criteria for an increased rating, the Board's inquiry is not necessarily limited to the criteria found in the VA rating schedule.  See Mauerhan, supra.

As summarized in detail above, the evidence shows that, throughout the period under review, the Veteran's PTSD has been manifested by symptoms such as recurrent suicidal ideation, depression, impaired concentration and memory, irritability, nightmares, flashbacks, inability or difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, difficulty sleeping, intrusive thoughts, an inability or difficulty establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, and grossly inappropriate behavior.  The evidence of record shows that, during the appeal period, the Veteran has isolated himself socially from others, has lived separately from his wife, and has a strained relationship with his children.

Although the Veteran was employed until October 2020, the Veteran reported that his symptoms caused him to make a lot of mistakes on the job that his co-workers had to fix for him.  Moreover, prior to his last day of full-time work, the Veteran's symptoms required him to seek in-patient treatment several times and he was placed on short-term disability.  The June 2020 VA examiner described the Veteran as "a depressed man who lives with a lot of PTSD symptoms and even hears noises and fears an attack."  The Veteran reported drinking up to three pints of vodka a day and experiencing depression, nightmares, and flashbacks.  These symptoms have also affected his personal relationships.  The record establishes that the Veteran socially isolated himself from others, lived apart from his wife, and had a strained relationship with his children.  Moreover, the Veteran's daughter stated that during his PTSD episodes, the Veteran does not recognize her or his wife, indicating disorientation and memory loss for names of close relatives.  

Applying the criteria set forth above to the facts in this case, and affording the Veteran the benefit of the doubt, the Board finds that his PTSD has been productive of symptomatology which more nearly approximates the criteria for a 100 percent rating since the effective date of the award of service connection.  

While there may have been day-to-day fluctuations in the manifestations of the Veteran's PTSD, the evidence shows no distinct periods of time during the appeal period when the Veteran's PTSD varied to such an extent that a rating less than the 100 percent assigned herein would be warranted.  Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007).

Although the record does contain some evidence suggesting that the Veteran's PTSD has not been consistently productive of total social and occupational impairment (see June 2020 and April 2021 VA examination reports), in cases such as this, where there is a question as to which of two evaluations apply, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7.  Affording the Veteran the benefit of the doubt, the Board finds that his disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria for a 100 percent rating.

Based on the foregoing, and resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Board finds that a 100 percent rating for PTSD is warranted for the entire appeal period. 

The Board recognizes that the Veteran raised the issue of entitlement to TDIU due to his service-connected PTSD during the pendency of this claim.  To this end, the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) has held that the receipt of a 100 percent schedular rating for a service-connected disability does not necessarily render moot any pending claim for a TDIU.  Bradley v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 280 (2008).  Although no additional disability compensation may be paid when a total schedular rating is already in effect, the Court's decision in Bradley, recognizes that a separate award of a TDIU predicated on a single disability may form the basis for an award of special monthly compensation.

(Continued on the next page)

?

The Bradley case, however, is distinguishable from the instant case.  In Bradley, the Court found that TDIU was warranted in addition to a schedular 100 percent evaluation where the TDIU has been granted for a disability other than the disability for which a 100 percent rating was in effect.  Under those circumstances, there was no "duplicate counting of disabilities."  Bradley, 22 Vet. App. at 293.  In this matter, the Veteran seeks entitlement to a TDIU based solely upon his service-connected PTSD.  See February 2021 VA Form 21-8940.  He has not asserted, nor does the record contain any indication, that he is entitled to a TDIU based upon his other service-connected disabilities, either singly or in combination.  Accordingly, the issue of entitlement to a TDIU is rendered moot by the assignment of the 100 percent disability rating for PTSD in this decision.  See 38 U.S.C. § 7105(d)(5).

 

K. Conner

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Madison, Siobhan K.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.