Citation Nr: A25034015
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 190620-22082
DATE: April 11, 2025

REMANDED

The issue of entitlement to service connection for a heart disability is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from October 1970 to September 1972.  

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a March 2019 rating decision of a Regional Office (RO) of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA).  

In the June 2019 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the hearing docket.  A Board hearing was held on June 29, 2023.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2019 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or his representative at the hearing or within 90 days following the hearing.  38 C.F.R. § 20.302(a).  If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal and prior to the Board hearing, or (2) more than 90 days following the hearing, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.302(a), 20.801.  However, because the Board is remanding the appeal, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).  

This issue was previously denied by the Board in an October 2023 decision, which the Veteran subsequently appealed to the U.S. Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court).  In September 2024, the Court vacated the Board's denial and returned this issue to the Board for additional consideration. 

 The Board notes the Veteran has other pending issues awaiting appellate review; these issues, however, will be the subject of separate Board decisions.  

Service connection for a heart disability is remanded.

The Veteran seeks service connection for a heart disability, to include as secondary to herbicide exposure in service.  This claim was previously denied by the Board in October 2023, at which time the Board found in the record no competent evidence of a current heart disability.  This result was vacated by the Court in September 2024, as noted above.  

In vacating the Board's October 2023 denial, the Court cited to an April 2024 brief filed by VA's Office of General Counsel, finding the Board erred in its denial.  Specifically, the brief found the Board erred in determining the record lacked competent evidence of a current heart disability.  Upon review of the record, the Board notes the Veteran's VA treatment records reflect he has been prescribed multiple medications for "heart/blood pressure."  That evidence, along the Veteran's current diagnosis of hypertension and his reports of being treated in the past for a "heart condition" by a private physician are sufficient to warrant providing him a VA examination and/or opinion regarding whether a current heart disability is present, and the etiology of such a disability.  The Board must remand a claim when necessary to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).  Remand is therefore warranted to correct this error.  

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Arrange for an appropriate health care provider to review the Veteran's claims file and provide an opinion as to whether the Veteran has a current cardiovascular disability, either at present or at any time since 2018, when the Veteran initially filed his claim.  For any identified cardiovascular disability, the examiner is asked to determine whether such a disability had its clinical onset during service or is due to an event or incident of the Veteran's period of active service.  In providing this opinion, the examiner is asked to address any medications the Veteran was or is taking for any possible cardiovascular disability.  The examiner should also specifically address whether a current diagnosis of ischemic heart disease is present.  

If the reviewing health care provider finds that a physical examination or telehealth interview of the Veteran and/or diagnostic testing is necessary, such should be accomplished.  A clear rationale for all opinions would be helpful and a discussion of the facts and medical principles involved would be of considerable assistance to the Board. 

 

 

M. Donohue

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Thomas D. Jones, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.