Citation Nr: A25034818
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 221010-284611
DATE: April 15, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an earlier effective date of August 17, 2020, but no earlier, for the grant of the 70 percent rating for major depressive episode recurrent with anxious distress and alcohol use disorder sustained remission, is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

From August 17, 2020, giving the Veteran the benefit of the doubt, the Veteran's major depressive episode recurrent with anxious distress and alcohol use disorder sustained remission has been manifested by occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking or mood; the impairment has not manifest as total occupational and social impairment.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to an earlier effective date of August 17, 2020, but no earlier, for the grant of a 70 percent rating for major depressive episode recurrent with anxious distress and alcohol use disorder sustained remission have been met. 38 U.S.C. § 5110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.400.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from October 1996 to September 2002, May 2010 to January 2011, February 2018 to May 2018, and from September 2019 to August 2020. 

In September 2022, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR), and requested review of a July 2022 rating decision. In September 2022, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the HLR decision on appeal, which considered the evidence of record at the time of the initial rating decision. 

In the October 2022 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) (NOD), the Veteran elected the Direct Review option; therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301.

The Veteran contends that he is entitled to a 70 percent rating for his psychiatric disability from August 17, 2020, as he has continually prosecuted his claim. See October 2022 Third Party Correspondence.

Ratings for service-connected disabilities are determined by comparing the Veteran's symptoms with criteria listed in VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities, which is based, as far as practically can be determined, on average impairment in earning capacity. Separate diagnostic codes identify the various disabilities. 38 C.F.R. Parts 4. When rating a service-connected disability, the entire history must be considered. Schafrath v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 589 (1991).

Where there is a question as to which of two ratings shall be applied, the higher rating will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating. Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7. The Board must consider entitlement to "staged" ratings to compensate for times since filing the claim when the disability may have been more severe than at other times during the course of the appeal. See Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119, 125-26 (1999). The relevant temporal focus for adjudicating an increased rating claim is on the evidence concerning the state of the disability for the time period beginning one year before filing the claim until the VA makes a final decision on the claim. Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007). 

The Veteran's psychiatric disability is evaluated under Diagnostic Code 9434 under the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9434.

Under the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders, a 50 percent rating is assigned for occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to such symptoms as flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short-and long-term memory; impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships.

A 70 percent rating is warranted where the disorder is manifested by occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking or mood, due to such symptoms as suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech that is intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately, and effectively; impaired impulse control, such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence; spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work-like setting; and an inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.

The maximum 100 percent rating is warranted where the disorder is manifested by total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name.

When evaluating a mental disorder, the rating agency shall consider the frequency, severity, and duration of psychiatric symptoms, length of remissions, and a veteran's capacity for adjustment during periods of remission. 38 C.F.R. § 4.126(a). The rating agency shall assign an evaluation based on all the evidence of record that bears on occupational and social impairment rather than solely on the examiner's assessment of the level of disability at the moment of the examination. In addition, the rating agency will consider the extent of social impairment but shall not assign an evaluation on the basis of social impairment. 38 C.F.R. § 4.126(b). Further, ratings are assigned according to the manifestation of particular symptoms. However, the use of the term "such as" in 38 C.F.R. § 4.130 demonstrates that the symptoms after that phrase are not intended to constitute an exhaustive list, but rather are to serve as examples of the type and degree of the symptoms, or their effects, that would justify a particular rating. Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436 (2002).

In a claim for a higher disability rating (i.e., increased compensation), unless specifically provided otherwise, the effective date of an award based on a claim for increase shall be fixed in accordance with the facts found but shall not be earlier than the date of receipt of the application. 38 U.S.C. § 5110(a); 38 C.F.R. § 3.400.

The effective date of an award of increased compensation shall be the earliest date as of which it is factually ascertainable that an increase in disability had occurred if the claim is received within one year from such date. Otherwise, the effective date will be the date of receipt of the claim. 38 U.S.C. § 5110(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.400(o)(2); see also Gaston v. Shinseki, 605 F.3d 979, 983 (Fed. Cir. 2010) ("It is clear from the plain language of [section] 5110(b)(2) that it only permits an earlier effective date for increased disability compensation if that disability increased during the one-year period before the filing of the claim."); Hazan v. Gober, 10 Vet. App. 511, 519 (1997) ("increase" for this purpose is one to the next disability level); VAOPGCPREC 12-98 (Sept. 23, 1998).

Effective March 24, 2015, VA amended its regulations to require that all claims governed by VA's adjudication regulations be filed on a standard form. See 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.150(a), 3.151(a), 3.155.

When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, VA shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant. See 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49 (1990).

Turning to the evidence of record, in an October 2020 VA treatment record, the Veteran reported that he has been struggling with anger and feeling as if his emotions were all over the place. He denied acting out of his anger, but that it has caused him to increase his usage of curse words and talking to others in a directed tone at times. 

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in October 2020. He was diagnosed with major depressive episode, moderate, recurrent, with anxious distress moderate and alcohol use disorder, severed, sustained remission. The examiner stated that he is not able to differentiate what symptoms are attributable to each diagnosis as the major depressive disorder explains all symptoms and alcohol use disorder (even with sustained remission) exacerbates their expression. The examiner stated that the Veteran has occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity. The Veteran was employed. The Veteran's symptoms included depressed mood, anxiety, chronic sleep impairment, flattened affect, and disturbances of motivation and mood. The examiner noted that the Veteran's mood is depressed with loss of joy and low motivation, with anxiety level as moderate. The Veteran is not suicidal and there is no history of any attempts. He is not homicidal and not an imminent risk to self or others. 

A December 2020 VA treatment record documents that the Veteran reported that he and his daughter have a difficult relationship. Another December 2020 VA treatment record noted that the Veteran often struggles with procrastination, losing track of things, and disorganization in his life that hinder him from making progress on taking care of himself. 

The Veteran reported that his current stressor is related to a difficult situation at work related to a number of personalities and his supervision style. See February 2021 VA treatment record. 

The Veteran was examined again by the VA in March 2021. The examiner indicated the Veteran had occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity. The Veteran's symptoms were depressed mood, anxiety, chronic sleep impairment, flattened affect, and disturbances of motivation and mood. The examiner noted that the Veteran's symptoms have increased recently, the result of loss of father and discovery that his brother will be sentenced to prison on drug-related charges, both stressors occurring within the last month. The Veteran is not suicidal or homicidal. 

In a July 2021 VA treatment record, the Veteran stated that he has times of intense sadness, sustained negative thought patterns, and uncontrollable crying. He noted that that he has been having a setback in regard to his mood compared to where he was feeling six months ago. He denied any suicidal ideation, intent, or plan. Also, in a July 2021 VA treatment record, the Veteran noted a significant amount of stress related to his job and not feeling respected or supported in his job that often make him feel that he is unsafe in his job. 

The Veteran reported that his depression symptoms consisted of him not wanting to get out of bed, eating more, and cannot enjoy things. See August 2021 VA treatment record. In another August 2021 VA treatment record, the Veteran noted that he has felt that Wellbutrin has been extremely helpful in decreasing his urges to smoke and actual smoking behaviors, while also improving his mood. He noted that he accidentally forgot a dose one day last week and felt a lot of the mood symptoms return with just missing that one dose. 

In a September 2021 VA treatment record, the Veteran reported that after his deployment two years ago, he had an increase in marital conflicts, verbal arguments, and family conflicts. He indicated that being away from home caused a big drift between him and his daughter. She refused to talk to him, was depressed and went to therapy. The Veteran started that he is afraid that he cannot perform at work or anywhere. He is easily overwhelmed, all over the place, and worries that he will have a breakdown and not be able to work. The Veteran also reported that he does not have support because he cannot talk to his brother, sister, or his wife. He stated that AA does not make sense to him right now. His lack of a support system is getting in the way of doing any emotional work and that he is all alone. The Veteran did not have any suicidal ideation or homicidal ideation. 

The Veteran expressed in an October 2021 VA treatment record that he does not have any positive thoughts about his future. The Veteran also reported in an October 2021 VA treatment record that after his deployment two years ago, he reported that his daughter does not talk or communicate with him. 

In a November 2021 VA treatment record, the Veteran stated he feels emotionally disconnected. He does not have a healthy attachment with any male in his life. He sabotages if it becomes too intimate or uncomfortable. 

In April 2022, the Veteran submitted a Statement in Support Claim listing his mental health symptoms. The Veteran specified that he had anxiety, chronic sleep problems, depression, difficulty making decisions, guilt, inability to make or keep friends, intrusive thought, isolation, lack of emotion, lack of friends, little interest in activities or hobbies he once enjoyed, low motivation, low self-esteem, negative thoughts about himself, others, or the world, neglect of chores or tasks, neglect of personal hygiene, neglect of family, panic attacks, periods of having much more energy than normal or not being able to sit still, and suicidal thoughts or feeling, or not caring if you live or die. He also noted that he was taking medication for his mental condition. 

The Veteran was afforded another VA examination in June 2022. The examiner stated that the Veteran had occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relationship, judgment, thinking and/or mood. The Veteran reported that he does not have any friends that he sees regularly. He was encouraged by mental health providers to try to build a support network. He has been working at a HVAC mechanic for the past nine years. He is also in the Air National Guard. He reported having conflicts with co-workers and bosses. A supervisor had told him that his shop is in complete chaos. The Veteran has given up all of his hobbies. He used to kayak, sky dive, and climb rocks, but lost interest in all of his hobbies. He starts home improvement projects and does not finish them. The Veteran is prescribed Bupropion but is nervous about taking prescription medications due to his job in the military. 

The Veteran's symptoms that apply to his psychiatric diagnoses include depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks more than once a week, chronic sleep impairment, flattened affect, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty in established and maintaining effective work and social relationship, difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work like setting, and suicidal ideation. He denied experiencing suicidal ideation on the day of the examination, but reported that he experiences passive suicidal ideation, without a plan or intent, on most days. He denied homicidal ideation. 

After review of the evidence, the Board finds that the level of impairment of the Veteran's psychiatric symptoms more closely approximates the level associated with a 70 percent rating. After careful review of the medical and lay evidence, the Board finds that during the appeal period, the Veteran's symptomatology result in occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking or mood due to symptoms that include impaired impulse control, such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work-like setting; and an inability to establish and maintain effective relationships. Accordingly, the Board finds that throughout the appeal period, the severity and type of symptomatology described by the evidence of record more closely approximates the impairment contemplated by the 70 percent rating criteria.

At no point during the appeal period, does the Veteran does meet the requirements for a rating in excess of 70 percent for his psychiatric disability. A rating higher than 70 percent requires total social and occupational impairment. The Veteran's symptomatology does not result in total occupational and social impairment. The Veteran's appearance and hygiene were mostly appropriate, and he was fully oriented throughout the appeal period. The Veteran generally presented with normal speech, thoughts, insight, and judgment. The record does not show the Veteran had delusions or hallucinations. The record also does not show persistent danger of the Veteran hurting himself or others. While some issues with memory and concentration are noted, the Veteran did not experience the kind of issues contemplated by a total rating, such as memory loss so severe that the Veteran forgets his own name. His thought processes and content were frequently found to be normal. The record also fails to demonstrate grossly inappropriate behavior, as the Veteran's behavior was often observed to be mostly pleasant and cooperative by various treating physicians. Consequently, the Board finds that the Veteran's symptomatology does not result in total occupational or social impairment, as required for a 100 percent rating.

The Board also finds that the Veteran has continually prosecuted his claim since the original claim was received by the AOJ on October 7, 2020. In a September 2021 rating decision, the Veteran was granted a 50 percent evaluation for his psychiatric condition from August 17, 2020, the day after he was released from active duty as he had submitted his claim within one year of his release date. He submitted his Intent to File in February 2022 and submitted his claim for increase within one year of the Intent to File, in April 2022. In a July 2022 rating decision, the AOJ increased the Veteran's evaluation to 70 percent, effective February 23, 2022, the date the Intent to File was received. In the July 2022 rating decision, the AOJ stated that the evidence does not show an increased evaluation prior to the date of the current claim received. However, as discussed above, the Veteran's psychiatric disability warrants a 70 percent throughout the appeal period. Therefore, the 70 percent rating is assigned from August 17, 2020, the date of the initial grant of service connection. 

As a final matter, the evidence shows that Veteran has been employed throughout the appeal period and thus, the Board finds that an issue of entitlement to a total disability based upon individual employability is not inferred at this time.  

 

MARJORIE A. AUER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	E. Kim, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.