Citation Nr: A25034388
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 250314-525579
DATE: April 15, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to special monthly compensation (SMC) based on the need for aid and attendance for the Veteran's spouse is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran's spouse requires assistance with bathing or tending to her other hygiene needs and with her health care needs.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for an award of SMC benefits based on the aid and attendance for the Veteran's spouse have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1114, 1115, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.350, 3.351, 3.352.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Marine Corps from February 1969 to August 1970. 

This appeal is being processed under the modernized review system, commonly referred to as the "AMA," as established by the Veterans Appeals Improvement and Modernization Act of 2017. 115 Pub. L. No. 55, 131 Stat. 1105.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal of a February 2025 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) regional office (RO), an agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ).

VA received the Veteran's VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) in March 2025. The Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the February 2025 AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. 

This appeal has been?advanced on the docket.?38?C.F.R. §?20.902.??

Entitlement to SMC benefits based on the need for aid and attendance of another person for the Veteran's spouse.

The Veteran seeks entitlement to SMC based on the need for regular aid and attendance for his spouse. See October 2024 VA Form 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim; see also April 2025 Appellate Brief. For the reasons that follow, the Board finds that SMC benefits are warranted. 

SMC is payable to a veteran by reason of their spouse being in need for aid and attendance. 38 U.S.C. § 1115(E)(1); 38 C.F.R. § 3.351(a)(2). SMC based on the need for aid and attendance of another is payable if, the veteran's spouse is blind or so nearly blind as to have corrected visual acuity of 5/200 or less, in both eyes, or concentric contraction of the visual field to 5 degrees or less; a patient in a nursing home because of mental or physical incapacity; or a factual need for aid and attendance under the criteria set forth in 38 C.F.R. § 3.352(a) is established. 38 C.F.R. § 3.351(c).

Pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 3.352(a), the following factors will be considered in determining whether regular aid and attendance of another person is needed: inability of claimant to dress or undress himself (herself), or to keep himself (herself) ordinarily clean and presentable; frequent need of adjustment of any special prosthetic or orthopedic appliances which by reason of the particular disability cannot be done without aid (this will not include the adjustment of appliances which normal persons would be unable to adjust without aid, such as supports, belts, lacing at the back, etc.); inability of claimant to feed himself (herself) through loss of coordination of upper extremities or through extreme weakness; inability to attend to the wants of nature; or incapacity, physical or mental, which requires care or assistance on a regular basis to protect the claimant from hazards or dangers incident to his or her daily environment.  It is not required that all of the disabling conditions noted above be found to exist before a favorable rating may be made. Id. The particular personal functions which the veteran's spouse is unable to perform should be considered in connection with his or her condition as a whole. Id. It is only necessary that the evidence establish that the veteran's spouse is so helpless as to need regular aid and attendance, not that there is a constant need. Id. 

The Veteran filed a September 2024 VA Form 21-2680, Examination Report for Housebound Status or Permanent Need for Regular Aid and Attendance. In the September 2024 examination report, Dr. G.S. noted that the Veteran's spouse's relevant diagnoses were chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), emphysema, lesion in left lung, lung cancer with a history of radiation, chronic supplemental oxygen use, chronic respiratory failure with hypoxia, stage 3 chronic kidney disease, history of deep vein thrombosis, and cardiomyopathy. Dr. G.S. indicated that the Veteran's spouse is wheelchair bound, she requires assistance in bathing and tending to other hygiene needs, and she is bedridden until assisted to her wheelchair. It was noted that the Veteran's spouse is not legally blind. Dr. G.S. noted that the Veteran's spouse is in need of peripheral vascular surgery to avoid toe amputation, but she is unable to be healthy enough to undergo a surgery. Dr. G.S. added that the Veteran's spouse is considered qualified for hospice. Dr. G.S. noted that the Veteran's spouse left home to be in a hospital twice in March and once in July. She also had a doctor's visit in August. Otherwise, she does not leave the house. 

A review of the Veteran's VA treatment records shows that he has been taking care of his wife. Specifically, the records show that the Veteran reported that his wife had cancer and also fell and broke her femur. In addition, she has been having difficulty breathing and he had to call EMS due to shortness of breath a few times. He also reported that his wife is his main focus, and he has been caring for her all day leaving him with little or no time to care for himself. The records also show that the Veteran has been assisting his wife with ambulation and his sleep is fragmented because she requires assistance with going to the bathroom throughout the day and at night. He also reported that he has to assist his wife in and out of wheelchair and he does not have a lot of time to eat as he is her primary caretaker. 

Based on the foregoing, the Board finds that the evidence of record sufficiently demonstrates that SMC based on the need for aid and attendance for the Veteran's spouse is warranted. Although, the Veteran's spouse is not legally blind or hospitalized nor in a nursing home, she requires assistance with bathing or tending to her other hygiene needs and she needs assistance with her health care needs. Accordingly, SMC based on the need for regular aid and attendance of the Veteran's spouse is granted.

 

 

C. CRAWFORD

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	A. Kuzniar, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.