Citation Nr: A25034279
Decision Date: 04/14/25	Archive Date: 04/14/25

DOCKET NO. 200910-102993
DATE: April 14, 2025

ORDER

The reduction in evaluation for post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) with major depressive disorder (MDD) and alcohol use disorder (AUD) from 70 percent to 30 percent was improper.

A 70 percent rating for PTSD is reinstated effective December 1, 2019.

FINDING OF FACT

The persuasive weight of the evidence did not show an actual improvement in the Veteran's PTSD to support a reduction.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for a reduction in the disability rating for the service-connected PTSD from 70 percent to 30 percent effective December 1, 2019 were not met. The criteria to reinstate the 70 percent evaluation are met effective December 1, 2019. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(e).

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from September 2007 to September 2011. 

A rating decision was issued in September 2018, which proposed that the 70 percent evaluation of PTSD be decreased to 30 percent.

Thereafter, the rating decision on appeal was issued in September 2019, which decreased the 70 percent evaluation for PTSD to 30 percent effective December 1, 2019.

In the September 2020 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Evidence Submission docket. 

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the September 2019 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or representative with, or within 90 days from receipt of, the VA Form 10182. 38 C.F.R. § 20.303. If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal and prior to the date the Board received the VA Form 10182, or (2) more than 90 days following the date the Board received the VA Form 10182, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.303, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

The Board acknowledges that the Veteran submitted a VA Form 21-22, Appointment of Veterans Service Organization as Representative, in April 2023 after the Board docketing letter was sent out, and no additional correspondence was sent to the Veteran's representative regarding the pendency of this appeal. However, because the Veteran's representative submitted an appellate brief specifically referencing this appeal and presenting arguments for the Board's consideration, the Board finds that the Veteran has not suffered any prejudice from the Board's failure to send information regarding this appeal to the Veteran's representative. Moreover, the benefit sought is being granted in full.

Except as noted below, neither the Veteran nor his representative has raised any issues with the duty to notify or duty to assist. See Scott v. McDonald, 789 F.3d 1375, 1381 (Fed. Cir. 2015) (holding that "the Board's obligation to read filings in a liberal manner does not require the Board . . . to search the record and address procedural arguments when the veteran fails to raise them before the Board."); Dickens v. McDonald, 814 F.3d 1359, 1361 (Fed. Cir. 2016) (applying Scott to duty-to-assist argument).

Whether the reduction in evaluation for PTSD from 70 percent to 30 percent effective December 1, 2019, was proper

The Veteran asserts that the reduction implemented in the September 2019 rating decision for PTSD from 70 percent to 30 percent was improper because his symptoms continue to more closely approximate the rating criteria for 70 percent.

The provisions of 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(e) allow for the reduction in evaluation of a service-connected disability when warranted by the evidence, but only after following certain procedural guidelines. The AOJ must issue a rating action proposing the reduction and setting forth all material facts and reasons for the reduction. The Veteran must then be given 60 days to submit additional evidence and to request a predetermination hearing. Then a rating action will be taken to effectuate the reduction. 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(e). If a predetermination hearing is requested, VA must notify the beneficiary in writing of the time and date of the hearing at least 10 days in advance of the scheduled hearing date. The 10-day advance notice may be waived by agreement. The hearing cannot be conducted by the VA personnel who was involved in the proposed adverse action. The VA personnel conducting the hearing will bear decision-making responsibility. The effective date of the reduction will be the last day of the month in which a 60-day period from the date of notice to the Veteran of the final action expires. 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(e), (i)(2)(i).

In this case, the proper procedures were followed in implementing the reduction. The Veteran was notified of the proposed reduction for his service-connected PTSD via a September 2018 rating decision and associated correspondence. The actual reduction was subsequently effectuated by a September 2019 rating decision with an effective date of December 1, 2019. The Veteran did not request a predetermination hearing regarding the proposal to reduce his PTSD rating. Therefore, there was compliance with all requisite procedural matters.

The Board must now consider whether the reduction in the rating was proper. VA rating reductions must be based upon a review of the entire history of the Veteran's disability. Brown v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 413, 420 (1993); 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.13. A rating reduction is proper if the evidence reflects an actual change in the disability. The examination reports reflecting such change must be based upon thorough examinations. Brown, supra. The evidence must reflect an actual change in the Veteran's condition and not merely a difference in the thoroughness of the examination or in the use of descriptive terms. 38 C.F.R. § 4.13. It must also be determined that any such improvement also reflects an improvement in the Veteran's ability to function under ordinary conditions of life and work. 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.2, 4.10. A reduction must be based upon review of "the entire record of examinations and the medical-industrial history . . . to ascertain whether the recent examination is full and complete, including all special examinations indicated as a result of general examination and the entire case history." 38 C.F.R. § 3.344(a). "Examinations less full and complete than those on which payments were authorized or continued will not be used as a basis of reduction." Id.

For ratings in effect five or more years, the current examination must be as full and complete as the examination upon which the original award was based. If the disease is subject to temporary or episodic improvement, the reduction may not be based on any one examination, except where all evidence clearly warrants the conclusion that there has been sustained improvement. If the disease becomes symptom-free after bed rest, the examination may not reflect the result of bed rest. If material improvement is shown, such improvement must be maintained under the ordinary conditions of life. If doubt remains, the current rating will be continued subject to reexamination.

In this case, the Veteran's PTSD was rated as 70 percent disabling from September 17, 2011, to November 30, 2019. Thus, the rating was in effect for more than five years. 

The Veteran's PTSD is currently evaluated at 30 percent pursuant to the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders, 38 CFR § 4.130, DC 9411, for PTSD. DC 9411 provides that a 30 percent rating is warranted when a mental disorder results in occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks (although generally functioning satisfactorily, with routine behavior, self-care, and conversation normal), due to such symptoms as: depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks (weekly or less often), chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss (such as forgetting names, directions, recent events).

Under DC 9411, a 70 percent rating is warranted where there is occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a worklike setting); and an inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.

Here, the evidence persuasively weighs against finding an actual improvement in the Veteran's condition. Taken together, the medical and lay evidence of record did not show a sustained, actual improvement in the Veteran's condition.

The Veteran was originally awarded service connection for PTSD with MDD rated as 70 percent disabling based on an August 2011 examination by Dr. K., completed prior to the Veteran's separation from service. This examination was exceedingly detailed and fact-specific, providing a detailed history of the Veteran and the onset and progression of his PTSD symptoms, and giving specific examples of the ways in which the Veteran's symptoms affected his occupational and social functioning. Regarding the Veteran's relationships, Dr. K. noted that the Veteran's "family role functioning has been impaired by his irritability, emotional detachment, and hypervigilance. His social functioning has been impaired by his irritability, hypervigilance, and heightened startle reflex." The Veteran reported having a good relationship with his parents and sister. The Veteran had married in November 2010 and separated in June 2011, and had little contact with his ex-wife. The Veteran had a five-year-old son from a previous relationship with whom he had a good relationship. The Veteran had close friendships with two fellow Marines with whom he had deployed. Regarding his occupational history, the Veteran was still an active-duty Marine at the time of the August 2011 examination. He reported having a "fair" relationship with his current supervisor, and good relationships with those of current coworkers who had deployed to Afghanistan but "avoids contact with any current coworkers who were not part of his deployment." The Veteran reported that he would find a reason to leave work early approximately three times every week due to his irritability and poor frustration tolerance. As for the Veteran's mental health, Dr. K. noted that the Veteran had not been treated with psychotropic medications or psychotherapy since the onset of his symptoms, and had no history of psychiatric hospitalizations or emergency room visits. Regarding alcohol use, Dr. K. noted that the Veteran denied any history of substance abuse. In addition, Dr. K. noted the Veteran's "persistent difficulty in falling and remaining asleep"; "persistent difficulties with irritability or outbursts of anger" including being "susceptible to bouts of 'road rage'"; that the Veteran "experiences marked distress whenever he hears a loud noise or experiences any form of unexpected physical contact"; "finds it difficult to maintain his focus at work"; and "has difficulty controlling his anxiety in crowded public environments." Based on his examination, Dr. K. found that the Veteran experienced occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas. He recommended that the Veteran begin mental health treatment and psychotropic medication to address his PTSD with MDD symptoms, and found that while it was likely that the Veteran's condition would improve over time, it was "more likely than not that his improvement will proceed relatively slowly." 

The September 2018 proposed rating reduction was based on VA examinations completed in December 2016 and August 2018. 

The December 2016 VA examiner, Dr. E., stated that the Veteran did not at that time meet the criteria for a PTSD diagnosis under Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM-5), finding that he did not have the required intrusion symptoms, persistent avoidance of stimuli, negative alterations in cognitions and mood, or marked alterations in arousal and reactivity, resulting from his PTSD. 

Regarding the Veteran's relationships, the Veteran reported that following his 2011 divorce, he had gotten married again in June 2013, to the mother of his son, and they now had three children together. He reported having good parent-child relationships and that his marriage was "going alright." Regarding his occupational history, Dr. E. noted that the Veteran had been employed full-time as a firefighter since July of 2016, after graduating from the firefighter program. "He reported that he has been written up for forgetting things (e.g., left strainer on top of fire engine). He believed that he is doing average on the job." As for the Veteran's mental health, Dr. E. noted that the Veteran had not received any therapy or psychotropic medication.  Regarding alcohol use, Dr. E. noted that the Veteran "drinks 3 to 4 beers several times during the week. He stated that the drinking does not interfere with his job duties. He reported drinking more heavily in the past; he stated that he drank a few drinks daily." In addition, Dr. E. noted the Veteran's reports of experiencing noise sensitivity, sleep problems, nightmares, and "having a temper."

The Veteran also underwent a VA examination in August 2018 by Dr. D., who confirmed his diagnoses of PTSD and MDD, and added a diagnosis of AUD. Dr. D. found that the Veteran's service-connected psychiatric conditions resulted in occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks, although generally functioning satisfactorily, with normal routine behavior, self-care and conversation. Regarding the Veteran's relationships, the Veteran reported that he has a good relationship with his parents and gets along "okay" with his sister. He has been married for five years and it is going "alright" and he has good relationships with his children. Regarding his occupational history, the Veteran reported that he was still working full-time as a firefighter and it was "going 'okay'" although he had "trouble remembering to sign up for important training events and has had to be reminded by supervisors to do so or he would be written-up." As for the Veteran's mental health, Dr. D. noted the Veteran's reports of "feeling down and sad more days than not, irritability, sensitivity to loud/sudden noises, memory and concentration problems, hypervigilance, and crowd avoidance." She noted that '[t]he symptoms are chronic and started in 2009 as a result of his direct combat experience." She noted that the Veteran has never been hospitalized or gone to the emergency room for psychiatric reasons, and has not undergone therapy or taken medication for his mental health problems. Regarding alcohol use, Dr. D. noted that the Veteran currently drank "3-4 beers a night and this pattern of use began about 5 years ago. He drinks because it helps him relax." In going through the PTSD diagnostic criteria, Dr. D. found that the Veteran's symptoms included recurrent distressing dreams in which the content and/or affect of the dream are related to the traumatic event(s); avoidance of or efforts to avoid external reminders (people, places, conversations, activities, objects, situations) that arouse distressing memories, thoughts, or feelings about or closely associated with the traumatic event(s); persistent negative emotional state (e.g., fear, horror, anger, guilt, or shame); markedly diminished interest or participation in significant activities; irritable behavior and angry outbursts (with little or no provocation) typically expressed as verbal or physical aggression toward people or objects; hypervigilance; exaggerated startle response; problems with concentration; sleep disturbance (e.g., difficulty falling or staying asleep or restless sleep).

In support of his appeal, the Veteran submitted a May 2020 letter from Dr. B., his current mental health treatment provider. Dr. B stated in this letter that he had recently started treating the Veteran for PTSD, and had reviewed the most recent treatment notes and VA evaluations and was "very familiar with his case." Dr. B. found that "[b]ased on [the Veteran's] self-report, clinical records review, and evaluation, [the Veteran] continues to demonstrate significant deficiencies in family relations, interpersonal relationships, judgment, thinking, and mood related to his service-connected PTSD." Dr. B. wrote:

Since his return from Afghanistan... in 2009, [the Veteran] has consistently experienced and reported anger out bursts; periods of anxiety and depressed mood; hypersensitivity to loud and unexpected noises; hypervigilance; becoming easily overwhelmed with relatively minor stressors; decreased motivation; increased fatigue; "jumpiness;" difficulty multi-tasking, especially in chaotic and noisy environments; worsening anxiety in crowds leading to feeling "foggy," and "just have to get out of there," and it takes quite some time to recover back to baseline; feeling "less dependable as I've always been the one to get things done, that people can count on, and with my poor memory and concentration, it's not like that anymore . . . I'm disappointed in myself."

Dr. B. also cited reports by the Veteran and his wife that the Veteran tends to avoid sleep due to his PTSD, which has affected his work performance. Dr. B. also noted the Veteran's description of his experience during the August 2018 VA examination: "He reported that when he met with the evaluator, he recognized her or someone from that office from high school and felt like he could not be open with her about his condition and symptoms. He also noted that the evaluation lasted less than half an hour." Dr. B. found that "[e]specially in stressful and chaotic working conditions, symptoms such as re-experiencing, hyperarousal, hypervigilance, paranoid ideation, avoidance, anxiety, and emotional disengagement significantly interfere with [the Veteran's] thinking and functioning."

The Veteran also submitted private treatment records documenting the mental health treatment he received from December 2019 to December 2020. These records document that the Veteran continued to experience problems with vivid nightmares, being easily startled, concentration and memory difficulties, insomnia, anxiety, depression, and anger, among other symptoms. During a December 11, 2019, session, the Veteran explained that the August 2018 VA examination "was very brief and that he was quite uncomfortable because a female peer he knew in high school worked at the practice, so he felt concerned about confidentiality." The Veteran described his wife as supportive. Although the Veteran reported in April 2020 that he was "feeling better recently" regarding his depression, he also reported that he had increased irritability at work. 

The Veteran began treatment with Dr. B. in July 2020. In a July 28, 2020 treatment note, Dr. B. notes the Veteran "reported that he tends to suffer most from hypervigilance, hyperarousal, and poor sleep. One of his biggest triggers is unexpected and loud noise." Dr. B. found that "[o]verall, [the Veteran's] condition appeared stable, but marked by lingering symptomatology." During an August 2020 session to which his wife accompanied him, the Veteran's wife reported her observations that "he suppresses more and will 'blow up' when repeatedly asked what is on his mind. Both [the Veteran and his wife] agreed that he tends to function affectively during major situations or strains, but becomes anxious and easily overwhelmed with relatively minor stressors. They also both endorsed decreased motivation, increased fatigue, and 'jumpiness.'" She stated that "things seemed to worsen approximately two to three years [prior] when [the Veteran] started losing touch with some of his former comrades," and the Veteran described a panic attack he had experienced around that time two to three years earlier: "I couldn't breathe, started crying, and was worried that something was going to happen to my wife and kids." The Veteran denied that he had experienced such panic attacks since then.

The Veteran also submitted a lay statement from T.W., who had become his work supervisor in June 2020 but had taught him in 2016 and had worked with him, although not on a consistent basis, since 2016. T.W. reported that the firefighters at the station habitually played jokes on each other, but he had noticed that the Veteran "reacts more than others and it takes a long time for him to settle down from being startled," so T.W. had asked the others to refrain from startling the Veteran. T.W. also reported that he believed the Veteran "was avoiding being alone and avoiding sleep" because on overnight shifts, the Veteran would "wait until everyone else on shift has gone to bed and then write his reports for the day. This has resulted in [the Veteran] sleeping through the tones for calls after he finally goes to sleep." Additionally, T.W. mentioned that the Veteran had arrived late for work because of his trouble sleeping the night before. 

In an appellate brief submitted by his representative, the Veteran argues that the August 2011 examination by Dr. K. was much more detailed and fact-specific than the August 2018 examination by Dr. D., in large part because the Veteran recognized somebody working in Dr. D.'s office, and that therefore the examination by Dr. D. should not have served as the basis for a reduction of the Veteran's disability rating. Further, the Veteran argues that the evidence as a whole, including the letter from Dr. B., does not show sustained improvement in the Veteran's PTSD. The Veteran also argues that Dr. D.'s findings support a 70 percent rating rather than a 30 percent rating. Finally, the Veteran's representative argues that the September 2019 rating decision does not accurately reflect the record in this case, as it mentions a "VA letter dated February 8, 2019" which is not part of the file, as well as basing the reduction on "findings during [the Veteran's] VA examination and medical records showing that [he was] no longer hospitalized" when there is no indication in the record that the Veteran has ever been hospitalized for psychiatric issues, and indeed Dr. D. had noted in the August 2018 examination that the veteran had never been hospitalized or gone to the emergency room for psychiatric issues. 

As noted above, under Brown a rating reduction is proper if the evidence reflects an actual change in the disability. It must also be determined that any such improvement also reflects an improvement in the Veteran's ability to function under ordinary conditions of life and work. 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.2, 4.10. In this case, the evidence does not show an actual improvement in the disability and does not reflect an improvement in the Veteran's ability to function under ordinary conditions of life and work as documented by his lay statements or the medical evidence of record. 

The Board finds that sustained material improvement in the disability had not been shown to justify a reduction. 38 C.F.R. § 3.344 (a). The evidence does not indicate with reasonable certainty that the purported improvement in the Veteran's condition would be maintained under the ordinary conditions of life. It is clear from the lay statement from T.W. that the Veteran's continued sleep difficulties affect his work performance, and the Veteran has continued to report to mental health professionals that his memory and concentration symptoms seem in fact to be worsening rather than improving. The Veteran's private treatment records reflect that his symptoms continue to prevent him from "generally functioning satisfactorily" as contemplated in the 30 percent rating standard.

Although Dr. D. indicated in her 2018 report that the Veteran experienced occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks, although generally functioning satisfactorily-which fits the standard for the 30 percent evaluation under DC 9411-other findings from her examination indicate that the Veteran's disability level overall was more severe than that contemplated by the 30 percent evaluation, such as noting irritable behavior and angry outbursts (with little or no provocation), and a persistent negative emotional state, as well as memory issues that affected his work due to problems concentrating. 

Thus, the Board finds that both the medical and lay evidence of record establishes that there was not actual improvement in the Veteran's PTSD to warrant a reduction.

When viewing the exams in their entirety, the August 2011 examination upon which the Veteran's disability rating was based was more "full and complete" and detailed than the December 2016 and August 2018 examinations combined. The letter from Dr. B. gave some explanation for this, as he noted the Veteran's report that he did not give a full description of his symptoms during the August 2018 VA examination because he recognized someone he knew in high school who worked in that office, and was concerned about the confidentiality of what he shared. 

It is not clear that the September 2019 rating decision reducing the Veteran's disability rating was based on review of the entire record, as it lists only three documents as evidence ("Rating Decision, dated February 17, 2017"; "Rating Decision, dated September 7, 2018"; and "VA letter notifying you of a proposed action, dated September 12, 2018), and mischaracterizes the evidence in stating that the Veteran was "no longer hospitalized." 

(Continued on the next page)

?

Based on the foregoing, the Board finds that the competent and credible evidence persuasively weighs against a showing of actual improvement in the Veteran's condition. Thus, the reduction in evaluation from 70 percent to 30 percent effective December 1, 2019, for PTSD was improper and the 70 percent evaluation under DC 9411 is reinstated effective December 1, 2019.

 

 

LAURA E. COLLINS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	R. West

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.