Citation Nr: A25034908
Decision Date: 04/16/25	Archive Date: 04/16/25

DOCKET NO. 241016-482826
DATE: April 16, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 30 percent for anxiety is denied.  

FINDING OF FACT

Throughout the appeal period, the severity, frequency, and duration of the Veteran's anxiety did not more nearly approximate occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 30 percent for anxiety have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.126, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411.  

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran was a member of the Pennsylvania Army National Guard, during which he had a period of active duty for training (ADT) from May 1990 to August 1990.  The Veteran subsequently transferred to the Ohio Army National Guard, during which he had periods of active duty from July 2004 to April 2005, January 2008 to January 2009, and September 2011 to November 2012.  

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a December 2023 rating decision of a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO), the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ), which awarded service connection for anxiety and assigned an initial 30 percent rating, effective July 10, 2023. 

In October 2024, the Veteran submitted a timely VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) on which he identified the December 2023 rating decision and elected the Direct Review docket.  As such, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the December 2023 AOJ decision.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  If evidence was submitted during the period after the December 2023 AOJ decision, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

 Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 30 percent for anxiety.    

The Veteran generally contends that he is entitled to a higher initial rating for anxiety because his symptoms are more severe than contemplated by the currently assigned 30 percent rating.  See October 2024 and November 2024 written arguments.  

Disability ratings are determined by applying the criteria set for in the VA Schedule for Rating Disabilities (Rating Schedule).  38 C.F.R. Part 4.  The Rating Schedule is primarily a guide in the evaluation of disability resulting from all types of diseases and injuries encountered as a result of or incident to military service.  The ratings are intended to compensate, as far as can practicably be determined, the average impairment of earning capacity resulting from such diseases and injuries and their residual conditions in civilian occupations.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1.  Separate diagnostic codes identify the various disabilities.  Disability ratings are determined by applying the criteria set forth in the VA Schedule for Rating Disabilities.

If two disability ratings are potentially applicable, the higher rating will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that evaluation.  Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7.  in view of the number of atypical instances, it is not expected, especially with the more fully described grades of disabilities, that all cases will show all the findings specified.  38 C.F.R. § 4.21.  It is the defined and consistently applied policy of VA to administer the law under a broad interpretation, consistent, however, with the facts shown in every case.  Any reasonable doubt regarding the degree of disability is resolved in favor of the Veteran.  38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.3.

When the appeal arises from an initial rating assigned following the award of service connection, evidence contemporaneous with the claim for service connection and with the rating decision granting service connection would be most probative of the degree of disability existing at the time that the initial rating was assigned and should be the evidence used to decide whether an initial rating on appeal was erroneous.  Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119, 126 (1999).  If later evidence obtained during the appeal period indicates that the degree of disability increased or decreased following the assignment of an initial rating, staged ratings may be assigned for separate periods of time based on facts found.  Hart v. Mansfield 21 Vet. App. 505, 509-10 (2007).

The Veteran's anxiety has been rated under the criteria contained in the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders at 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411.  

Unde those criteria, a 30 percent rating is warranted for occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks (although generally functioning satisfactorily, with routine behavior, self-care, and conversation normal), due to such symptoms as: depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks (weekly or less often), chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss (such as forgetting names, directions, recent events).

A 50 percent rating is warranted for occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to such symptoms as: flattened affect, circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short-and long-term memory (e.g. retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships. Id.

A 70 percent rating is assigned when there is objective evidence demonstrating occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately, and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a worklike setting); inability to establish and maintain effective relationships. Id.

A 100 percent rating is warranted when there is total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place, memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name. Id.

Under the General Rating Formula, the Board must conduct a "holistic analysis" that considers all associated symptoms, regardless of whether they are listed as criteria.  Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 10, 22 (2017); 38 C.F.R. § 4.130.  The Board must determine whether unlisted symptoms are similar in severity, frequency, and duration to the listed symptoms associated with specific disability percentages.  Then, the Board must determine whether the associated symptoms, both listed and unlisted, caused the level of impairment required for the higher rating.  Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 114-118 (Fed. Cir. 2013).

In Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436 (2002), the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) held that use of the term "such as" in 38 C.F.R. § 4.130 demonstrates that the symptoms after that phrase are not intended to constitute an exhaustive list, but rather are to serve as examples of the type and degree of the symptoms, or their effects, that would justify a particular rating. Accordingly, the evidence considered in determining the level of impairment under section 4.130 is not restricted to the symptoms provided in the diagnostic code. Rather, VA must consider all symptoms of a claimant's condition that affect the level of occupational and social impairment, including, if applicable, those identified in the American Psychiatric Association's Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders.

The standard of proof to be applied in decisions on claims for VA benefits is set forth in 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b). Under that provision, VA shall consider all information and lay and medical evidence of record in a case before the Secretary with respect to benefits under laws administered by the Secretary. When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, the Secretary shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); see also Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

Here, the Veteran was awarded service connection for anxiety in a December 2023 rating decision, which assigned an initial 30 percent rating, effective July 10, 2023.  Where, as here, the appeal stems from an initial assigned rating, VA assesses the level of disability from the effective date of service connection.  See Fenderson, at 125; 38 U.S.C. § 5110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.400.  Accordingly, the Board considers whether an initial rating in excess of 30 percent is warranted anytime since July 10, 2023, the effective date of service connection.  

Turning to the evidence, the Veteran's VA treatment records show that, prior to April 2023, the Veteran consistently denied any mental health symptoms.  In April 2023, the Veteran reported problems with anxiety and requested a referral for a mental health assessment.  He reported working in real estate and doing contracting work.  

A May 2023 primary care mental health integration note reflects the Veteran's report of anxiety, emotional flattening, crowd avoidance, hypervigilance, nightmares, insomnia, intrusive thoughts, decreased energy, anhedonia, impaired focus/concentration, irritability/anger, and feelings of hopelessness.  He reported that he lives with his wife and has 24-year-old twin daughters, with whom he is close.  He reported working as a general contractor and denied financial problems.  The clinician noted a diagnosis of anxiety, unspecified and rule out PTSD.  

 A June 2023 VA psychiatry consultation note reflects the Veteran's report that his anxiety began in service.  He reported that he had been divorced once and was now remarried with two children.  He also reported feeling stable and that things were good at home.  Upon examination, the clinician noted that the Veteran was alert and oriented with good eye contact and hygiene.  His mood was euthymic and affect appropriate.  His insight and judgment were good, and he did not have delusions or hallucinations.  The Veteran was noted to be on Sertraline, and he reported some improvement in symptoms since starting the medication.  The clinician noted a diagnosis of PTSD and advised the Veteran to continue Sertraline and Hydroxyzine.  

A June 2023 counseling note reflects the Veteran's report that he had two tours of combat and when he retired, he came home to a divorce.  He reported that he did not want to be involved in mental health therapy because his then-wife would use it against him.  He reported that he had been dealing with mental health problems all this time and "now it is affecting my thoughts, my mood - too much.  I feel something bad is going to happen for no reason, it is not logical.  I worry and have a lot of anxiety."  His mental status examination was normal with the exception that he was noted to be anxious.  

A July 2023 psychiatry note reflects the Veteran's report that he had not yet started taking Sertraline.  He reported that work is stressful at times due to drama caused by the property managers. He also reported an upcoming trip to Europe that he was looking forward to.  

A September 2023 psychiatry note reflects the Veteran's report that he had a nice trip with his wife to Bulgaria despite not liking to fly.  He reported that he has continued paranoid thoughts and guilt over seemingly small things.  

An October 2023 psychiatry note reflects the Veteran's report that he had started taking Sertraline and felt it helped with anxiety and PTSD.  He reported sleeping well, normal energy levels, and an okay appetite.  

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in November 2023.  The Veteran endorsed symptoms of anxiety, suspiciousness, and mild memory loss, such as forgetting names, directions, or recent events.  He also reported that he struggles most with decision making and at times will replay in his mind whether he did the thing he did and runs in his mind the worst-case scenario.  He reported that he also struggles to trust other people.  With respect to his social life, the Veteran reported that he found it difficult to adjust to civilian life, that he missed the routine of military life, and is later to issues of safety and is always looking around and has a hard time being in crowds.  He also reported that he does not do anything for fun and that he likes being outdoors but finds himself caught up in working.  With respect to his work, the Veteran reported that after separation he went back to school and earned credits towards an associate's degree.  He reported that he found it much easier when he was a platoon sergeant. He reported that he got his real estate license and now works in maintenance and remodeling.  The examiner noted that the Veteran's affect was appropriate to the content of his speech and his thought process was logical and organized.  He also noted that the Veteran's memory, attention, and concentration appeared intact, and he was alert and oriented times four.  The examiner diagnosed the Veteran with anxiety disorder, unspecified.  He also determined that the Veteran's symptoms did not meet the diagnostic criteria for PTSD under DSM-5 criteria.  The examiner concluded that the Veteran's symptoms resulted in occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks, although generally functioning satisfactorily, with normal routine behavior, self-care and conversation.  

The standard of proof to be applied in decisions on claims for VA benefits is set forth in 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b). Under that provision, VA shall consider all information and lay and medical evidence of record in a case before the Secretary with respect to benefits under laws administered by the Secretary. When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, the Secretary shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); see also Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

The Board has thoroughly reviewed the record and has given full consideration to 38 C.F.R. § 4.7 (where there is a question as to which of two evaluations shall be applied, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating.  Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned) and 38 C.F.R. § 3.102 (when there is an approximate balance of evidence regarding the merits of an issue material to the determination of the matter, the benefit of the doubt in resolving each issue shall be given to the veteran).  In determining whether the Veteran meets the schedular criteria for an increased rating, the Board's inquiry is not necessarily limited to the criteria found in the VA rating schedule.  See Mauerhan, supra.

Applying the facts in this case to the criteria set forth above, the Board finds that an initial rating in excess of 30 percent for anxiety is not warranted.  The record persuasively establishes that the Veteran's overall disability picture is neither consistent with, nor more nearly approximates, the criteria for a higher disability rating during the appeal period.  

As an initial matter, the Board acknowledges the Veteran has been diagnosed with both anxiety and PTSD during the appeal period.  The Board has, however, attributed all psychiatric symptoms, and their functional impact, to the service-connected disability, currently characterized as anxiety, and all of these symptoms will be rated pursuant to the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders under 38 C.F.R. § 4.130.  As such, there is no prejudice to the Veteran.  

The evidence demonstrates that, during the appeal period, the Veteran's anxiety has been manifested by crowd avoidance, emotional flattening, hypervigilance, nightmares, insomnia, intrusive thoughts, decreased energy, anhedonia, impaired focus/concentration, irritability/anger, hopelessness, and mild memory loss.  The Board finds the severity, frequency, and duration of the Veteran's symptoms more closely approximate the symptoms contemplated by a 30 percent rating, which are less severe, less frequent, and shorter in duration than those contemplated by a 50 percent rating.  The Veteran experienced occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency, but is generally functioning satisfactorily, with routine behavior, self-care, and normal conversation.

His reported symptoms are not shown to have resulted in occupational or social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.  He has been generally able to perform occupational functions with only intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks.  The Veteran reported working as a general contractor and, although he described his job as sometimes stressful, this was attributed to "drama caused by property managers" and not symptoms of his psychiatric disability.  Additionally, the Veteran reported that things are good at home with his wife and that he is close to his twin daughters.  

The Board notes that, in May 2023, the Veteran reported emotional flattening, a symptom contemplated by the 50 percent criteria.  The overall evidence, however, does not demonstrate a level of impairment associated with a 50 percent rating.  The Veteran's other remaining symptoms were either contemplated by or more consistent with a 30 percent rating.  

The Board acknowledges the Veteran's argument that the December 2023 VA examination is inadequate because the examiner failed to properly review the Veteran's treatment records and did not conduct an examination that properly documented the Veteran's in-service traumas.  As reflected in the examination report, however, the examiner indicated that he reviewed the Veteran's entire claims file, including his VA treatment records and his DD Form 214, indicating his receipt of the Combat Infantry Badge.  The Veteran has not alleged that he reported any specific psychiatric symptoms to the examiner that the examiner did not record.  In any event, as discussed above, the Board has considered all reported psychiatric symptoms of record during the appeal period in rating the Veteran's anxiety.  With respect to the Veteran's argument that the examiner failed to properly characterize the Veteran's in-service stressors, the Board notes, and the Veteran's then-representative acknowledged, that the Veteran's in-service stressor was conceded because of his receipt of the Combat Infantry Badge.  While the entire history of the Veteran's psychiatric disability is relevant, the description of the in-service stressor is most relevant to the question of whether an in-service injury occurred.  What is critical for the initial rating of the Veteran's anxiety is the current severity of his symptoms, not whether an in-service stressor occurred, which in this case has already been conceded.  

In short, the evidence of record persuasively weighs against the Veteran's claim for an initial rating in excess of 30 percent for anxiety for any portion of the appeal period.  As the evidence is neither evenly nor approximately balanced as to whether a higher rating is warranted, the benefit of the doubt rule is not applicable, and the claim must be denied.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 76 (Fed. Cir. 2021).     

 

K. Conner

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Madison, Siobhan K.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.