Citation Nr: A25034161
Decision Date: 04/14/25	Archive Date: 04/14/25

DOCKET NO. 240426-435841
DATE: April 14, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a right index finger disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a left index finger disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a right little finger disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a left little finger disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a right long finger disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a left long finger disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a right ring finger disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a left ring finger disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a right thumb disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a left thumb disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a right hand/wrist disability, to include carpal tunnel syndrome, is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a left hand/wrist disability, to include carpal tunnel syndrome, is remanded.

Entitlement to a rating higher than 10 percent for a cervical spine strain is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from July 2001 to July 2004, from December 2004 to June 2006, from July 2007 to October 2009 and from November 2009 to February 2023, to include service in Southwest Asia.

This case comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a December 2023 (service connection for right and left hand disabilities) and an April 25, 2024 rating decision (increased rating for cervical spine disability and service connection for disabilities of the right and left index finger, right and left little finger, right and left long finger, right and left ring finger, and right and left thumb) issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).  In an April 26, 2024, VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the direct review lane.  

As an appeal in which the appellant requested, on the Notice of Disagreement, direct review by the Board without submission of additional evidence and without a Board hearing, the Board's decision is based on a review of the evidence of record at the time of the decision on the issues on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.    

As noted, the Veteran selected the direct review docket.  In Williams v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 305 (2024), the Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims held that the Board should not adjudicate an appellant's appeal until the period to switch Board dockets has elapsed.  This period expires one year from the date the RO mails notice of the decision on appeal, or 60 days from the date the Board received the VA Form 10182, whichever is later.  See 38 C.F.R. § 20.202(c)(2). Here, that time has not yet elapsed with regard to the issues decided in the April 2024 rating decision; however, the Veteran submitted a 38 U.S.C. § 5103 notice response stating that he had no more evidence to submit and to "please decide my claim as soon as possible."  See January 2025 38 U.S.C. § 5103 notice acknowledgement letter.  Therefore, the Veteran was clear that he does not wish for further delay by explicitly stating he wished his claim to be decided as soon as possible and the Board will proceed as requested.

Lastly, based on the medical evidence of record, the Veteran's claims for right hand and left hand disabilities have been recharacterized, to include the wrists and carpal tunnel syndrome, as noted above.  Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1 (2009) (holding that when a Veteran makes a claim, he is seeking service connection for symptoms regardless of how those symptoms are diagnosed or labeled).

1. Entitlement to service connection for a right index finger disability is remanded.

2. Entitlement to service connection for a left index finger disability is remanded.

3. Entitlement to service connection for a right little finger disability is remanded.

4. Entitlement to service connection for a left little finger disability is remanded.

5. Entitlement to service connection for a right long finger disability is remanded.

6. Entitlement to service connection for a left long finger disability is remanded.

7. Entitlement to service connection for a right ring finger disability is remanded.

8. Entitlement to service connection for a left ring finger disability is remanded.

9. Entitlement to service connection for a right thumb disability is remanded.

10. Entitlement to service connection for a left thumb disability is remanded.

In an October 2023 VA hand/fingers examination report, the Veteran reported that after his third deployment and holding heavy equipment and guns, he started experiencing cramps in his both of his hands.  He reported daily bilateral hand cramps.  He reported inability to use his hands until the cramps reside, with the pain in his right hand being worse.  The examiner concluded that although the Veteran had subjective complaints, there was no objective evidence to support a diagnosis.      

The Board notes that in Saunders v. Wilkie, the Federal Circuit held that pain alone, even without an underlying pathology or diagnosis, can constitute a disability under VA law where such pain results in functional impairment that affects earning capacity.  See Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356, 1361 (Fed. Cir. 2018).

Moreover, the Veteran has qualifying service subject to presumptive service connection for veterans of the Persian Gulf War.  38 C.F.R. § 3.317(e).  Here, the Veteran's Persian Gulf War service and his presumed toxic exposure have not been addressed by a VA examiner.   

Accordingly, a pre-decisional duty to assist error has been identified with respect to the claims for service connection for disabilities of the right and left index finger, right and left little finger, right and left long finger, right and left ring finger, and right and left thumb, and a remand is warranted for further VA examination.  See 38 C.F.R. § 20.802.

11. Entitlement to service connection for a right hand/wrist disability, to include carpal tunnel syndrome, is remanded.

12. Entitlement to service connection for a left hand/wrist disability, to include carpal tunnel syndrome, is remanded.

The Veteran is seeking service connection for right and left hand/wrist disabilities which he relates to active duty service.  In particular, he reports treatment for carpal tunnel syndrome which is documented in his VA treatment records.  

Thus, the evidence is sufficient to trigger a VA examination.  As the Veteran has not been afforded a VA examination with respect to his claimed disabilities of the right and left hand/wrist, to include carpal tunnel syndrome, a pre-decisional duty to assist error has occurred and a remand for VA examination is warranted.  See 38 C.F.R. § 20.802.

13. Entitlement to a rating higher than 10 percent for a cervical spine strain is remanded.

The Veteran asserts that he is entitled to an increased disability rating for his cervical spine strain.  

In increased evaluation claims for musculoskeletal conditions, the examiner must attempt to elicit relevant information regarding the description of the Veteran's flare-ups and any additional functional loss suffered during flare-ups.  Sharp v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 26, 34-36 (2017).

On VA neck examination in April 2023, the Veteran reported daily neck pain exacerbated by strenuous activities; however, the examiner did not provide any further information regarding functional loss during flare-ups.  Also, the examiner did not test passive range of motion as it was found medically contraindicated as it may have caused pain or risk of further injury; however, no range of motion estimates were provided.  See Correia v. McDonald, 28 Vet. App. 158, 169-70 (2016). 

The VA examiner also determined that there was no radicular pain or any other signs or symptoms due to radiculopathy.  However, in an August 2016 private treatment record, the examiner suspected that the Veteran had cervical radiculitis.  The VA examiner did not reconcile this finding in the April 2023 examination report.    

The Board finds that the RO's decision based on an inadequate VA examination resulted in a pre-decisional duty-to-assist error.  Thus, the claim is remanded so that the Veteran may be afforded a new examination of his cervical spine to address the above-stated deficiencies.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for VA examination to determine the nature and origin of the claimed disabilities of the right and left index finger, right and left little finger, right and left long finger, right and left ring finger, and right and left thumb.  The claims file must be reviewed by the examiner. The examiner should offer the following opinions:

(a) Whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's claimed disabilities of the right and left index finger, right and left little finger, right and left long finger, right and left ring finger, and right and left thumb is part of a medically unexplained chronic multi-symptom illness or an otherwise undiagnosed illness?

(b) If a chronic disorder(s) is/are found, can such disorder(s) be attributed to a known clinical diagnosis(es), or is there otherwise a medical explanation for the Veteran's claimed disabilities of the right and left index finger, right and left little finger, right and left long finger, right and left ring finger, and right and left thumb?   If so, state the diagnosis; if not, so state specifically.

(c) For any diagnosed disorder is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that such disorder(s) is/are etiologically related to the Veteran's periods of active duty service, including presumed exposure to particulate matter during service in Southwest Asia during the Persian Gulf War?

The examiner must provide a comprehensive rationale for each proffered opinion. The examiner is advised that the Veteran is competent to report his symptoms and history, and such reports are to be considered in formulating any opinion.

2. Schedule the Veteran for an examination to determine the nature and origin of disabilities of the right and left hand/wrist, to include carpal tunnel syndrome.  The claims file, including a copy of this remand, should be made available to the examiner, who should review it and should note that review in the report.

The examiner is requested provide an opinion on whether a right and left hand/wrist disability, to include carpal tunnel syndrome, is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) related to an in-service event, injury, or disease?

A complete and detailed rationale should be provided for each opinion requested by the examiner.

3. Schedule the Veteran for an examination with an appropriate VA examiner to determine the current level of severity of his service-connected cervical spine disability.

(a) Test for pain on active motion, passive motion, weightbearing, and non-weightbearing.  If the examiner is unable to conduct the required testing or concludes that the required testing is not necessary in this case, an explanation must be provided.

(b) State whether the examination is taking place during a flare-up.  If not, the examiner should ask the Veteran to describe the flare-ups he experiences, including: frequency, duration, characteristics, severity, and/or extent of functional impairment he experiences during a flare-up of his symptoms.  Based on this information, the examiner should then provide an estimate concerning the average additional loss of motion during a flare-up.

(c) Identify and evaluate the severity of all neurologic abnormalities or bowel or bladder impairments associated with the cervical spine disability.

A complete rationale must be provided for all opinions offered. 

 

 

RAY BARTO SLABBEKORN, JR.

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Henriquez, J.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.