Citation Nr: A25034090
Decision Date: 04/14/25	Archive Date: 04/14/25

DOCKET NO. 240711-456589
DATE: April 14, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to a disability rating of 30 percent, but no higher, for radiculopathy of the left lower extremity, anterior tibial and internal popliteal nerves (previously rated as radiculopathy, left lower extremity, sciatic nerve), is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran's radiculopathy of the left lower extremity, anterior tibial and internal popliteal nerves, is manifested by severe incomplete paralysis.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for a disability rating of 30 percent, but no higher, for radiculopathy of the left lower extremity, anterior tibial and internal popliteal nerves, are met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8524.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Air Force from January 1978 to September 2001.

These matters come before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from a February 2024 rating decision by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO), which is the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ). Although the July 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), indicated that the Veteran was appealing an April 2024 rating decision, the Veteran stated that his appeal involved the evaluation of numbness and lack of movement in the second toe of his left foot, issues related to the Veteran's left lower extremity radiculopathy claim. The April 2024 rating decision did not address the Veteran's left lower extremity radiculopathy claim, but a February 2024 rating decision, from which the Notice of Disagreement is timely, did address the claim. In that February 2024 rating decision, the AOJ continued the rating of 20 percent for radiculopathy, left lower extremity, anterior and popliteal nerves.

In July 2024 Notice of Disagreement, the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the February 2024 AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 20 percent for left lower extremity radiculopathy

The Veteran is seeking a higher rating for his service-connected left lower extremity radiculopathy, anterior tibial and internal popliteal nerve. July 2024 Notice of Disagreement. He contends that he has nerve damage bilaterally below the knee and loss of the movement of the left foot, including numbness and a lack of mobility in the second toe of the left foot. Id.; October 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ, Fully Developed Claim.

Ratings

The Veteran is currently in receipt of a rating of 20 percent disability for his left lower extremity radiculopathy, anterior tibial and internal popliteal nerve, under Diagnostic Code (DC) 8524. The disability is rated under DC 8524 for paralysis of the internal popliteal nerve (tibial) in accordance with the criteria set forth in 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, DC 8524. Under these criteria, mild incomplete paralysis is rated as 10 percent disabling. Moderate incomplete paralysis is rated as 20 percent disabling. Severe incomplete paralysis is rated as 30 disabling. Complete paralysis is rated as 40 disabling and is manifested by loss of plantar flexion, loss of all frank adduction of the foot, no flexion and separation of toes, inability to move a muscle in the sole, and lesions of the nerve high in the popliteal fossa. 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, DC 8524.

The words "mild," "moderate," and "severe" as used in the various Diagnostic Codes are not defined in the Rating Schedule. Regulations provide that ratings for peripheral neurological disorders are to be assigned based the relative impairment of motor function, trophic changes, or sensory disturbance. 38 C.F.R. § 4.120. Consideration is also given for loss of reflexes, pain, and muscle atrophy. See 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.123, 4.124.

The term "incomplete paralysis" indicates a degree of lost or impaired function substantially less than the type of picture for complete paralysis given with each nerve, whether due to varied level of the nerve lesion or to partial regeneration. 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Note at "Diseases of the Peripheral Nerves." When the involvement is wholly sensory, the rating is for the mild, or at most, the moderate degree. Id. The disability ratings for the peripheral nerves are for unilateral involvement; when bilateral, the ratings combine with application of the bilateral factor. Id. The Note to 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a establishes a maximum disability rating for conditions that are wholly sensory, as opposed to a minimum disability rating for conditions that are other than wholly sensory. See Miller v. Shulkin, 28 Vet. App. 376 (2017).

Analysis

The Board finds that a rating of 30 percent, but no higher, is warranted for the veteran's left lower extremity radiculopathy affecting the anterior tibial and internal popliteal nerves.

In this case, a November 2023 VA examination determined that the Veteran had moderate symptoms in the bilateral lower extremities of paresthesias and/or dysesthesias and of numbness, with decreased sensation to light touch for both feet and toes. The strength bilaterally of each of knee extension, ankle plantar flexion, and ankle dorsiflexion were normal, and bilateral knee and ankle reflexes were also normal. The November 2023 VA examiner identified no trophic changes attributable to peripheral neuropathy. However, the examiner noted that, without shoes, the left second toe bent downward, and that the Veteran was unable move the toe up, the examiner observed that, with shoes on, the Veteran had a normal gait despite the second toe of the left foot. Based on this examination, the November 2023 examiner determined that the Veteran experienced mild incomplete paralysis of the bilateral anterior tibial (deep peroneal) and internal popliteal (tibial) nerves.

At a September 2023 medical appointment, the Veteran reported numbness and tingling in the soles of both feet, with a weakness of movement or involuntary movement in the second toe of the left foot. The September 2023 noted multiple nerve disruptions in the knees and lower legs, as well as weakness of the second toe on dorsiflexion, and diminished vibration on both feet, but noted that the Veteran denied any pain.  VA treatment records reflect that the Veteran continued to report and seek treatment for a loss of movement in the second toe of his left foot. October 2023 VA treatment records. Although the records show that the Veteran had a normal gait, they also show that the second toe of the left foot had strength of only a 3 on a scale of 1 to 5 on dorsi- and plantar flexion as well as abduction and adduction. October 2023 VA treatment record. 

The Board finds that the evidence of record shows the Veteran's symptoms more nearly approximated the criteria for severe incomplete paralysis during the appeal period. 

The Veteran had documented numbness of the bilateral lower extremities with motor deficit of a left foot drooping toe, which the November 2023 VA examiner noted caused impairment to gait, although this impairment was lessened when the Veteran was wearing shoes.   The evidence also shows multiple nerve disruptions in the knees and lower legs, as well as weakness of the second toe on dorsiflexion, and diminished vibration on both feet.  Moreover, the Veteran continued to report and seek treatment for a loss of movement in the second toe of his left foot. Finally, the record also shows that the second toe of the left foot had strength of only a 3 on a scale of 1 to 5 on dorsi- and plantar flexion as well as abduction and adduction. Given the severity of the limitations on the left lower toe, when combined with the Veteran's remaining subjective symptoms of numbness and the documented diminished vibration on the foot, the Board finds that after resolving the benefit of any reasonable doubt, the Veteran's disability more nearly approximates the criteria for severe incomplete paralysis.  Accordingly, a 30 percent rating is warranted for left lower extremity radiculopathy, affecting the anterior tibial and internal popliteal nerves.  A rating in excess of 30 percent, however, is not warranted, given that the record does not reflect symptoms such as complete paralysis manifested by loss of plantar flexion, loss of all frank adduction of the foot, no flexion and separation of toes, inability to move a muscle in the sole, and lesions of the nerve high in the popliteal fossa.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7; See Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 781-82 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc).  

 

M. HYLAND

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	T. Guill, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.