Citation Nr: A25034531
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 210624-168133
DATE: April 15, 2025

ISSUES

1. Entitlement to service connection for a bilateral knee disability.

2. Entitlement to service connection for C-5-6 disc herniation with radiculopathy, status post neck surgery (neck disability).

3. Entitlement to service connection for thoracolumbar spine degenerative disc disease with intervertebral disc syndrome (back disability).

4. Entitlement to service connection for a left foot bunion condition (left big toe disability).

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a bilateral knee disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a neck disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a back disability is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a left big toe disability is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from July 1980 to May 1982.

These matters come before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from rating decisions by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO), which is the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ).   

As background, a 2003 rating decision denied inter alia entitlement to service connection for a bilateral knee disability and a neck disability. Following an October 2017 VA Form 526EZ for a neck disability, back disability, and bilateral big toe disability, a January 2018 rating decision denied entitlement to service connection for all issues. Following a November 2020 supplemental claim for the bilateral knee disability, neck disability, back disability, and a left big toe disability, a March 2021 rating decision denied entitlement to service connection for all issues. In June 2021, the Veteran timely filed VA Form 10182, and selected the Hearing docket. A Board hearing was held in October 2024 with the undersigned Veterans Law Judge (VLJ). A transcript of the hearing is associated with the claims file.

The Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2021 supplemental claim rating decision, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or representative at the October 2024 Board hearing or within 90 days following the Board hearing. 38 C.F.R. § 20.302(a). If evidence was submitted either (1) after the March 2021 rating decision and prior to the October 2024 Board hearing, or (2) more than 90 days following the October 2024 Board hearing, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.302(a), 20.801.

However, because the Board is remanding the claims, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

1. Entitlement to service connection for a bilateral knee disability.

2. Entitlement to service connection for a neck disability.

3. Entitlement to service connection for a back disability.

4. Entitlement to service connection for a left big toe disability.

The Veteran claims entitlement to service connection for a bilateral knee disability, neck disability, back disability, and left big toe disability. Specifically, he claims that the disabilities were incurred in-service, or in the alternative, were caused by,  due to, or aggravated by his service-connected right foot 5th metatarsal disability. See October 2024 Board hearing.

As an initial matter, regarding specifically the left big toe disability, the Veteran has been diagnosed over time with (and without) left foot (and right foot) hallux valgus (bunion), hallux rigidus, hallux limitus, and degenerative arthritis. The Board has broadened and recharacterized the issue on appeal to entitlement to service connection for a left big toe disability. See Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1, 5 (2009).

Additionally, the Board notes that in the March 2021 supplemental claim rating decision, the RO found new and relevant evidence had been received for all claims. The Board is bound by this prior favorable finding, which was not clearly and unmistakably erroneous. See 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.104(c), 3.2501. 

The Board also notes that the Veteran is service-connected for a right foot 5th metatarsal disability with an effective date of January 24, 1990. Additionally, the RO found that the Veteran was diagnosed with a bilateral knee disability (osteoarthritis of knees), a neck disability (neck surgery x 2, fusion screws and rods), a back disability (thoracolumbar spine degenerative disc disease with intervertebral disc syndrome), and a left big toe disability (hallux rigidus and degenerative arthritis). The Board is also bound by these favorable findings, which were not clearly and unmistakably erroneous. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).

To that end, the Board notes that the Veteran has had a multitude of VA examinations regarding the current issues on appeal. 

In an October 2002 VA examination, the examiner opined that the Veteran's current bilateral knee disability was not caused by or related to his service-connected right foot 5th metatarsal disability. 

In a January 2018 VA examination, the examiner opined that the Veteran's neck disability was not incurred in or caused by injury during service. 

In a January 2018 VA examination, the examiner opined that the Veteran's left (and right) big toe disability was not incurred in or caused by injury during service. In a February 2020 VA examination, the examiner opined that the Veteran's left (and right) big toe disability was not caused by or related to his service-connected right foot 5th metatarsal disability. 

In a February 2020 VA examination, the examiner opined that the Veteran's back disability was not caused by or related to his service-connected right foot 5th metatarsal disability.

The Board finds the above examinations inadequate for adjudication purposes at the very least because in no instance was an aggravation opinion provided as it related to the Veteran's service-connected right foot 5th metatarsal disability. El-Amin v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 136, 140-141 (2013). Additionally, no examiner has opined specifically as to whether the Veteran's bilateral knee disability or back disability were directly related to service. See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295 (2008); Combee v. Brown, 34 F.3d 1039, 1043-1044 (Fed.Cir.1994). 

Therefore, the Board finds that a remand is necessary to correct the above pre-decisional duty to assist errors and obtain VA medical examinations/opinions which specifically address the nature and etiology of the Veteran's current disabilities encompassing alternative theories of entitlement as appropriate.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain a VA examination from an appropriate medical professional regarding the nature and etiology of the Veteran's bilateral knee disability. The electronic claims folder, including a copy of this remand, must be made available to the examiner for all examinations. The examiner is requested to provide an opinion on the following:

(a) Whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's bilateral knee disability was incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness.

(b) Whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's bilateral knee disability was caused by or due to, or aggravated* by the Veteran's service-connected right foot 5th metatarsal disability.

*Any amount of aggravation is sufficient to establish secondary service connection; permanent aggravation/worsening of a non- service-connected disability is not required. See Ward & Neal v. Wilkie, 31 Vet. App. 233 (2019). 

2. Obtain a VA examination from an appropriate medical professional regarding the nature and etiology of the Veteran's neck disability. The examiner is requested to provide an opinion on the following:

(a) Whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's neck disability was caused by or due to, or aggravated* by the Veteran's service-connected right foot 5th metatarsal disability.

*Any amount of aggravation is sufficient to establish secondary service connection; permanent aggravation/worsening of a non- service-connected disability is not required. Id. 

3. Obtain a VA examination from an appropriate medical professional regarding the nature and etiology of the Veteran's back disability. The examiner is requested to provide an opinion on the following:

(a) Whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's back disability was incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness.

(b) Whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's back disability was caused by or due to, or aggravated* by the Veteran's service-connected right foot 5th metatarsal disability.

*Any amount of aggravation is sufficient to establish secondary service connection; permanent aggravation/worsening of a non- service-connected disability is not required. Id. 

4. Obtain a VA examination from an appropriate medical professional regarding the nature and etiology of the Veteran's left big toe disability. The examiner is requested to provide an opinion on the following:

(a) Whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's left big toe disability was caused by or due to, or aggravated* by the Veteran's service-connected right foot 5th metatarsal disability.

*Any amount of aggravation is sufficient to establish secondary service connection; permanent aggravation/worsening of a non- service-connected disability is not required. Id. 

A complete and thorough rationale, with citation to relevant evidence and specific medical studies as appropriate must be provided for any and all opinions.

As to the rendered opinions, the examiner should also specifically discuss lay statements made by the Veteran in connection with his disability as appropriate, as well as any contradictory evidence in the claims file, and reconcile that evidence with their findings. 

 

 

Michael A. Pappas

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Matthew Leahy, Associate Counsel 

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.