Citation Nr: A25034910
Decision Date: 04/16/25	Archive Date: 04/16/25

DOCKET NO. 240918-473475
DATE: April 16, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an effective date earlier than October 29, 2021 for the award of a 40 percent rating for degenerative disc disease other than intervertebral disc disease is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) received claim seeking entitlement to service connection for a low back condition on March 9, 2020.

2. An August 2022 rating decision awarded service connection for degenerative disc disease other than intervertebral disc disease and assigned a 10 percent rating beginning on March 9, 2020 and a 40 percent rating beginning on October 29, 2021. 

3. For the appeal period prior to October 29, 2021, the Veteran's degenerative disc disease other than intervertebral disc disease has been manifested by forward flexion to 85 degrees and the combined range of motion to 210 degrees, both at worst and on repetitive motion testing, even in contemplation of functional loss due to symptoms such as pain, fatigue, weakness, lack of endurance, or incoordination, or as a result of repetitive motion and/or flare-ups without ankylosis, the functional equivalent of ankylosis, doctor prescribed bedrest or associated objective neurologic abnormalities other than those separately rated.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to an effective date earlier than October 29, 2021 for the award of a 40 percent rating for degenerative disc disease other than intervertebral disc disease have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§  5110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.151, 3.155, 3.400.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from June 1990 to July 1993.

The matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from a September 2023 rating decision issued by the VA Regional Office (RO). The rating decision on appeal constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.  

In May 2021, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review, and requested readjudication of the claim of entitlement to service connection for a low back condition most recently addressed in an August 2020 rating decision. However, the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) found a development error during review and assigned the claim to the supplemental review lane on July 13, 2021 for further development. In August 2022, the AOJ issued a supplemental claim decision which found that new and relevant evidence had been received, awarded service connection and assigned an initial staged rating based on the evidence of record at the time of that decision. The Veteran timely appealed the decision by a May 2023 VA Form 20-0996 seeking an earlier effective date for the award of a 40 percent rating. The AOJ denied the claim for an earlier effective date in a September 2023 rating decision based on the evidence of record at the time of that August 2022 rating decision. 

In the September 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the August 2022 AOJ decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim[s], considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Entitlement to an effective date earlier than October 29, 2021 for the award of a 40 percent rating for degenerative disc disease other than intervertebral disc disease is denied.

The Veteran seeks an earlier effective date for the award of a 40 percent rating for degenerative disc disease other than intervertebral disc disease. Specifically, the Veteran contends that the staged rating was improper. See September 2024 VA Form 10182. The Board notes that the Veteran was awarded a 10 percent rating for degenerative disc disease other than intervertebral disc disease effective March 9, 2020 and a 40 percent rating effective October 29, 2021.

Generally, the effective date for the grant of service connection will be the day following separation from active service or the date entitlement arose, if the claim is received within one year after discharge from service. Otherwise, for an award based on an original claim, claim reopened after a final disallowance, or claim for an increased rating, the effective date is the date of receipt of the claim or the date entitlement arose, whichever is later. 38 U.S.C. § 5110(a); 38 C.F.R. § 3.400.

The general rule for claims for increased ratings is that the award is effective the date of receipt of claim or the date entitlement arose, whichever is later. 38 C.F.R. § 3.400(o)(1). The effective date of an award of increased compensation is the earliest date as of which it is factually ascertainable that an increase in disability has occurred, if the claim is received within one year from such date, otherwise, the date of receipt of the claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.400(o)(2). 

An exception to that rule provides that the effective date of an award of an increase shall be the earliest date as of which it is ascertainable that an increase in disability had occurred, if application is received within one year from such date. 38 U.S.C. § 5110(b)(2), 38 C.F.R. § 3.400(o)(2); see also Harper v. Brown, 10 Vet. App. 125 (1997). The Board notes that the instant earlier effective date appeal originates from the award of service connection and the Veteran has not challenged the assigned effective date for the award of service connection; therefore, the one-year look back provisions are not applicable to the instant appeal. 

Disability ratings are determined by application of the criteria set forth in VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities, which is based on average impairment of earning capacity. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. Part 4. When a question arises as to which of two ratings applies under a particular diagnostic code, the higher rating is assigned if the disability more closely approximates the criteria for the higher rating. Otherwise, the lower rating applies. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7. After careful consideration of the evidence, any reasonable doubt remaining is resolved in favor of a veteran. 38 C.F.R. § 4.3.

Where entitlement to compensation has already been established and an increase in the disability rating is at issue, the present level of disability is of primary concern. Although a rating specialist is directed to review the recorded history of a disability in order to make a more accurate evaluation, see 38 C.F.R. § 4.2, the regulations do not give past medical reports precedence over current findings. Francisco v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 55 (1994). However, the Board must also consider staged ratings. Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505, 509-10 (2007).

Pertinent regulations do not require that all cases show all findings specified by the Rating Schedule, but that findings sufficiently characteristic to identify the disease and the resulting disability and above all, coordination of rating with impairment of function will be expected in all cases. 38 C.F.R. § 4.21. Therefore, the Board has considered the potential application of various other provisions of the regulations governing VA benefits, whether or not they were raised by the veteran, as well as the entire history of the veteran's disability in reaching its decision. Schafrath v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 589, 595 (1991).

In general, all disabilities, including those arising from a single disease entity, are rated separately, and all disability ratings are then combined in accordance with 38 C.F.R. § 4.25. Pyramiding, the evaluation of the same disability, or the same manifestation of a disability, under different diagnostic codes, is to be avoided when rating a veteran's service-connected disability. 38 C.F.R. § 4.14. It is possible for a veteran to have separate and distinct manifestations from the same injury which would permit rating under several diagnostic codes, however, the critical element in permitting the assignment of several ratings under various diagnostic codes is that none of the symptomatology for any one of the conditions is duplicative or overlapping with the symptomatology of the other condition. See Esteban v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 259, 261-62 (1994).

The basis of disability evaluation is the ability of the body as a whole, or of the psyche, or of a system or organ of the body to function under the ordinary conditions of daily life including employment. 38 C.F.R. § 4.10.

The veteran is competent to report symptoms and experiences observable by his senses. See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 (Fed. Cir. 2007); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(a).

Although the Board has an obligation to provide reasons and bases supporting its decision, there is no obligation to discuss, in detail, the extensive evidence of record. See Gonzales v. West, 218 F.3d 1378, 1380-81 (Fed. Cir. 2000) (holding that the Board must review the entire record but does not have to discuss each piece of evidence). Therefore, the Board will summarize the relevant evidence where appropriate, and the Board's analysis will focus specifically on what the evidence shows, or fails to show, as it relates to the Veteran's claim.

The intent of the Rating Schedule is to recognize actually painful, unstable or malaligned joints, due to healed injury, as entitled to at least the minimum compensable rating for the joint, even in the absence of arthritis. 38 C.F.R. § 4.59; Burton v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 1, 5 (2011). In this regard, 38 C.F.R.                              § 4.59 requires that "[t]he joints involved should be tested for pain on both active and passive motion, in weight-bearing and non-weight-bearing and, if possible, with the range of the opposite undamaged joint." Correia v. McDonald, 28 Vet. App. 158 (2016). Further, 38 C.F.R. § 4.59 is applicable to the evaluation of musculoskeletal disabilities involving actually painful, unstable or malaligned joints or periarticular regions, regardless of whether the Diagnostic Code under which the disability is evaluated is predicated on range of motion measurements. Southall-Norman v. McDonald, 28 Vet. App. 346 (2016).

When evaluating musculoskeletal disabilities based on limitation of motion, 38 C.F.R. § 4.40 requires consideration of functional loss caused by pain or other factors listed in that section that could occur during flare-ups or after repeated use and therefore, not be reflected on range-of-motion testing. 38 C.F.R. § 4.45 requires consideration also be given to less movement than normal, more movement than normal, weakened movement, excess fatigability, incoordination, and pain on movement. See DeLuca v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 202 (1995); see also Mitchell v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 32, 44 (2011). Nonetheless, even when the background factors listed in § 4.40 or 4.45 are relevant when evaluating a disability, the rating is assigned based on the extent to which motion is limited, pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a (musculoskeletal system) or § 4.73 (muscle injury); a separate or higher rating under § 4.40 or 4.45 itself is not appropriate. See Thompson v. McDonald, 815 F.3d 781, 785 (Fed. Cir. 2016) ("[I]t is clear that the guidance of § 4.40 is intended to be used in understanding the nature of the veteran's disability, after which a rating is determined based on the § 4.71a [or 4.73] criteria.").]

When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, the Secretary shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; see also Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (2021).

VA amended the criteria for rating musculoskeletal disabilities effective from February 7, 2021. These new regulations apply to all applications for benefits received by VA or that are pending before the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) on or after February 7, 2021. Claims pending prior to the effective date will be considered under both old and new rating criteria, and whatever criteria is more favorable to the veteran will be applied. The Board may not apply a current regulation prior to its effective date, unless the regulation explicitly provides otherwise. Kuzma v. Principi, 341 F.3d 1327 (Fed. Cir. 2003). However, the Board is not precluded from applying prior versions of the applicable regulation to the period on or after the effective dates of the new regulation if the prior version was in effect during the pendency of the appeal.

VA's General Counsel has held that where a law or regulation changes during the pendency of a claim for a higher rating, the Board must first determine whether the revised version is more favorable to the veteran. In so doing, it may be necessary for the Board to apply both the old and new versions of the regulation. If the revised version of the regulation is more favorable, the retroactive reach of that regulation under 38 U.S.C. § 5110(g) can be no earlier than the effective date of that change. The Board must generally apply both the former and the revised versions of the regulation for the period prior and subsequent to the regulatory change, but an effective date based on the revised criteria may be no earlier than the date of the change.

VA thus must consider the claim for a higher rating pursuant to the former and revised regulations during the latter part of this appeal. See VAOPGCPREC 3-2000, 65 Fed. Reg. 33,422 (2000); DeSousa v. Gober, 10 Vet. App. 461, 467 (1997). Therefore, the Board will consider the Veteran's claim under the former criteria prior to February 7, 2021 and both the former and new rating criteria from February 7, 2021. The criteria that is more favorable to the Veteran will be applied. The Board also notes that the former and revised criteria under Diagnostic Codes 5242 are identical.

Under the General Rating Formula for Diseases and Injuries of the Spine, a 10 percent rating is assigned when forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine is greater than 60 degrees but not greater than 85 degrees; or, forward flexion of the cervical spine is greater than 30 degrees but not greater than 40 degrees; or, combined range of motion of the thoracolumbar spine is greater than 120 degrees but not greater than 235 degrees; or, combined range of motion of the cervical spine greater than 170 degrees but not greater than 335 degrees; or, muscle spasm, guarding, or localized tenderness not resulting in abnormal gait or abnormal spinal contour; or, vertebral body fracture with loss of 50 percent or more of the height. A 20 percent rating is assigned when forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine is greater than 30 degrees but not greater than 60 degrees; or, forward flexion of the cervical spine is greater than 15 degrees but not greater than 30 degrees; or, the combined range of motion of the thoracolumbar spine is not greater than 120 degrees; or, the combined range of motion of the cervical spine is not greater than 170 degrees; or, muscle spasm or guarding severe enough to result in an abnormal gait or abnormal spinal contour such as scoliosis, reversed lordosis, or abnormal kyphosis. A 30 percent rating is assigned when forward flexion of the cervical spine is 15 degrees or less; or favorable ankylosis of the entire cervical spine. A 40 percent rating is assigned when there is unfavorable ankylosis of the entire cervical spine; or forward flexion of the thoracolumbar spine is 30 degrees or less; or favorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine. A 50 percent rating is assigned when there is unfavorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine. A 100 percent rating is assigned when there is unfavorable ankylosis of the entire spine.

Note (1) to the rating formula specifies that any associated objective neurologic abnormalities, including, but not limited to, bowel or bladder impairment, should be separately evaluated under an appropriate diagnostic code.

Note (2) (see also Plate V) provides that, for VA compensation purposes, normal cervical motion is forward flexion, extension, and lateral flexion from zero to 45 degrees. Normal left and right rotation is from zero to 80 degrees. The normal combined range of motion for the cervical spine is 340 degrees.

Note (3): In exceptional cases, an examiner may state that because of age, body habitus, neurologic disease, or other factors not the result of disease or injury of the spine, the range of motion of the spine in a particular individual should be considered normal for that individual, even though it does not conform to the normal range of motion stated in Note (2). Provided that the examiner supplies an explanation, the examiner's assessment that the range of motion is normal for that individual will be accepted.

Note (4): Round each range of motion measurement to the nearest five degrees.

Note (5): For VA compensation purposes, unfavorable ankylosis is a condition in which the entire cervical spine, the entire thoracolumbar spine, or the entire spine is fixed in flexion or extension, and the ankylosis results in one or more of the following: difficulty walking because of a limited line of vision; restricted opening of the mouth and chewing; breathing limited to diaphragmatic respiration; gastrointestinal symptoms due to pressure of the costal margin on the abdomen; dyspnea or dysphagia; atlantoaxial or cervical subluxation or dislocation; or neurologic symptoms due to nerve root stretching. Fixation of a spinal segment in neutral position (zero degrees) always represents favorable ankylosis.

Note (6): Separately evaluate disability of the thoracolumbar and cervical spine segments, except when there is unfavorable ankylosis of both segments, which will be rated as a single disability. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a.

For VA compensation purposes, unfavorable ankylosis is a condition in which the entire cervical spine, the entire thoracolumbar spine, or the entire spine is fixed in flexion or extension, and the ankylosis results in one or more of the following: difficulty walking because of a limited line of vision; restricted opening of the mouth and chewing; breathing limited to diaphragmatic respiration; gastrointestinal symptoms due to pressure of the costal margin on the abdomen; dyspnea or dysphagia; atlantoaxial or cervical subluxation or dislocation; or neurologic symptoms due to nerve root stretching. Fixation of a spinal segment in neutral position (zero degrees) always represents favorable ankylosis. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, General Rating Formula for Diseases and Injuries of the Spine, Note (5).

Additionally, intervertebral disc syndrome may also be evaluated under the Formula for Rating Intervertebral Disc Syndrome Based on Incapacitating Episodes. Under this formula, a 20 percent rating is warranted with incapacitating episodes having a total duration of at least 2 weeks but less than 4 weeks during the past 12 months. A 40 percent rating is warranted with incapacitating episodes having a total duration of at least 4 weeks but less than 6 weeks during the past 12 months. A 60 percent rating is warranted with incapacitating episodes having a total duration of at least 6 weeks during the past 12 months. 38 C.F.R.                       § 4.71a (Diagnostic Code 5243).

Following the rating criteria, note (1) provides that: For purposes of evaluations under Diagnostic Code 5243, an incapacitating episode is a period of acute signs and symptoms due to intervertebral disc syndrome that requires bed rest prescribed by a physician and treatment by a physician.

Note (2): If intervertebral disc syndrome is present in more than one spinal segment, provided that the effects in each spinal segment are clearly distinct, evaluate each segment on the basis of incapacitating episodes or under the General Rating Formula for Diseases and Injuries of the Spine, whichever method results in a higher evaluation for that segment. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a (Diagnostic Code 5243).

The Formula for Rating Intervertebral Disc Syndrome Based on Incapacitating Episodes provides a 40 percent rating for intervertebral disc syndrome with incapacitating episodes having a total duration of at least 4 weeks but less than 6 weeks during the past 12 months; and a 60 percent rating for intervertebral disc syndrome with incapacitating episodes having a total duration of at least 6 weeks during the past 12 months. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a.

When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, all reasonable doubt will be resolved in favor of the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

The Veteran's degenerative disc disease other than intervertebral disc disease is rated as 10 percent beginning on March 9, 2020 and as 40 percent beginning on October 29, 2021 under Diagnostic Code 5242. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a.

The Veteran submitted an Application for Disability Compensation and Related Compensation Benefits (VA Form 21-526EZ) seeking entitlement to service connection for a low back condition on March 9, 2020. The AOJ denied the claim for service connection in an August 2020 rating decision. In May 2021, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996 seeking higher level review of the August 2020 rating decision. The July 2021 rating decision identified a duty to assist error for a low back condition. An August 2022 rating decision awarded service connection for degenerative disc disease other than intervertebral disc syndrome and assigned an initial 10 percent rating, effective March 9, 2020 and a 40 percent rating, effective October 29, 2021. The Veteran sought higher level review of the assigned effective dates in May 2023 and a September 2023 rating decision denied an earlier effective date for the ratings assigned for degenerative disc disease other than intervertebral disc syndrome. The Veteran appealed the effective date assigned for the 40 percent rating for degenerative disc disease other than intervertebral disc disease in the September 2024 VA Form 10182 and asserted that the staged rating was improper.

Turning to the evidence of record, an April 2020 VA back Disability Benefits Questionnaire (DBQ) report found that the Veteran does not now have and has not ever been diagnosed with a thoracolumbar spine condition. However, the examiner did note that the Veteran experienced chronic low back pain with no flare-ups but with some functional loss to include limitation from daily chores and activities, repetitive bending, heavy lifting, twisting, prolonged sitting, prolonged standing and exertional work. Active range of motion testing revealed forward flexion to 90 degrees, extension to zero degrees, right and left lateral flexion each to 30 degrees and right and left lateral rotation each to 30 degrees, all with pain. Repetitive use range of motion testing found that there was no additional loss of function or range of motion after three repetitions and that the examination was neither medically consistent nor inconsistent with the Veteran's statements describing functional loss with repetitive use over time. Repetitive use of over time range of motion testing revealed forward flexion to 85 degrees, extension as to 25 degrees, right and left lateral flexion was to 25 degrees each and 25 degrees to right and left lateral rotation was to 25 degrees each. The physical examination was not conducted during a flare-up, the examination was neither medically consistent or inconsistent with the Veteran's statements describing functional loss during flare-ups and the Veteran denied flare-ups. The examiner noted that passive range of motion testing was not performed as it was feasible to do this in a safe and reasonable manner, that the opposing joint assessment was not applicable as the spine does not have an opposing joint and that non-weight bearing assessment was not applicable. Physical examination was negative for guarding or muscle spasm of the thoracolumbar spine, radicular pain or other signs or symptoms due to radiculopathy, ankylosis, other neurologic abnormalities or findings related to a thoracolumbar spine condition or intervertebral disc disease of the thoracolumbar spine. The Veteran did not use any assistive devices as a normal mode of locomotion.

Based on the foregoing, the Board finds it is not factually ascertainable that a 40 percent rating for degenerative disc disease other than intervertebral disc disease is warranted prior to October 29, 2021. Specifically, the April 2020 VA examination found forward flexion to be to 85 degrees and the combined range of motion to be to 210 degrees, at worst, on repetitive range of motion testing, even in even in contemplation of functional loss due to symptoms such as pain, fatigue, weakness, lack of endurance, or incoordination, or as a result of repetitive motion and/or flare-ups. 

No report suggests that the specific findings on examination, in terms of range of motion, would change to the degree required for a higher rating during a flare-up, after repetitive use, due to pain, or with weight bearing, nor does any other evidence of record to include the Veteran's statements. While the Veteran has essentially stated that he has reduced motion in his spine, he has not described a range of motion which would warrant a higher rating. In this regard, the Veteran reported flare-ups but described the flare-ups as consisting of increased pain. The Veteran's statements do not show the requisite limitation of motion necessary for a higher rating. Treatment records do not show greater limitation of motion than the examination findings. Given the above, it is not factually ascertainable that a 40 percent rating for degenerative disc disease other than intervertebral disc disease is warranted prior to October 29, 2021 based on limitation of motion. 38 C.F.R.              §§ 4.40, 4.45, 4.59; DeLuca v. Brown, supra.

With regard to disabilities of the spine, VA is to evaluate any associated objective neurologic abnormalities under appropriate diagnostic criteria. See Note (1) of the General Rating Formula. In this regard, the Veteran is already service connected for right and left lower extremity radiculopathy and those ratings are not on appeal. De Hart v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 371 (2024). Further, the Board finds that his thoracolumbar spine degenerative arthritis with intervertebral disc syndrome does not result in any additional associated objective neurologic abnormalities, to include bladder or bowel incontinence prior to October 29, 2021. Neurologic abnormalities or findings related to the thoracolumbar spine degenerative arthritis with intervertebral disc syndrome such as bowel or bladder problems were not found on objective examination in April 2020. Therefore, absent evidence of objective neurologic abnormalities of bladder or bowel incontinence, the Board finds that separate ratings for such conditions are not warranted and that it is not factually ascertainable that a 40 percent rating for degenerative disc disease other than intervertebral disc disease prior to October 29, 2021 based upon neurologic abnormalities.

The Board has also considered whether a higher rating is warranted based upon ankylosis or the functional equivalent of ankylosis, See Lewis v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 259 (1992) (ankylosis is defined as "immobility and consolidation of a joint due to disease, injury, surgical procedure"); Chavis v. McDonough, 34 Vet. App. 1 (2021) (a veteran might be eligible for a higher rating if, due to weakness, fatigability, lack of coordination, restricted or excess movement, or pain on movement during flare-ups, his symptoms cause him to experience the functional equivalent of ankylosis).

In this case, the Board finds that functional ankylosis equivalent of unfavorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine or unfavorable ankylosis of the entire spine was not shown by the record. The examiners above provided range of motion tests in weight-bearing and in nonweight-bearing and showed the Veteran continued to retain movement and some range of motion in his lumbar spine. As noted, the Veteran's symptoms and reported functional impairment are described above, to include limitation of motion, flare-ups, and their frequency and severity. However, difficulty on movement, to include pain and limitation, does not equate to unfavorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine or unfavorable ankylosis of the entire spine. The Veteran has not alleged, and the record does not suggest, that he experiences difficulty walking because of a limited line of vision, restricted opening of the mouth and chewing, breathing limited to diaphragmatic respiration, gastrointestinal symptoms due to pressure of the costal margin on the abdomen, dyspnea of dysphagia, atlantoaxial or cervical subluxation or dislocation or neurological symptoms due to nerve root stretching. Accordingly, functional ankylosis equivalent of unfavorable ankylosis of the entire thoracolumbar spine or unfavorable ankylosis of the entire spine has not been shown at any time during the period on appeal. The Board finds that it is not factually ascertainable that a 40 percent rating for degenerative disc disease other than intervertebral disc disease prior to October 29, 2021 based upon ankylosis.

With regard to intervertebral disc syndrome, the evidence must demonstrate incapacitating episodes lasting a total duration of at least four weeks during the past twelve months to warrant an increased rating. In this case, there is no evidence of incapacitating episodes having a total duration of at least six weeks during the past 12 months. It is noteworthy that during all the above cited VA examinations, although the Veteran was noted to have intervertebral disc syndrome, the evidence does not reflect and the Veteran has not alleged, incapacitating episodes to include doctor prescribed bedrest. As such, there is no clinical of record showing the Veteran had incapacitating episodes with bed rest that was prescribed by a physician during the period in question and the Veteran has not made such allegation. Therefore, the Board finds that it is not factually ascertainable that a 40 percent rating for degenerative disc disease other than intervertebral disc disease prior to October 29, 2021 based upon intervertebral disc disease.

Accordingly, the Board finds that an effective date prior to October 29, 2021 for the award of a 40 percent rating for degenerative disc disease other than intervertebral disc disease is not warranted. The appeal is denied. 38 U.S.C.              § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, supra.

 

 

KRISTY L. ZADORA

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Audrey Kim, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.