Citation Nr: A25034255
Decision Date: 04/14/25	Archive Date: 04/14/25

DOCKET NO. 240716-455065
DATE: April 14, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an initial compensable rating of 10 percent, but no higher, for right knee disability is granted.

Entitlement to an initial compensable rating of 10 percent, but no higher, for right ankle disability is granted.

Entitlement to an initial compensable rating of 10 percent, but no higher, for left ankle disability is granted.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran's right knee disability manifests in painful motion; however, at no point during the appeal period did the Veteran's right knee disability result in instability, ankylosis, dislocated semilunar cartilage, removal of semilunar cartilage, limitation of motion, malunion or nonunion of tibia and fibula, medial tibial stress syndrome (MTSS) or shin splints, or genu recurvatum.

2. The Veteran's right ankle disability manifests in painful motion; however, at no point during the appeal period did the Veteran's right ankle disability result in dorsiflexion less than 5 degrees or plantar flexion less than 10 degrees.

3. The Veteran's left ankle disability manifests in painful motion; however, at no point during the appeal period did the Veteran's left ankle disability result in dorsiflexion less than 5 degrees or plantar flexion less than 10 degrees.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for an initial 10 percent rating, and no higher, have been met throughout the appeal period for the Veteran's right knee disability.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.2, 4.3, 4.7, 4.10, 4.21, 4.59, 4.71a, Diagnostic Codes 5256-5263.

2. The criteria for an initial 10 percent rating, and no higher, have been met throughout the appeal period for the Veteran's right ankle disability.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.2, 4.3, 4.7, 4.10, 4.21, 4.59, 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5271.

3. The criteria for an initial 10 percent rating, and no higher, have been met throughout the appeal period for the Veteran's left ankle disability.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.2, 4.3, 4.7, 4.10, 4.21, 4.59, 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5271.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from November 1988 to August 2010.

For the right knee and right and left ankle initial rating claims, the rating decision on appeal was issued in September 2023 and constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.  In the July 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, for the initial rating claims, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the September 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

For the service connection for OSA claim, the AMA rating decision on appeal was issued in October 2023.  In the July 2024 Notice of Disagreement, the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, for the service connection claim, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the October 2023 AOJ decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  However, because the Board is remanding the service connection claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

The Board has limited the discussion below to the relevant evidence required to support its findings of fact and conclusions of law, as well as to the specific contentions regarding the case as raised directly by the Veteran and those reasonably raised by the record.  See Scott v. McDonald, 789 F.3d 1375, 1381 (Fed. Cir. 2015); Robinson v. Peake, 21 Vet. App. 545, 552 (2008).

Ratings

Disability evaluations are determined by the application of the facts presented to VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities (Rating Schedule) at 38 C.F.R. Part 4.  The percentage ratings contained in the Rating Schedule represent, as far as can be practicably determined, the average impairment in earning capacity resulting from diseases and injuries incurred or aggravated during military service and the residual conditions in civilian occupations.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.321(a), 4.1.

Any reasonable doubt regarding the degree of disability should be resolved in favor of the claimant.  38 C.F.R. § 4.3.  Where there is a question as to which of two evaluations shall be applied, the higher rating will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that evaluation.  Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7.

In evaluating the severity of a particular disability, it is essential to consider its history.  38 C.F.R. § 4.1; Peyton v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 282 (1991); Schafrath v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 589 (1995). 

Separate ratings can be assigned for separate periods of time based on the facts found, a practice known as "staged" ratings.  See Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007).  

The evaluation of the same disability under several diagnostic codes, known as pyramiding, must be avoided; separate ratings may be assigned for distinct disabilities resulting from the same injury only where the symptomatology for one condition is not duplicative or overlapping with the symptomatology of the other condition.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.14; see also Esteban v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 259, 261-62 (1994).

When evaluating musculoskeletal disabilities based on limitation of motion, 38 C.F.R. § 4.40 requires consideration of functional loss caused by pain or other factors listed in that section that could occur during flare-ups or after repeated use and, therefore, not be reflected on range-of-motion testing.  Under 38 C.F.R. § 4.45, consideration is also given to less movement than normal, more movement than normal, weakened movement, excess fatigability, incoordination, and pain on movement.  See DeLuca v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 202 (1995); see also Mitchell v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 32, 44 (2011).  Nonetheless, even when the background factors listed in § 4.40 or 4.45 are relevant when evaluating a disability, the rating is assigned based on the extent to which motion is limited, pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a; a separate or higher rating under § 4.40 or 4.45 itself is not appropriate.  See Thompson v. McDonald, 815 F.3d 781, 785 (Fed. Cir. 2016) ("[I]t is clear that the guidance of § 4.40 is intended to be used in understanding the nature of the veteran's disability, after which a rating is determined based on the § 4.71a criteria.").

Under 38 C.F.R. § 4.59, painful motion is a factor to be considered with any form of arthritis; however, 38 C.F.R. § 4.59 is not limited to disabilities involving arthritis.  See Burton v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 1 (2011).  38 C.F.R. § 4.59 provides that it is the intention to recognize actually painful, unstable, or malaligned joints, due to healed injury, as entitled to at least the minimum compensable rating for the joint.  A rating based on this section must be applied in connection with the criteria found in a particular diagnostic code.  Sowers v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 472, 479 (2016).

In Correia v. McDonald, 28 Vet. App. 158 (2016), the Court held that the final sentence of 38 C.F.R. § 4.59 requires that the examiner record the results of range of motion testing "for pain on both active and passive motion [and] in weight-bearing and non-weight-bearing and, if possible, with range of motion measurements of the opposite undamaged joint." 

In Sharp v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 26 (2017), the Court held that VA examiners must obtain information about the severity, frequency, duration, precipitating and alleviating factors, and extent of functional impairment of flares from the veterans themselves, when a flare-up is not observable at the time of examination.

The Board further acknowledges that VA is required "to discount beneficial medication effects when relevant rating criteria do not specifically contemplate medication use," unless such effects are otherwise contemplated in a particular diagnostic code.  Ingram v. Collins, __ Vet. App. __, No. 23-1798, 2025 U.S. App. Vet. Claims LEXIS 327, *1 (Mar. 12, 2025). 

In rendering this decision, the Board has reviewed all evidence of record whether discussed in detail.  See Newhouse v. Nicholson, 497 F.3d 1298, 1302 (Fed. Cir. 2007) (holding the Board must only discuss the evidence which is relevant to the issues on appeal). 

To the extent the evidence is found in "approximate balance," the Board will afford the benefit of the doubt in favor of the Veteran.  Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed, Cir. 2021) (holding that exact equipoise is not required for the benefit of the doubt to be applied, but rather the Veteran is entitled to the benefit of the doubt when the evidence is in approximate balance or "nearly equal").

1. Entitlement to an initial compensable rating of 10 percent, but no higher, for right knee disability is granted.

The Veteran is seeking a higher initial rating for his right knee disability, currently rated noncompensable under 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5257, for recurrent subluxation or lateral instability.

Under Diagnostic Code 5257, for recurrent subluxation or lateral instability, a 30 percent rating is warranted for unrepaired or failed repair of complete ligament tear causing persistent instability and a medical provider prescribing both an assistive device (e.g., cane(s), crutch(es), walker) and bracing for ambulation.  A 20 percent rating is warranted for either (a) sprain, incomplete ligament tear, or repaired complete ligament tear causing persistent instability, and a medical provider prescribing a brace and/or assistive device (e.g., cane(s), crutch(es), walker) for ambulation; or (b) unrepaired or failed repair of complete ligament tear causing persistent instability, and a medical provider prescribing either an assistive device (e.g., cane(s), crutch(es), walker) or bracing for ambulation.  A 10 percent rating is warranted for sprain, incomplete ligament tear, or complete ligament tear (repaired, unrepaired, or failed repair) causing persistent instability, without a prescription from a medical provider for an assistive device (e.g., cane(s), crutch(es), walker) or bracing for ambulation.

Diagnostic Code 5257 also provides for ratings based on patellar instability.  A 30 percent rating is warranted for a diagnosed condition involving the patellofemoral complex with recurrent instability after surgical repair that requires a prescription by a medical provider for a brace and either a cane or a walker.  A 20 percent rating is warranted for a diagnosed condition involving the patellofemoral complex with recurrent instability after surgical repair that requires a prescription by a medical provider for one of the following: a brace, cane, or walker.  A 10 percent rating is warranted for a diagnosed condition involving the patellofemoral complex with recurrent instability (with or without history of surgical repair) that does not require a prescription from a medical provider for a brace, cane, or walker.  Note [1] to Diagnostic Code 5257 states that for patellar instability, the patellofemoral complex consists of the quadriceps tendon, the patella, and the patellar tendon.  Note [2] to Diagnostic Code 5257 states that a surgical procedure that does not involve repair of one or more patellofemoral components that contribute to the underlying instability shall not qualify as surgical repair for patellar instability (including, but not limited to, arthroscopy to remove loose bodies and joint aspiration.

Also relevant to any discussion of knee disabilities are the criteria under Diagnostic Codes 5256 through 5263.  38 C.F.R. § 4.71a.

Under Diagnostic Code 5256, favorable ankylosis of the knee, in full extension or in slight flexion between 0 degrees and 10 degrees warrants a 30 percent disability rating; ankylosis in flexion between 10 degrees and 20 degrees warrants a 40 percent disability rating; ankylosis in flexion between 20 degrees and 45 degrees warrants a 50 percent disability rating; and extremely unfavorable ankylosis in flexion at an angle of 45 degrees or more warrants a 60 percent disability rating.

Under Diagnostic Code 5258, a claimant is entitled to a 20 percent rating for dislocated semilunar cartilage with frequent episodes of "locking," pain, and effusion into the joint.

Under Diagnostic Code 5259, a 10 percent evaluation is assigned for symptomatic removal of semilunar cartilage.

Under Diagnostic Code 5260, for limitation of flexion of the leg, a noncompensable rating is warranted for flexion limited to 60 degrees.  A 10 percent rating is warranted for flexion limited to 45 degrees.  A 20 percent rating is warranted for flexion limited to 30 degrees.  A 30 percent rating is warranted for flexion limited to 15 degrees.  

Under Diagnostic Code 5261, extension of the leg limited to 5 degrees is rated noncompensably (0 percent) disabling; extension of the leg limited to 10 degrees is rated 10 percent disabling; extension of the leg limited to 15 degrees is rated 20 percent disabling; extension of the leg limited to 20 degrees is rated 30 percent disabling; extension of the leg limited to 30 degrees is rated 40 percent disabling; and extension of the leg limited to 45 degrees is rated 50 percent disabling.

Diagnostic Code 5262 provides for a 40 percent rating for nonunion of the tibia and fibula, with loose motion, requiring brace.  Malunion of the tibia and fibula are to be evaluated under diagnostic codes 5256, 5257, 5260, or 5261 for the knee or 5270 or 5271 for the ankle, whichever results in the highest evaluation.  Separate ratings are also provided for medial tibial stress syndrome (MTSS) or shin splints.

Under Diagnostic Code 5263, a 10 percent rating is warranted for genu recurvatum (acquired, traumatic, with weakness and insecurity in weight-bearing objectively demonstrated).

Normal ranges of motion of the knee are to 0 degrees in extension, and to 140 degrees in flexion.  38 C.F.R. § 4.71, Plate II.

The Veteran's rating claim stems from his initial grant of service connection.  Therefore, the period on appeal goes back to May 9, 2023, the date of service connection.

Turning to the evidence, in a May 2023 statement, the Veteran reported that his right knee symptoms include pain with motion, locking, and swelling.  He reported that activities cause pain, so he avoids activities, and that he takes Motrin to help with pain.

The Veteran underwent VA examination in August 2023.  The Veteran was diagnosed with right knee strain.  He reported achy, intermittent, mild pain without radiation.  He used NSAIDs and physical therapy.  The Veteran reported no flare-ups and no functional impairment, including after repeated use over time.  He reported no history of instability or recurrent subluxation of the knee.  Active and passive range of motion testing was normal, with pain on flexion and extension.  The examiner noted pain on motion which did not result in functional loss.  Repetitive use testing did not result in any limitation of motion or functional loss.  The examiner opined that procured evidence did not suggest that pain, fatigability, weakness, lack of endurance, or incoordination would significantly limit functional ability with repeated use over time or during flare-ups.  There was no ankylosis.  There was no recurrent subluxation or persistent instability, no ligament tear, and no recurrent patellar instability.  There was no recurrent patellar dislocation, shin splints (medial tibial stress syndrome), stress fracture, or any other tibial or fibular impairment.  The Veteran had not been diagnosed with any meniscal condition.  The Veteran did not use any assistive devices as a normal mode of locomotion.  There were no other pertinent physical findings, complications, conditions, signs, or symptoms related to the right knee disability.  

The Board notes at the outset that the evidence of record at the time of the September 2023 rating decision is adequate to determine the extent and severity of the Veteran's right knee disability.  The August 2023 examiner tested for pain on both active and passive motion, in weight-bearing and non-weight-bearing, in accordance with Correia.  The Veteran did not report flare-ups.  Given the totality of the information in this case, the Board finds that the requirements of DeLuca, Correia, and Sharp have been adequately addressed.  DeLuca v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. at 202; Sharp v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. at 32; Correia v. McDonald, 28 Vet. App. at 158.  

With regard to Ingram, although the August 2023 VA examiner noted the Veteran's report that he would use NSAIDs for pain, there was no indication that the examiner considered the ameliorative effects of medication in rendering the findings in the report nor did the Veteran indicate he was on any pain medications at the time of the examination.  The examiner considered the Veteran's lay description of symptoms and opined regarding flare-ups and functional impairments due to pain and range of motion limitations in all worse-case scenarios.  There is no indication that the examiner considered the ameliorative effects of medication but rather the examiner appears to have considered the Veteran's description of when his pain is at its worst.  The Board, too, in rendering this decision, resolved all doubt in the Veteran's favor.  As such, the Board concludes the examination of record is adequate to base a decision.  Cf. Ingram v. Collins, ___ Vet. App. ___ , No. 23-1798, 2025 U.S. App. Vet. Claims LEXIS 327, *1 (March 12, 2025).

In light of the Veteran's reports of pain with motion, which the Board finds credible, the Board resolves doubt in favor of the Veteran and finds that a 10 percent rating is warranted for the Veteran's right knee disability throughout the appeal period under 38 C.F.R. § 4.59.

However, a rating in excess of 10 percent is not warranted at any time during the appeal period under any applicable Diagnostic Code for the knee.  Rather, the August 2023 VA examination is negative for any findings of instability, ankylosis, dislocated semilunar cartilage, removal of semilunar cartilage, limitation of motion, malunion or nonunion of tibia and fibula, MTSS or shin splints, or genu recurvatum, which might provide the basis for a higher rating.  The Board acknowledges the Veteran's lay reports of symptoms, including pain and increased pain with activity.  The Board notes that the Veteran is compensated for his reports of painful motion with the newly assigned 10 percent rating.  The evidence persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran's right knee disability meets the requirements for a higher rating under any Diagnostic Code relating to disabilities of the knee.

The Board determines that the Veteran's right knee disability is fully capable of evaluation under the rating schedule.  There is no applicable provision that would warrant a higher rating in this case.

In conclusion, the Board finds that a 10 percent rating is appropriate throughout the claims period, from May 9, 2023, for the Veteran's right knee disability.  The evidence persuasively weighs against a rating in excess of 10 percent.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

2. Entitlement to an initial compensable rating of 10 percent, but no higher, for right ankle disability is granted.

3. Entitlement to an initial compensable rating of 10 percent, but no higher, for left ankle disability is granted.

The Veteran is seeking higher initial ratings for his right and left ankle disabilities, currently rated noncompensable under 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5271, for limitation of motion of the ankle.  

Under Diagnostic Code 5271, a 10 percent rating is warranted for moderate limited motion of the ankle (less than 15 degrees dorsiflexion or less than 30 degrees plantar flexion).  A 20 percent rating is warranted for marked limited motion of the ankle (less than 5 degrees dorsiflexion or less than 10 degrees plantar flexion).

Other diagnostic codes relevant to the ankles include 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5270 through Diagnostic Code 5274.

Under Diagnostic Code 5270, a 20 percent rating is warranted for ankylosis of the ankle in plantar flexion, less than 30 degrees.  A 30 percent rating is warranted for ankylosis of the ankle in plantar flexion between 30 degrees and 40 degrees, or in dorsiflexion, between zero degrees and 10 degrees.  A maximum 40 percent rating is warranted for ankylosis of the ankle in plantar flexion at more than 40 degrees, or in dorsiflexion at more than 10 degrees or with abduction, adduction, inversion, or eversion deformity.

Under Diagnostic Code 5272, a 10 percent rating is warranted for ankylosis of the subastragalar or tarsal joint in good weight-bearing position and a 20 percent rating is warranted for ankylosis of the subastragalar or tarsal joint in poor weight-bearing position.

Under Diagnostic Code 5273, a 10 percent rating is warranted for malunion of the os calcis or astragalus with moderate deformity.  A maximum 20 percent rating is warranted for malunion of the os calcis or astragalus with marked deformity.

Diagnostic Code 5274 provides a maximum 20 percent rating for astragalectomy.

The Veteran's rating claims stem from his initial grants of service connection.  Therefore, the period on appeal goes back to May 9, 2023, the date of service connection.

Turning to the evidence, in a May 2023 statement, the Veteran reported that his right ankle symptoms include pain, swelling, and muscle fatigue, and that his left ankle symptoms include pain, swelling, weakness, and muscle fatigue.  He reported that high impact activities exacerbate his ankle pain, so he limits his activities.  He reported that he uses Motrin and ice/heat to help with pain.

The Veteran underwent VA examination in August 2023.  The Veteran was diagnosed with right and left ankle lateral collateral ligament sprain.  The Veteran reported achy, intermittent, mild pain without radiation.  He reported that he used NSAIDs and physical therapy.  He reported no flare-ups or functional loss, including after repeated use over time.  He reported no history of instability of the ankle.  Active and passive range of motion testing was normal for both the right and left ankle, with plantar flexion to 45 degrees and dorsiflexion to 20 degrees.  The Veteran showed pain on both active and passive motion, which did not result in functional loss.  Repetitive use testing did not result in any limitation of range of motion or additional loss of function.  The examiner opined that the evidence did not suggest that pain, fatigability, weakness, lack of endurance, or incoordination would significantly limit functional ability with repeated use over time or during flare-ups.  There was no muscle atrophy.  There was no ankylosis.  Joint stability tests were normal.  There were no shin splints (medial tibial stress syndrome), stress fractures, achilles tendonitis, achilles tendon rupture, malunion of calcaneus (os calcis) or talus (astragalus), or talectomy (astragalectomy).  There was no objective evidence of crepitus or localized tenderness or pain on palpation of the joint.  The Veteran did not use any assistive devices as a normal mode of locomotion.  There were no other pertinent physical findings, complications, conditions, signs, or symptoms related to the ankle conditions.

The Board notes at the outset that the evidence of record at the time of the September 2023 rating decision is adequate to determine the extent and severity of the Veteran's right and left ankle disabilities.  The August 2023 examiner tested for pain on both active and passive motion, in weight-bearing and non-weight-bearing, in accordance with Correia.  The Veteran did not report flare-ups.  Given the totality of the information in this case, the Board finds that the requirements of DeLuca, Correia, and Sharp have been adequately addressed.  DeLuca v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. at 202; Sharp v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. at 32; Correia v. McDonald, 28 Vet. App. at 158.  

With regard to Ingram, although the August 2023 VA examiner noted the Veteran's report that he would use NSAIDs for pain, there was no indication that the examiner considered the ameliorative effects of medication in rendering the findings in the report nor did the Veteran indicate he was on any pain medications at the time of the examination.  The examiner considered the Veteran's lay description of symptoms and opined regarding flare-ups and functional impairments due to pain and range of motion limitations in all worst-case scenarios.  There is no indication that the examiner considered the ameliorative effects of medication but rather the examiner appears to have considered the Veteran's description of when his pain is at its worst.  The Board, too, in rendering this decision, resolved all doubt in the Veteran's favor.  As such, the Board concludes the examination of record is adequate to base a decision.  Cf. Ingram v. Collins, ___ Vet. App. ___ , No. 23-1798, 2025 U.S. App. Vet. Claims LEXIS 327, *1 (March 12, 2025).

In light of the Veteran's reports of pain with motion, which the Board finds credible, the Board resolves doubt in favor of the Veteran and finds that 10 percent ratings are warranted for the Veteran's right and left ankle disabilities throughout the appeal period under 38 C.F.R. § 4.59.

However, ratings in excess of 10 percent are not warranted at any time during the appeal period as the Veteran's ankle disabilities are not more nearly approximate to limitation of motion defined as less than 5 degrees dorsiflexion or less than 10 degrees plantar flexion at any time during the appeal period.  Rather, the August 2023 VA examination showed no limitation of motion in either ankle.  The Board acknowledges the Veteran's lay reports of symptoms.  The Veteran reported pain, including increased pain with activities, but did not report any limitations in range of motion.  The Board notes that the Veteran is compensated for his reports of painful motion with the newly assigned 10 percent ratings.  The evidence persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran's right or left ankle exhibits limitation of motion meeting the degree measurements under Diagnostic Code 5271 for a rating in excess of 10 percent.

The Board has also considered whether any other Diagnostic Codes related to disabilities of the ankle would provide for a higher disability rating.  However, the evidence does not reflect that the symptoms would warrant a higher rating under a different Diagnostic Code.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a.  Since ankylosis has not been shown, the provisions of Diagnostic Code 5270 and 5272, which govern ankylosis, are not applicable to the current claim.  With regard to Diagnostic Code 5273, the examiner noted no malunion of the os calcis or astragalus.  Finally, with regard to Diagnostic Code 5274, the examiner noted no astragalectomy of the ankle, which involves removal of the ankle bone.

The Board determines that the Veteran's right and left ankle disabilities are fully capable of evaluation under the rating schedule.  There is no applicable provision that would warrant a higher rating in this case.

In conclusion, the Board finds that 10 percent ratings are appropriate throughout the claims period, from May 9, 2023, for the Veteran's right and left ankle disabilities.  The evidence persuasively weighs against ratings in excess of 10 percent.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea is remanded.

This matter must be remanded to correct a duty to assist error that occurred prior to the October 2023 rating decision, in not obtaining an adequate medical opinion.

The Veteran seeks service connection for obstructive sleep apnea, asserting that his sleep apnea is secondary to his service-connected disabilities through an obesity link.  The opinions of record at the time of the October 2023 rating decision were insufficient to render a decision on this theory - constituting a pre-decisional duty to assist error.  

Secondary service connection requires sufficient evidence to establish "but for" causation or aggravation between the disability and the service-connected disability.  Spicer v. McDonough, 61 F.4th 1360 (Fed. Cir. 2023).  

Obesity may qualify as an "intermediate step" between a service-connected disability and a current disability under a secondary basis under 38 C.F.R. § 3.310.  Walsh v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 300 (2020).  In particular, service connection may be warranted if the following questions are answered in the affirmative: (1) whether the service-connected disability caused the Veteran to become obese or aggravated the Veteran's obesity; (2) if so, whether the obesity/aggravation of obesity as a result of the service-connected disability was a substantial factor in causing the current disability; and (3) whether the current disability would not have occurred but for (the obesity caused/obesity aggravated by) the service-connected disability. Walsh v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 300 (2020).

The Board notes that the Veteran submitted a May 2023 private opinion.  Although the private opinion attempts to link the Veteran's sleep apnea to weight and his weight to his service-connected musculoskeletal disabilities, the opinion is not sufficient to support a grant as it does not contain an adequate rationale addressing the Veteran's particular circumstances.  The conclusions in the private opinion appear inconsistent with the severity of his service-connected musculoskeletal disabilities and limitations from such disabilities as described in the Veteran's VA examinations for such disabilities.  The opinion does not adequately address/resolve such conflicts between its conclusions and other evidence in the record.  Accordingly, remand is warranted to obtain additional medical opinion regarding the obesity link argument and correct this pre-decisional duty to assist error in not obtaining adequate opinion.  Moreover, in light of the psychiatric examiner's notation of motivation problems and sleep disturbances from the Veteran's service-connected psychiatric disability, medical opinion should have been obtained to address the potential impact of the Veteran's service-connected psychiatric disability on his obesity, a pre-decisional duty to assist error.

In addition, the claims file at the time of the October 2023 rating decision raised additional theories which should have been addressed in VA medical opinion.  In a December 2010 VA examination months after separation from service, the VA examiner noted a "possible related symptom" for "sleep apnea" of "sleep disruption," following the Veteran's reports of problems sleeping while deployed.  In light of this notation and the Veteran's acknowledged Gulf War service, VA medical opinion should have been obtained regarding whether the Veteran's sleep apnea is directly related to service or whether he has a diagnosed medically unexplained chronic multi-symptom illness (MUCMI) responsible for the manifestations claimed as sleep apnea.  Accordingly, remand is warranted to obtain such medical opinion and correct this pre-decisional duty to assist error.

The Board notes that VA medical opinions have been obtained regarding whether the Veteran's sleep apnea was caused by his in-service toxic exposure risk activity or was directly caused by his service-connected disabilities, but the above theories of secondary service connection via an obesity link, direct service connection, and MUCMI require additional medical opinion.

Remand is appropriate to correct this pre-decisional duty-to-assist error and obtain corrective medical opinions.

While the Board is remanding this matter at this time for additional development, the Board is mindful of the holding in Smith v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 332 (2020) and the impact of implicit credibility determinations within remand orders.  The Board does not at this time make any determinations regarding the credibility of any evidence currently of record, to include those described in this remand.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Ask an appropriate examiner to review the Veteran's file.  The necessity of an in-person examination is left to the discretion of the examiner.

The examiner should opine as to the following:

-	Does the Veteran have a diagnosed illness but the result of a medically unexplained chronic multi-symptom illness (MUCMI) responsible for the manifestations claimed as sleep apnea? 

NOTE: the term "MUCMI" refers to an illness where either the etiology or the pathophysiology of the illness is inconclusive. 	 

-	If the Veteran does not have a diagnosed MUCMI, the examiner should opine as to whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's OSA had an onset in service or is otherwise related to service, to include his in-service sleep disruptions.

-	If not, the examiner should opine regarding:

o	Whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's service-connected disabilities (including his musculoskeletal and psychiatric disabilities, and to include in combination) caused the Veteran to become obese or aggravated the Veteran's obesity;

o	If so, whether it is at least as likely as not that the obesity or aggravation of obesity as a result of the service-connected disabilities was a substantial factor in causing the current OSA disability;

o	If so, the examiner should opine whether it is at least as likely as not that the current OSA disability would not have occurred but for the obesity caused or aggravation of obesity by the service-connected disability.

NOTE: If the clinician determines that the claimed condition was aggravated with an intermediate step of obesity, the clinician must provide the baseline level of severity of sleep apnea established by medical evidence created before the onset of aggravation or by the earliest medical evidence created at any time between the onset of aggravation and the receipt of medical evidence establishing the current level of severity of sleep apnea.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(b).

The examiner should consider all relevant medical and lay evidence of record.

The examiner must specifically address the Veteran's reports, the May 2023 private opinion, and the December 2010 VA examination notation of a "possible" sleep apnea-related symptom.

If the Veteran's reports are discounted, the examiner should provide a rationale for doing so (e.g., whether there is any medical reason to accept or reject his contentions).

The examiner is asked to explain the reasons behind any opinions expressed.

2. After the above development, and any additionally indicated development, has been completed, readjudicate the issue on appeal.

 

 

SHEREEN M. MARCUS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	A. Purcell, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.