Citation Nr: A25034244
Decision Date: 04/14/25	Archive Date: 04/14/25

DOCKET NO. 240411-432546
DATE: April 14, 2025

ORDER

Service connection for a right knee condition is denied.

Service connection for a left knee condition is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The evidence of record persuasively favors the conclusion that it is less likely than not that the Veteran's right knee condition, including osteoarthritis, either began in or was otherwise caused by his active service, or was caused or aggravated by his service-connected shin splints.

2. The evidence of record persuasively favors the conclusion that it is less likely than not that the Veteran's left knee condition, including osteoarthritis, either began in or was otherwise caused by his active service, or was caused or aggravated by his service-connected shin splints.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for service connection for a right knee condition have not been met. 38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.304, 3.310.

2. The criteria for service connection for a left knee condition have not been met. 38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.304, 3.310.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran had active service from August 1990 to August 1994. 

This matter stems from an April 2024 rating decision that denied service connection for a bilateral knee condition.

The Veteran timely appealed the April 2024 rating decision by filing a VA Form 10182, wherein he selected the direct review docket within the Veterans Appeals Improvement Modernization Act (AMA) review system.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the February 2024 rating decision that was subsequently subject to higher-level review in the April 2024 rating decision.  By operation of law, the Board is precluded from considering evidence submitted during a period after the AOJ issued the February 2024 rating decision that was subject to higher-level review.  38?C.F.R. §?20.301. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any additional evidence in conjunction with his appeal, he may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38?C.F.R. §?3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Service Connection

Service connection will be granted if the evidence demonstrates that a current disability resulted from an injury or disease incurred in or aggravated by active military service. 38?U.S.C. §?1110; 38?C.F.R. §?3.303. Service connection requires competent evidence showing: (1) the existence of a present disability; (2) in-service relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred in or aggravated during service (nexus). Shedden v. Principi, 381 F. 3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

Service connection may also be established on a secondary basis for a disability which is proximately due to, or aggravated by, a service-connected disability. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a).

Service connection may also be established with certain chronic diseases based upon a legal presumption by showing that the disorder manifested itself to a degree of 10 percent disabling or more within one year from the date of separation from service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 1112, 1113, 1137; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307, 3.309(a). While arthritis is a chronic disease listed under 38 C.F.R. § 3.309, it was not shown to have manifested in the Veteran's knees to a degree of 10 percent or more within one year from the date of separation.  As the Veteran was diagnosed with osteoarthritis in 2014 (according to the March 2019 VA examination), the chronic disease presumption does not apply to the Veteran's claims.

The Veteran's service treatment records (STRs) do not show any complaints of or treatment for a bilateral knee condition. However, his records do show he was treated for a bilateral leg condition (shin splints), for which he is already service connected.

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in December 2010 at which he reported that a private doctor told him he had arthritis in both knees (no x-rays were completed), and that he (the Veteran) believed his knee arthritis was caused by lack of treatment from stress fractures. The Veteran told the VA examiner that he had worked as a police officer for the previous two years, and that prior to that he had worked as a department of corrections officer for six years, and as a construction worker since 1994.  The VA examiner stated that there was no objective evidence of bilateral knee osteoarthritis upon examination, but that the Veteran did have diagnoses of patellofemoral syndrome. The VA examiner also stated that the Veteran suffered a bilateral tibial fracture that was nondisplaced and successfully treated, and that it would be unlikely that his current bilateral knee patellofemoral syndrome was caused by or the result of the resolved service-connected condition.

The Veteran was afforded another VA examination in March 2019 and was diagnosed with knee joint osteoarthritis, as well as degenerative joint disease of the knees bilaterally.

The Veteran was afforded another VA examination in November 2023 and was diagnosed with bilateral knee osteoarthritis. He stated that he began having knee pain in 1994 and that it was painful to stand, run, and jump. The VA examiner opined it was less likely than not that the Veteran's bilateral knee condition was due to his service-connected shin splints because his gait was normal, he had no tenderness on palpitation and the imaging and examination were consistent with age related mild osteoarthritis of the knees bilaterally. 

The Veteran's post-service treatment records showed that in 2009, he was seen for left knee pain and reported it started after running a lot as part of police school training. Treatment notes from 2019 showed early degenerative changes of the patellofemoral compartment in the left knee. Imaging results of the right knee showed mild degenerative disease. The Veteran's gait was routinely shown to be normal. 

In August 2023, the Veteran submitted an article that stated knee instability was associated with greater odds of moderate to severe gait related pain.

In his August 2023 Supplemental Claim, the Veteran claimed service connection for his bilateral knee condition secondary to his service-connected shin splints and tibial stress fractures. He stated that these conditions caused him to walk unevenly and that his symptoms included pain, swelling, instability, stiffness, and popping. He also stated that using the stairs, running/jogging, squatting, jumping, performing side to side movements, and carrying heavy objects caused pain. He reported using a knee brace to assist with walking and that he received cortisone shots. 

Here, the Veteran has claimed that his bilateral knee conditions were caused by his service-connected shin conditions. However, the evidence shows that the cause of the Veteran's knee conditions was not his service-connected conditions, but rather age-related degeneration.

The Veteran reported that his service-connected shin condition caused him to walk unevenly, and then submitted an article noting that knee instability was associated with greater odds of moderate to severe gait related pain. However, the Veteran's gait was consistently shown to be normal on examination, and it has not been noted by a medical professional that his service-connected shin splints caused any altered gait which affected his knees.

The Board acknowledges the Veteran's contention that he believed his knee conditions were caused by a lack of treatment for stress fractures. However, determining the etiology of the Veteran's claimed bilateral knee condition is a medically complex question which the Veteran lacks the medical training and expertise to answer.  See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 n.4 (Fed. Cir. 2007). To address the questions the Veteran lacked the medical expertise to answer, VA obtained a medical opinion to consider the Veteran's symptoms, lay statements and medical history and to opine as to whether the Veteran's bilateral knee conditions were caused by his service-connected shin splints.

The November 2023 VA examiner provided a negative VA opinion, finding that the imaging results were consistent with age-related mild osteoarthritis, which was supported by the fact that the Veteran's gait was normal and there was no pain on palpation. The evidence shows the Veteran was also able to perform labor intensive work post-service, including being a police officer, doing construction, and working for the department of corrections, and that the first time the Veteran mentioned knee pain was in March 2009 after running for his police academy training (15 years post service). The Board finds that this further supports the November 2023 VA examiner's conclusion that the Veteran's bilateral knee conditions were due to age, rather than his service-connected shin splints. Additionally, the November 2010 VA examiner also provided a negative opinion, finding that the Veteran's service-connected tibial fracture was non-displaced and successfully treated, and that it would be unlikely that that the Veteran's knee condition was the result of a resolved service-connected condition.

Overall, the Board finds that these opinions are supported by the additional evidence of record, in that the Veteran was shown to have mild osteoarthritis, and that his gait was normal post-service. 

As such, service connection for a bilateral knee condition is denied. 

 

MATTHEW W. BLACKWELDER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Elizabeth A. Gadson, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.