Citation Nr: A25034917
Decision Date: 04/16/25	Archive Date: 04/16/25

DOCKET NO. 240816-470633
DATE: April 16, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

The evidence is approximately balanced as to whether the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea was incurred in service.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Air Force from February 2003 to May 2013.

By way of history, the Veteran filed his initial claim for service connection for sleep apnea in January 2016. This was denied in a September 2016 rating decision. In April 2021, the Veteran filed a VA Form, 20-0995, Supplemental Claim Application seeking to readjudicate the prior claim. The RO again denied service connection for sleep apnea in a January 2022 rating decision. In May 2024 the Veteran filed a second VA Form, 20-0995, Supplemental Claim Application seeking to readjudicate the prior claim. The RO again denied service connection for sleep apnea in a July 2024 rating decision.

In August 2024, VA received a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), from the Veteran identifying the July 2024 supplemental claim rating decision denying service connection for obstructive sleep apnea and electing the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the July 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) supplemental claim decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. 

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea (OSA).

The Veteran contends that service connection for OSA is warranted as he developed symptoms of snoring and sleep disturbances in service which have continued to the present.

Service connection may be granted for disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.  The three-element test for service connection requires evidence of: (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury.  Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166 -67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

With respect to the first element needed to establish service connection, a current disability, the record on appeal contains clinical evidence of a diagnosis of OSA. In July 2016, the Veteran completed a sleep study as a result of which he was diagnosed with obstructive sleep apnea. In the rating decision on appeal, the RO made a favorable finding of a current disability. The Board is bound by this favorable finding, absent clear and unmistakable error. In that regard, the Board finds no error. Therefore, the criterion of a current disability is met.

With respect to the second element needed to substantiate a claim of service connection, the Veteran has reported throughout the entire appeal period that he experienced sleep-related symptoms both in and since his separation from active duty service. In this regard, the Board observes that lay evidence concerning continuity of symptoms after service, if deemed credible, may be determined to be competent evidence of continuity where the record otherwise lacks contemporaneous clinical evidence. Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331, 1337 (Fed. Cir. 2006). 

Turning first to in-service incurrence, in support of his claim, the Veteran submitted a statement from a fellow servicemember, S.L., indicating that he was the Veteran's roommate during active duty. He stated that the Veteran often snored. See correspondence from L.E. received in July 2024. The Veteran's spouse also submitted a statement in which she noted that after the Veteran returned from his first deployment to Afghanistan he began to snore and pause between breaths. She further attests that his snoring has continued since that time. As the Board has no reason to doubt the veracity of these supporting statements, and the Veteran's reports have been consistent throughout the appeal period, the Board finds them credible. 

In addition, the record contains in service evidence of sleep disturbance. A service treatment record dated January 2011 notes the Veteran reported "1 day of inadequate sleep in the past 30 days, [...] but, they often: [h]ave difficult falling asleep, staying asleep during the night, or waking up too early, which is making it difficult for them to do their work, take care of things at home, or get along with other people." Based on this entry, the Boards finds that the Veteran experienced symptoms consistent with sleep apnea, snoring and sleep disturbances while in service. The lay statements attesting to the onset of symptoms consistent with sleep apnea in combination with the clinical evidence in the Veteran's STRs supports a finding that the second Shedden element, an in-service incurrence of a disease or injury, is met.

Thus, the question becomes whether the Veteran's current disability is causally related to the symptoms experienced in service. On this question conflicting medical opinions have been provided.

The probative value of medical opinion evidence is based on the medical expert's personal examination of the patient, the physician's knowledge and skill in analyzing the data, and the medical conclusion that the physician reaches.  Guerrieri v. Brown, 4 Vet. App. 467, 470-71 (1993). Whether a physician provides a basis for a medical opinion goes to the weight or credibility of the evidence in the adjudication of the merits.  See Hernandez-Toyens v. West, 11 Vet. App. 379, 382 (1998).  Other factors for assessing the probative value of a medical opinion are the physician's access to the claims folder and the thoroughness and detail of the opinion.  See Prejean v. West, 13 Vet. App. 444, 448-9 (2000); Nieves-Rodriguez, 22 Vet. App. 295 (2008); Prejean v. West, 13 Vet. App. 444, 448-9 (2000).

In connection with his initial claim for service connection the Veteran was afforded a VA examination in June 2016. At that examination the Veteran reported that he began to have problems with snoring and increased fatigue after his second deployment. See June 2016 Sleep Apnea Disability Benefits Questionnaire (DBQ). No nexus opinion was provided in the report of examination; however, the Board notes the DBQ was completed by NP. M. Chavez, who provided an opinion several months later.

On September 5, 2016, NP. M. Chavez opined that "[s]leep apnea has not been associated with exposure to environmental hazards such as inhalation of fine grain sand, fuel or solvent fumes, insecticides or pesticides, or multiple vaccines. It is therefore not related to exposure of environmental hazards experienced during military service in Southwest Asia. HOWEVER, the Veteran's sleep apnea is a common cause of his [complaint of] fatigue while in the service and therefore should be direct service connected." 

The Board observes that this opinion was provided by a VA medical professional who possesses the necessary education, training, and expertise to provide the requested opinions.  Additionally, the opinion is also shown to have been based on a review of the Veteran's record and is accompanied by a sufficient explanation as to why the Veteran's OSA is directly connected to his service. The Board thus places great probative weight on the September 5, 2016, medical opinion.  

On September 13, 2016, Dr. W. Roche, using the DBQ provided by NP. Chavez, without conducting an examination of the Veteran, opined that there was "no causal nexus between one incidence of inadequate sleep and OSA." Dr. Roche thus provided a negative nexus opinion. However, Dr. Roche's conclusions were based, at least in part, on an inaccurate factual premise.  The opinion mischaracterized the Veteran's service treatment records, as the Veteran reported ongoing sleep difficulties though only reported inadequate sleep once. The opinion also seems to link the Veteran's sleep apnea to his current obesity without addressing his statements concerning symptoms presenting in service prior to his obesity. The examiner in essence impermissibly relied on the absence of in-service treatment records to support his negative opinion. See Dalton v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 23 (2007). Therefore, the Board assigns the September 13, 2016, medical opinion no probative weight.  See Reonal v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 458, 461 (1993). 

The RO subsequently denied the Veteran's claim without considering the September 5, 2016, positive nexus medical opinion. See September 2016 Rating Decision.

In connection with his April 2021 Supplemental Claim application the Veteran provided a positive private nexus opinion. After an examination of the Veteran, and a review of relevant medical history pertaining to the onset of snoring, fatigue, and other symptoms consistent with obstructive sleep apnea, the authoring doctor found that it was more likely than not that the Veteran's sleep apnea was related to his service. The doctor opined that the "severe nasal obstruction from airborne irritant exposure caused him to snore a lot and the tissue laxity with the redundant mucosa made it worse. The decreased muscle tone with REM sleep and airway collapse led to desaturation. The arousal with restoration of airway resulted in sleep fragmentation leading to daytime hypersomnolence." In evaluating the probative weight to be assigned to this opinion, the Board considers that the private doctor considered the Veteran's contentions, reviewed relevant medical records, and examined the Veteran in conjunction with opining for a nexus between the Veteran's current OSA and his active military service entitles the opinion to significant probative weight.  

The Veteran was also afforded a VA examination in connection with his April 2021 Supplemental Claim. The VA examiner opined "Veteran is also noted to have OSA, which is an impairment with airflow during sleep, most commonly due to soft palette anatomy or obesity.  This is not related to exposure event in SW Asia." This VA examiner, like the author of the September 13, 2016, opinion, did not address the Veteran's lay statements regarding his in-service sleep disturbances and snoring, nor did the examiner address the positive nexus opinion provided by the Veteran. The Board also points out that this examiner did not address whether the Veteran's OSA had its clinical onset during service.  Rather, the examiner addressed only whether the sleep apnea was related to an exposure event in service. Therefore, the opinion is of little probative weight regarding the question of direct service connection.

The Veteran was afforded a final medical opinion without an in person examination in July 2024 in response to his May 2024 Supplemental Claim Application. The VA examiner opined "[t]here is no medical nexus between the development of OSA and the presence of toxic exposures." The VA examiner discussed numerous risk factors identified with the development of sleep apnea but did not explain the relevance of these factors in connection to the Veteran's medical history. The examiner ultimately found that "[r]ecords show that veteran's BMI was reported to be around 29.9 which is essentially in the obesity range and more likely the cause of veteran's OSA. Therefore, the condition was less likely than not (likelihood is less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activity(ies), after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran." Again, this examiner did not address the Veteran's lay statements regarding his in-service sleep disturbances and snoring, nor did the examiner address the positive nexus opinion provided by the Veteran. Similar to the prior VA examiner, this examiner did not provide an opinion as to whether direct service connection, more specifically a nexus between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury, was likely for the Veteran's sleep apnea.  The examiner's negative opinion rested solely on the lack of medical support for a relationship between OSA and the Veteran's in-service environmental exposures.  Therefore, this opinion also is of little probative weight regarding the question of direct service connection.

Thus, the examinations of record include probative positive nexus opinions and negative nexus opinions that are of little probative weight.

At this point, the Board could remand the claims for VA examinations or opinions. However, a request for an opinion could be construed as obtaining additional evidence for the sole purpose of denying the claim, which is impermissible. 38 C.F.R. § 3.304(c) ("The development of evidence in connection with claims for service connection will be accomplished when deemed necessary but it should not be undertaken when evidence present is sufficient for this determination"); Andrews v. McDonough, 34 Vet. App. 216, 225 (2021) ("Remand is inappropriate where the predominant purpose is not to allow the Board to make a fully informed decision unencumbered by error but to allow VA to obtain more evidence so that it can properly deny the claim").

The service treatment record documenting the presence of sleep disturbance in service, the Veteran's statements indicating the continuation of sleep disturbance since service, and the clinical evidence confirming a diagnosis of sleep apnea are sufficient to establish that the Veteran's sleep disability had its onset in service. 

Upon review of the record, the Board finds the evidence to at least be in equipoise as to whether the Veteran's current sleep apnea had its incurrence in service. Accordingly, after resolving all doubt in favor of the Veteran, the Board finds that service connection for sleep apnea is warranted. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

 

S.C. Krembs

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Matthews, Jessica L.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.