Citation Nr: A25034454
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 210503-336106
DATE: April 15, 2025

ORDER

The termination of the spousal apportionment from the Veteran to the Appellant, effective from the first date of the month following their divorce, was proper; the appeal as to the termination of the apportionment is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran and the Appellant were married to each other from July 2001 to February 2021.

2. In November 2006, the Appellant filed a successful claim to receive an apportioned share (apportionment) of the Veteran's Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) compensation benefits. She was awarded $139 per month from December 2006 to December 2007, followed by $142 per month from December 2007 to February 2021. 

3. In April 2021, the parties were notified that the apportionment from the Veteran to the Appellant would end (terminate) effective from March 1, 2021, the first date of the month following their divorce finalized in February 2021. 

4. Since March 1, 2021, the Appellant has not been the spouse of the Veteran and is not the custodian of any minor children of the Veteran; as such, she is not an eligible individual to receive an apportionment from the Veteran's VA compensation benefits following their divorce. 

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria have not been met to overturn the termination of the apportionment to the Appellant following her divorce from the Veteran. 38 U.S.C. § 5307; 38 C.F.R. § 3.450-3.452.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from February 1966 to December 1973. He has been in receipt of a total disability rating for VA compensation purposes since December 1999.  

The Appellant, Y. L., is the Veteran's former spouse. Initials will be used in the remainder of this decision for privacy purposes. The full names of the parties, although listed on the first page and in the document header, are not disclosed in publicly viewable copies of this decision. 

The apportionment decision on appeal was issued in April 2021 and constitutes an initial decision on the matter of the propriety of the termination of the apportionment, effective from March 1, 2021; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies to this appeal. 

In the May 2021 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Appellant elected the Hearing docket. The parties appeared before the undersigned Veterans Law Judge to present testimony on the issue on appeal in December 2024. A transcript of that testimony is considered as evidence in this appeal. As an important point of clarification, at the time of the hearing, it was clarified both during a pre-hearing conference, and on the written record, that the Appellant's primary concern was in addressing the amount of the apportionment that she had received prior to March 2021, rather than seeking to overturn the termination of the apportionment since March 2021. In that regard, the Board acknowledges that in August 2008, the Appellant timely filed a Notice of Disagreement with the amount of the apportionment awarded to her in a June 2008 apportionment determination. That issue was not properly addressed by the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) but is procedurally distinguishable from the present matter and is to be addressed in a different legacy (pre-February 2019) appeals stream. The Board will separately address the pending matter regarding the amount of the apportionment assigned in a different decision. At this time, based on the procedural requirements necessitated by the appeal perfected as to the termination of the apportionment, only that issue is addressed by this decision. 

Simultaneously contested claims are subject to special procedural regulations. In the present case, the Veteran was provided a copy of the Appellant's May 2021 Notice of Disagreement in April 2023 and given the opportunity to file a brief, argument, or request for a different type of review within 30 days from the date the content of the Notice of Disagreement was furnished. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.400-20.404. The Veteran did not request a change in the docket assigned. Following the December 2024 hearing, attended by both parties, the Board now proceeds with review of the appeal regarding the termination of the apportionment in March 2021. 

The termination of the spousal apportionment from the Veteran to the Appellant, effective from the first date of the month following their divorce, was proper; the appeal as to the termination of the apportionment is denied.

Legal Criteria

All or any part of a veteran's VA compensation benefits may be apportioned if that veteran is not residing with his or her spouse or children, and the veteran is not reasonably discharging his or her responsibility for the support of the spouse or children. 38 U.S.C. § 5307; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.450, 3.452.

A "spouse" is defined as the current wife or husband of a veteran. 38 U.S.C. § 101(31). In plain terms, a former spouse of a veteran is not eligible to receive an apportionment of a Veteran's VA compensation benefits once they become divorced from the Veteran because they are no longer the "spouse" of the veteran once a divorce is finalized.

Analysis & Conclusion

The Board finds that since the date that the divorce between the Appellant and the Veteran became final in February 2021, the Appellant, Y. L., is not an eligible individual to receive an apportionment from the Veteran's VA compensation benefits. Neither party disputes these facts, and based upon clarification from Y. L. at the time of the December 2024 hearing, the Appellant does not seek an apportionment beyond the date of her divorce. Instead, a decision is necessary here to conclude a properly perfected appeal, and a separate decision will be rendered in due course regarding the separate distinguishable issue of the amount of the apportionment awarded prior to the divorce of the parties. 

Nonetheless, the Board confirms that the Appellant previously received a portion of the Veteran's VA disability compensation during the period in which they were legally married. The parties divorced in February 2021. As described in the legal criteria above, a former spouse is not an eligible recipient for an apportionment on their own behalf (as opposed to on behalf of any minor children not living with the Veteran which is not applicable in this instance).   

The Appellant has not asserted, nor submitted any evidence, that she remained married to the Veteran at any time since the effective date of the termination of the apportionment. Instead, she has acknowledged that she is the former spouse of the Veteran with a previously finalized divorce decree. See, e.g., Board hearing transcript, December 2024. Since the Appellant has not been married to the Veteran at any time since the apportionment was terminated, she is no longer an eligible recipient of an apportionment on her behalf, and the claim must be denied on that basis. This decision should not be interpreted as precluding any remedies available to the Appellant through a state civil court regarding any changes to her divorce settlement which is beyond the jurisdiction of this body. This decision also does not adjudicate or otherwise impact the amount of the apportionment received by the Appellant between December 2006 and February 2021, which will be addressed by a separate decision to follow. 

However, in a case such as this, in which the facts are not in dispute and thus the law and not the evidence is dispositive, the Board must deny the appeal to overturn the termination of the apportionment based on the lack of legal merit or the lack of entitlement under the law. See Sabonis v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 426 (1994).

 

 

S. CHARLES NEILL

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	K. McDonald

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.