Citation Nr: A25034695
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 240815-463485
DATE: April 15, 2025

REMANDED

Service connection for a low back disability is remanded.

Service connection for a cervical spine disability is remanded.

Service connection for a right shoulder disability is remanded.

Service connection for a left shoulder disability is remanded.

Service connection for a right knee disability is remanded.

Service connection for a left knee disability is remanded.

Service connection for a right ankle disability is remanded.

Service connection for a left ankle disability is remanded.

Service connection for a right elbow disability is remanded.

Service connection for a left elbow disability is remanded.

Service connection for a right wrist disability is remanded.

Service connection for a left wrist disability is remanded.

Service connection for a skin disorder is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran had active service from June 2011 to June 2016, to include service in Southwest Asia.

These matters come before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal of an April 2024 supplemental claim decision of a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In the August 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the April 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) supplemental claim decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted after the AOJ issued the supplemental claim decision on appeal, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of entitlement to service connection for the Veteran's back, cervical spine, right shoulder, left shoulder, right knee, left knee, right ankle, left ankle, right elbow, left elbow, right wrist, left wrist, and skin disabilities, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Service connection for a low back disability is remanded.

Service connection for a cervical spine disability is remanded.

Service connection for a right shoulder disability is remanded.

Service connection for a left shoulder disability is remanded.

Service connection for a right knee disability is remanded.

Service connection for a left knee disability is remanded.

Service connection for a right ankle disability is remanded.

Service connection for a left ankle disability is remanded.

Service connection for a right elbow disability is remanded.

Service connection for a left elbow disability is remanded.

Service connection for a right wrist disability is remanded.

Service connection for a left wrist disability is remanded.

Service connection for a skin disorder is remanded.

The Veteran is seeking service connection for his back, cervical spine, right shoulder, left shoulder, right knee, left knee, right ankle, left ankle, right elbow, left elbow, right wrist, left wrist, and skin disabilities, claiming that these disabilities are related to his active service. See November 2020 Claims. Notably, the Veteran asserts that his musculoskeletal disabilities, to include joint pains in his upper and lower extremities, were caused by his military occupational specialty as parachutist, where he was required to engage in rigorous physical activities, to include airborne operations, that put wear and tear on his joints. Id. He further asserts that his skin disorder is due to his service in the Gulf War region. The Board finds that remand of these disabilities is required to correct pre-decisional duty to assist errors-to afford the Veteran VA medical examinations and obtain adequate medical opinions.

As an initial matter, the Board notes that a review of the Veteran's VA treatment records reveals that he has had ongoing complaints for pain in his back, neck, and upper and lower extremities. See, for instance, April and June 2023 VA Treatment Records.

In addition, favorable findings noted in the April 2024 rating decision include: 1) "The evidence shows that a qualifying event, injury, or disease had its onset during the Veteran's service, as service treatment records show parachutist badge and that participation in a toxic exposure risk activity is conceded; and 2) that the Veteran served in Kuwait during the Gulf War Era as a parachutist and coxswain." It further states that the Veteran was diagnosed with cervicalgia and a left shoulder disability. The Board is bound by these favorable findings.

As noted herein, the Veteran has verified service in Southwest Asia (service in the Persian Gulf War). Under 38 C.F.R. § 3.317 (b), which pertains to Persian Gulf War veterans, signs or symptoms which may be manifestations of undiagnosed illness or medically unexplained chronic multi-symptom illness include, but are not limited to, fatigue, signs or symptoms involving the skin, headache, muscle pain, joint pain, neurological signs or symptoms, neuropsychological signs or symptoms, signs or symptoms involving the respiratory system, sleep disturbances, gastrointestinal signs or symptoms, cardiovascular signs or symptoms, and abnormal weight loss. The Veteran maintains that the disabilities for which he is seeking service connection are reflective of some of these symptoms, to include muscle and joint pains, and symptoms involving his skin. However, a Gulf War VA examination was not conducted to specifically address these signs and symptoms. As such, the Board cannot make well-informed decisions on the Veteran's claims.

The Board acknowledges that the Veteran failed to report for his scheduled VA examinations in March 2024. When a Veteran fails to report for a VA examination, he must show good cause to be rescheduled for such examination. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.655 (requiring a showing of good cause for failure to appear before a VA examination is rescheduled). The Board notes that the duty to assist a claimant is not a one-way street, and the Veteran is required to fully cooperate in the development of his claim. Wood v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 406 (1991) (further holding that "if a Veteran wishes help, he cannot passively wait for it in those circumstances where he may or should have information that is essential in obtaining the putative evidence"); see also Caffrey v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 377, 383 (1994); Olson v. Principi, 3 Vet. App. 480, 483 (1992); Kowalski v. Nicholson, 19 Vet. App. 171, 181 (2005) (reflecting that any failure to appear for or cooperate during a VA examination "subjects the Veteran to the risk of an adverse adjudication based on an incomplete and underdeveloped record").

Where entitlement to a benefit cannot be established or confirmed without a VA examination and the Veteran fails to report for an examination scheduled in conjunction with an original compensation claim, the claim shall be based on the evidence of record. 38 C.F.R. § 3.655. However, in this case, the evidence of record is not sufficient to decide the Veteran's claims. 

Here, in September 2023, prior to the scheduling of his VA examinations, the Veteran notified VA that due to his employment with the State Department, he would have limited availability to attend VA examinations. He explained that he works in countries, to include Iraq and Syria, where there are no contract examination facilities. He specifically stated that he would be "home and available to attend the VA examinations from December 2023 to January 2024." He also stated that if the examinations were not scheduled during the above timeframe, he would be unable to attend them, as he would not be able "to return home to attend those examinations." However, despite this correspondence from the Veteran, as documented in his claims file, he was scheduled for his VA examinations in March 2024.

In additional correspondence from the Veteran in May 2024, he reiterated that he works overseas as a government contractor, in remote combat locations, to include the African continent, Iraq, and Syria, where VA contract examination facilities are not available. He referred to his initial September 2023 correspondence to VA about the timeframe requested for scheduling his examinations and explained that his request was disregarded. He is requesting, considering his overseas assignments, that VA work with him to schedule his examinations. As there is evidence of ongoing communication from the Veteran concerning the scheduling of his examinations, and considering his work locations overseas, the Board resolves reasonable doubt in his favor, finding that he has presented good cause for his failure to appear at his scheduled VA examinations. 

As there is insufficient evidence on which to make well-informed decisions on the Veteran's claims, additional development is necessary; thus, remand is required. The Veteran is cautioned that failure to attend a scheduled examination could result in denial of his claims. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.655 (b).

In addition, with regard to complaints of pain, the Board notes that in Saunders v. Wilkie, the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit (Federal Court) found that the term "disability" as used in 38 U.S.C. § 1110 "refers to the functional impairment of earning capacity, not the underlying cause of said disability," and held that "pain alone can serve as a functional impairment and therefore qualify as a disability." 886 F.3d 1356, 1368 (Fed. Cir. 2018). Thus, the complaints of joint and muscle pains in the Veteran's treatment records should also be addressed at the VA examinations.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for appropriate VA examinations to determine the nature and etiologies of his lower back, cervical spine, bilateral shoulder, bilateral knee, bilateral ankle, bilateral elbow, and bilateral wrist disabilities, to include pain. The entire claims file, to include a copy of this Remand, must be reviewed by the clinician. The medical opinion report should include a discussion of the Veteran's documented history and assertions. All indicated tests and studies should be conducted, and all clinical findings should be reported in detail. 

Note: The Veteran reported that he works overseas in areas where there are no contract examination facilities and is requesting to be consulted prior to scheduling his examinations. 

The examiner should respond to the following:

A.	Identify and diagnose all lower back, cervical spine, bilateral shoulder, bilateral knee, bilateral ankle, bilateral elbow, and bilateral wrist disabilities the Veteran has had throughout the appeal period.

If the examiner finds there to be no pathology to attribute the Veteran's back, neck, shoulder, knee, ankle, elbow, and wrist pains, the examiner should address the functional effects or limitations of the Veteran's back, neck, shoulder, knee, ankle, elbow, and wrist pains, to include whether pain results in functional impairment of earning capacity.

B.	Then, as to each diagnosed:

i.	back,

ii.	neck,

iii.	right shoulder,

iv.	left shoulder,

v.	right knee,

vi.	left knee,

vii.	right ankle,

viii.	left ankle,

ix.	right elbow,

x.	left elbow,

xi.	right wrist, and

xii.	left wrist disability,

to include whether pain results in functional impairment of earning capacity, the examiner should opine whether it is at least as likely as not (an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence) that the disability is related to the Veteran's active service, to include his military occupational specialty of parachutist, and associated duties, and all presumed environmental exposures experienced by the Veteran during service in Southwest Asia.

The examiner must address the synergistic, combined effect of all the Veteran's TERAs.

C.	If it is determined that the Veteran does not have a i) back; ii) neck; iii) right shoulder; iv) left shoulder; v) right knee; vi) left knee; vii) right ankle; viii) left ankle; ix) right elbow; x) left elbow; xi) right wrist; or xii) left wrist disability that can be attributed directly to service, the examiner should opine whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's disability pattern is consistent with: (1) an undiagnosed illness, or (2) part of a medically unexplained chronic multi-symptom illness that is defined by a cluster of signs or symptoms.

The examiner is advised that the lack of contemporaneous records documenting complaints of, or treatment for, these disabilities, alone is insufficient rationale for a medical nexus opinion.

The examiner must be advised that the Veteran is competent to report symptoms and events known to him, and those reports must be considered, along with the other evidence of record, in formulating the requested opinions. If the examiner rejects the Veteran's reports regarding current or past symptoms, the examiner must provide a reason for doing so.

The examiner must provide a complete rationale for all opinions and conclusions expressed. If the examiner cannot provide an opinion without resort to speculation, the examiner should provide an explanation as to why this is so and whether there is additional evidence that would permit the opinion to be provided.

2. Also, schedule the Veteran for a VA examination with an appropriate clinician to determine the nature and etiology of his skin disorder (to include a cyst/benign growth). The entire claims file, to include a copy of this Remand, must be reviewed by the clinician. The medical opinion report should include a discussion of the Veteran's documented history and assertions. All indicated tests and studies should be conducted, and all clinical findings should be reported in detail.

Note: The Veteran reported that he works overseas in areas where there are no contract examination facilities and is requesting to be consulted prior to scheduling his examinations. 

The clinician is asked to:

A.	Identify and diagnose all skin disorders the Veteran has had throughout the appellate period.

B.	For any skin disorder diagnosed, opine whether it is at least as likely as not (an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence) that it is related to the Veteran's active service, to include any presumed environmental exposures experienced by the Veteran during service in Southwest Asia. The examiner must address the synergistic, combined effect of all the Veteran's TERAs.

C.	If it is determined that the Veteran does not have a skin disorder that can be attributed directly to service, the examiner should provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's disability patterns are consistent with: (1) an undiagnosed illness, or (2) part of a medically unexplained chronic multi-symptom illness that is defined by a cluster of signs or symptoms.

The examiner is advised that the lack of contemporaneous records documenting complaints of, or treatment for, a skin condition, alone is insufficient rationale for a medical nexus opinion.

The examiner must be advised that the Veteran is competent to report symptoms and events known to him, and those reports must be considered, along with the other evidence of record, in formulating the requested opinions. If the examiner rejects the Veteran's reports regarding current or past symptoms, the examiner must provide a reason for doing so.

					(Continued on next page)

The examiner must provide a complete rationale for all opinions and conclusions expressed. If the examiner cannot provide an opinion without resort to speculation, the examiner should provide an explanation as to why this is so and whether there is additional evidence that would permit the opinion to be provided. 

 

 

A. J. Spector

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	T. Trowers

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.