Citation Nr: A25034382
Decision Date: 04/14/25	Archive Date: 04/14/25

DOCKET NO. 240515-440848
DATE: April 14, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a lower back disorder is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty for training in the United States Army Reserves from October 1997 to March 1998 and on active duty in the United States Army from March 2004 to November 2006, including foreign service in Kuwait.

The back appeal is before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal of a September 2023 rating decision from a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO), followed by a subsequent April 2024 higher-level review decision.  The sleep apnea appeal is before the Board from a May 2024 rating decision.

Given the date of these rating decisions, the Veteran's appeal is governed by the modernized review system (known by the Board as AMA).  38 C.F.R. ยง 19.2.  

On his May 2024 VA Form 10182 to the Board, the Veteran selected direct review.  38 C.F.R. ยง 20.301.

Generally speaking, under the modernized review system, the Board may only remand an issue to correct any pre-decisional duty to assist errors it identifies.  38 C.F.R. ยง 20.802.  That same regulation also provides that the Board may remand for correction of any other error by the AOJ in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty, if such correction would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the claim.  Id. 

Although the Board sincerely regrets the additional delay this will cause, such errors are present with respect to these appeals.

Specifically, VA nexus opinions were obtained in July 2023 (back) and May 2024 (sleep apnea).  Regrettably, these opinions are inadequate, as both examiners failed to address the competent lay testimony of the Veteran; the sleep apnea examiner also failed to account for the secondary theory of entitlement raised by the record.  See, e.g., March 2024 VA Form 21-526EZ (associating the claimed sleep apnea with the Veteran's service-connected posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD)).  Thus, remand is instructed to allow for complete and adequate opinions to be obtained.

The above determination is based upon the Veteran's competency to report events capable of lay observation; however, the Board offers no findings as to his credibility at this time.  Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 469 (1994); Miller v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 249 (2020).

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Obtain addendum opinions addressing the questions below.  If the examiner determines that the opinion cannot be offered without evaluation of the Veteran, an examination must be scheduled.

The claims file and a copy of this remand must be made available for review.  The examiner must definitively state that the Veteran's file was reviewed in support of their opinions.

The back examiner is asked to offer medical opinions as to:

(1)	Identify all diagnoses shown by the Veteran during the period on appeal, including pain productive of functional impairment.

If a diagnosis of arthritis is rendered, the examiner must explicitly identify the onset thereof.

(2)	For each current disorder, address whether it is at least as likely as not that the condition began in service, was caused by service, or is otherwise related to service?

Here, the examiner must explicitly address the Veteran's contentions that:

"	His back pain onset during service and has persisted since that time; 

"	His back pain is associated with the physical demands of service, including carrying heavy loads;

"	He injured his back while carrying injured soldiers; and

"	He was placed on light duty several times as a result of back pain.

See, e.g., July 2023 lay statement.

Given that the appeal is being remanded, the examiner may also consider an April 2024 buddy statement. 

The sleep apnea examiner is asked to offer medical opinions as to:

(1)	Address whether it is at least as likely as not that the condition began in service, was caused by service, or is otherwise related to service?

Here, the examiner must contemplate the lay statements of record indicating that the Veteran's symptoms onset during service and have persisted since that time.  See, e.g., April 2024 buddy statement.  

(2)	Also address whether it is at least as likely as not that that the condition was caused or aggravated by the Veteran's service-connected PTSD and/or tinnitus or the treatment thereof?  See, e.g., July 2023 lay statements; see also April 2024 buddy statement.  

Consistent with Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 781-82 (2021), the examiner is advised that the term "at least as likely as not" means that the likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher.

A finding of "aggravation" does not require a permanent worsening of the disorder; rather, any incremental increase in a nonservice-connected condition attributable to a service-connected disability, whether permanent or not, constitutes aggravation.  Ward v. Wilkie, 31 Vet. App. 233, 240 (2019).

A complete rationale should be provided for all opinions or conclusions expressed.  It should be noted that the Veteran is competent to attest to observable symptomatology.  If there is a medical basis to support or doubt the history provided by the Veteran, the examiner should provide a fully reasoned explanation.

 

 

Evan M. Deichert

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Kovarovic, Kate

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.1303.