Citation Nr: A25034726
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 240301-421945
DATE: April 15, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an increased rating of 60 percent for chronic edema, right lower extremity, is granted.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for right knee meniscal tear and degenerative arthritis is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for left knee degenerative arthritis is remanded.

FINDING OF FACT

Throughout the period on appeal, the Veteran's chronic edema, right lower extremity, manifested as pain, persistent edema, persistent stasis pigmentation, eczema, persistent subcutaneous induration, persistent ulceration; the Veteran did not have massive board-like edema with constant pain at rest.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to an increased rating of 60 percent for chronic edema, right lower extremity, has been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.1-4.14, 4.104, Diagnostic Code 7121.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Navy from March 1974 to March 1978 and from June 1981 to June 1995. 

In the March 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the January 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal with regard to the issue of entitlement to an increased disability rating for chronic edema, right lower extremity and the December 2023 rating decision as to the issue of service connection for right and left knee disabilities.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of entitlement to service connection for right and left knee disabilities, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Chronic edema, right lower extremity

When a Veteran seeks an increased evaluation, it will generally be presumed that the maximum benefit allowed by law and regulation is sought, and it follows that such a claim remains in controversy where less than the maximum benefit available is awarded. See AB v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 35, 38 (1993). Disability ratings are determined by applying a schedule of ratings that is based on average impairment of earning capacity. Separate diagnostic codes identify the various disabilities. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R., Part 4. Each disability must be viewed in relation to its history and the limitation of activity imposed by the disabling condition should be emphasized. 38 C.F.R. § 4.1.

Where the question to consider is the propriety of the initial evaluation assigned, consideration of the medical evidence since the effective date of the award of service connection and consideration of the appropriateness of a "staged" rating are required. See Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 199, 125-26 (1999). Where entitlement to compensation already has been established and an increase in the disability rating is at issue, it is the present level of disability that is of primary concern. See Francisco v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 55, 58 (1994). The Board will consider whether separate ratings may be assigned for separate periods of time based on facts found, a practice known as "staged ratings," whether it is an initial rating case or not. See Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505, 509-10 (2007).

Where there is a question as to which of two evaluations shall be applied, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria for that rating. Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7.

Importantly, the evaluation of the same disability under various diagnoses is to be avoided. 38 C.F.R. § 4.14. However, when it is not possible to separate the effects of the service-connected disability from a nonservice-connected condition, such signs and symptoms must be attributed to the service-connected disability. Mittleider v. West, 11 Vet. App. 181, 182 (1998); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

VA is responsible for determining whether the evidence supports the claim or is in relative equipoise, with the claimant prevailing in either event, or whether the evidence is persuasively against the claim, in which case the claim is denied. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021). When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination, the benefit of the doubt is afforded the claimant.

The Veteran asserts that he is entitled to an increased rating for his chronic edema, right lower extremity. The Veteran is rated at 40 percent from October 23, 2007. The Veteran is also rated at 10 percent for chronic dermatophytosis, primarily of the feet. 

The Veteran's chronic edema, right lower extremity, is rated under 38 C.F.R. § 4.104, Diagnostic Code (DC) 7121. Under that code, a 40 percent rating requires is warranted for persistent edema and stasis pigmentation or eczema, with or without intermittent ulceration. A 60 percent rating is assigned for persistent edema or subcutaneous induration, stasis pigmentation or eczema, and persistent ulceration. A 100 percent rating requires massive board-like edema with constant pain at rest.

The rating criteria are worded in the conjunctive with the use of the word "and." Thus, to establish entitlement to a higher rating, the Veteran must have all of the symptoms listed for the rating criteria. See Camacho v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 360 (2007); see also 38 C.F.R. § 4.104, Diagnostic Code 7121. If disability rating criteria are written in the conjunctive, "a veteran must demonstrate all of the required elements in order to be entitled to that higher evaluation" and 38 C.F.R. § 4.7 cannot be used to circumvent the need to demonstrate all required criteria. Middleton v. Shinseki, 727 F.3d 1172 (Fed. Cir. 2013).

VA Treatment records show that the Veteran has consistently sought treatment for his chronic edema. This includes rash with occasional blisters, discoloration, pedal edema, venous insufficiency dermatitis, and swelling of the leg. See January 2016 and April 2022 VA Treatment Records. Further, in August 2023, the Veteran sought treatment to a wound in the right lower extremity, which had crusted. The Veteran stated that he occasionally gets these blisters in the right lower leg and that it takes about 3 weeks to heal. The Veteran was treated for chronic stasis dermatitis in the right lower extremity, which included symptoms such as erythema, warmth, and diffuse edema. A history of cellulitis to the right lower extremity was also noted. 

The Veteran underwent a VA examination in September 2023, in which the VA examiner described the following symptoms for the Veteran's chronic edema: varicose veins, post-phlebitic syndrome, aching and fatigue in right leg after prolonged standing and walking, persistent stasis pigmentation, persistent edema that is incompletely relieved by elevation, intermittent ulceration, and persistent subcutaneous induration. Although the VA examiner did not have a current diagnosis of ulcers or cellulitis, the Veteran's condition caused him to be prone to recurrent cellulitis and ulcers. 

The Veteran provided a statement and photograph of his most recent ulcers from August 2023. He stated he gets leg ulcers about twice a year, and they are deep, very painful, and last about a month. See February 2024 Statement by Veteran. 

Throughout the period on appeal, the Veteran's chronic edema, right lower extremity, warrants an increased rating of 60 percent. Although the VA examiner endorsed intermittent ulceration, which is under the 40 percent rating, the Veteran's statements of his recurrent ulcers that last about a month and VA Treatment Records support a finding that the Veteran has persistent ulceration, that meets the 60 percent rating. Further, the Veteran's symptoms, such as persistent subcutaneous induration, along with persistent edema, and persistent stasis pigmentation, warrants that the Veteran is rated at 60 percent. 

A next higher rating of 100 percent is not warranted as massive board-like edema with constant pain at rest was not demonstrated in the record. Although the Veteran endorsed pain in the right lower extremity, the VA Treatment Records, lay statements, and September 2023 VA Examination, did not reveal massive board-like edema with constant pain at rest. Therefore, a 100 percent rating is not warranted for the Veteran's chronic edema, right lower extremity.

The Veteran's representative argues that the Veteran should be rated separately for his chronic stasis dermatitis under DC 7806 for dermatitis or eczema. See July 2024 Written Brief Presentation. The VA Treatment Records support that this stasis dermatitis is associated with venous insufficiency dermatitis or stasis pigmentation and chronic edema, and therefore not a separate ratable condition. See April 2022 and August 2023 VA Treatment Records; September 2023 VA Examination. Further, this condition is accounted for as a symptom of the Veteran's chronic edema and is accounted for in the higher rating assigned to the Veteran under DC 7121. Thus, assigning this symptom of chronic edema as a separate diagnostic code would constitute impermissible pyramiding.

Accordingly, the Board finds that an increased rating of 60 percent for chronic edema, right lower extremity, is warranted. The appeal is granted. 38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch, 21 F.4th at 776.

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Right knee meniscal tear and degenerative arthritis

2. Left knee degenerative arthritis 

The Board finds that remand is warranted here in order for the AOJ to a correct pre-decisional duty to assist errors for the claims. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a). Specifically, the Board finds that a remand is warranted to obtain a new VA medical opinion as the September 2023 VA medical opinion is inadequate because the examiner did not address the in-service injury to the right knee in STRs dated November 1975 to May 1976, and including February 1977 STR of injury to shin splints and right leg on parachute test range. The VA medical opinion also failed to address the reports of left knee injury for many months from November 1975 until March 1976 while in-service and Veteran's lay statements of cast and immobility from the motorcycle accident in November 1975. Therefore, on remand, an addendum opinion is needed on whether the Veteran's current bilateral knee disability can be caused by or is related to the bilateral knee injuries and complaints that occurred while on active-duty service and to the Veteran's statements of reported injuries to both knees while in-service.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain an addendum medical opinion addressing the nature and etiology of the Veteran's left knee condition. The evidentiary record, including a copy of this remand, must be made available to, and reviewed by, the examiner. The need for an examination of the Veteran is left to the discretion of the clinician selected to write the opinion.

After a thorough review of the record to include all in-service and post-service treatment records, the examiner should identify the diagnosis present. For each disability identified, the examiner is asked to respond to the following:

(a.) Is it at least as likely as not that the Veteran's left knee condition was caused or incurred as a result of the Veteran's active-duty service?

Do the Veteran's reports about his symptoms align with how the currently diagnosed disability is known to develop or are the Veteran's reports generally inconsistent with medical knowledge or implausible?

In rendering the opinion, the VA examiner is asked to address the Veteran's in-service complaints of left knee pain, to include the STRs dated November 1975 through March 1976, as well as lay statements of the injuries to his left knee while in-service, including Veteran's lay statements of cast and immobility from the motorcycle accident in November 1975.

The examiner must provide a comprehensive report including complete rationales for all opinions and conclusions reached, citing the objective medical findings leading to the conclusions.

2. Obtain an addendum medical opinion addressing the nature and etiology of the Veteran's right knee condition. The evidentiary record, including a copy of this remand, must be made available to, and reviewed by, the examiner. The need for an examination of the Veteran is left to the discretion of the clinician selected to write the opinion.

After a thorough review of the record to include all in-service and post-service treatment records, the examiner should identify the diagnosis present. For each disability identified, the examiner is asked to respond to the following:

(a.) Is it at least as likely as not that the Veteran's right knee condition was caused or incurred as a result of the Veteran's active-duty service?

Do the Veteran's reports about his symptoms align with how the currently diagnosed disability is known to develop or are the Veteran's reports generally inconsistent with medical knowledge or implausible?

In rendering the opinion, the VA examiner is asked to address the Veteran's in-service complaints of right knee pain, to include the STRs dated November 1975 through May 1976, as well as lay statements of the injuries to his right knee while in-service, including STR dated February 1977 of injury of shin splints and right leg from parachute test range.

(Continued on the next page)

?

The examiner must provide a comprehensive report including complete rationales for all opinions and conclusions reached, citing the objective medical findings leading to the conclusions.

 

 

ANTHONY C. SCIRÉ, JR

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	D. Fam, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.