Citation Nr: A25034345
Decision Date: 04/14/25	Archive Date: 04/14/25

DOCKET NO. 240702-452726
DATE: April 14, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection, to include on a secondary basis, for hypertension is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for fatigue is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection, to include on a secondary basis, for diabetes is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for erectile dysfunction is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from December 1989 to December 1993.  

This matter is before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from January 2024 and June 2024 rating decisions by a Department of Veterans Affairs Regional Office (RO).  On the Decision Review Request Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) VA Form 10182, received in July 2024, the Veteran requested a Direct Review by a Veterans Law Judge.  In this regard, the Board notes that under the direct review option, no additional evidence received after the appealed rating decision is to be considered; rather, review is limited to the evidence on record at the time of the decision.

The Veteran filed his service connection claims in April 2023.  Those claims were denied in a January 2024 rating decision.  With regard to his service connection claims for diabetes, fatigue and hypertension, in February 2024 he submitted VA Form 20-0996, and requested Higher Level Review (HLR).  A February 2024 HLR rating decision identified duty to assist errors.  Thereafter, these claims were further developed and a June 2024 rating decision continued denial of these claims.

The Board recognizes that in appealing the service connection claims for diabetes, fatigue and hypertension, the Veteran identified the February 2024 HLR rating decision as the decision being appealed.  As noted above, the February 2024 rating decision did not adjudicate those issues, but rather identified duty to assist errors and explained that additional development would be conducted.  As such, the February 2024 rating decision was not final with regard to those issues.  However, in consideration that these claims were adjudicated in the June 2024 rating decision and that the Veteran identified the issues adjudicated in that decision, and in further consideration that he filed his Notice of Disagreement (NOD) after issuance of the June 2024 rating decision, the Board will consider the NOD as appealing the June 2024 rating decision.  These issues are therefore properly before the Board.

1. Entitlement to service connection for hypertension is remanded.

2. Entitlement to service connection for fatigue is remanded.

3. Entitlement to service connection for diabetes is remanded.

4. Entitlement to service connection for erectile dysfunction is remanded.

5. Entitlement to service connection for IBS is remanded.

The claims file includes a February 2023 Social Security Administration (SSA) Inquiry Results form, which shows the Veteran filed for SSA benefits and that his claim was denied, however, it is unclear from this form when he filed for these benefits.  The Board notes that when there has been a determination with regard to SSA benefits, the records concerning that decision must be obtained, if relevant.  Golz v. Shinseki, 590 F.3d 1317 (Fed. Cir. 2010).  

A review of the claims file shows that diagnoses and dates of diagnoses are of particular relevance to the claims on appeal.  Additionally, given the nature of the service connection claims on appeal, including secondary service connection claims for some of these claims, the Board finds that a duty to assist existed at the time of the rating decisions on appeal to obtain and associate with the claims file any outstanding SSA records and a remand is warranted to cure this duty to assist error.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Identify and obtain any outstanding SSA records that are not already associated with the record.  If these records are unavailable, a written statement to this effect must also be incorporated into the claims file. 

 

S. HENEKS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Lamb, Christopher

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.1303.