Citation Nr: A25034021
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 241003-479806
DATE: April 11, 2025

ORDER

An initial disability rating in excess of 70 percent for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is denied.

An effective date earlier than December 21, 2023 for the assignment of service connection for PTSD is denied.

A total disability rating due to individual unemployability (TDIU) effective December 21, 2023 is granted.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran's PTSD did not manifest total occupational and social impairment.

2. The Veteran filed a claim for service connection for PTSD on December 21, 2023, and the Veteran was granted service connection effective December 21, 2023.

3. The Veteran's previously service-connected PTSD prevented the Veteran from securing and maintaining substantially gainful employment effective December 21, 2023, and the Veteran meets the schedular criteria for TDIU.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for an initial disability rating in excess of 70 percent for PTSD have not been met.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 3.140, Diagnostic Code 9411.

2. The criteria for an effective date earlier than December 21, 2023 for the assignment of service connection for PTSD have not been met.  38 U.S.C. § 5110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.400.

3. The criteria for TDIU effective December 21, 2023 have been met.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.16.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served honorably in the United States Army from September 1969 to September 1972.

These matters come to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a May 2024 rating decision of a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).  This appeal is being adjudicated under the modern appellate framework.  In the October 2021 notice of disagreement (NOD) which commenced this appeal, the Veteran opted into the Direct Review Docket.

As the Veteran has selected the Direct Review Docket, the Board may only consider the evidence of record before the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) at the time of its decision on the issue(s) on appeal.  See 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300(a), 301.  The Board will not consider evidence received after the AOJ decision unless the claimant files a timely request for a Board hearing or an opportunity to submit additional evidence on the NOD (VA Form 10182). 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. The Veteran has not filed such a request. If additional evidence was submitted after the AOJ decision, the Board will not consider it. If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was added to the claims file that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a supplemental claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim(s), considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a supplemental claim are included with this decision.  See also Cook v. McDonough, 36 Vet. App. 175 (2023).

1. An initial disability rating in excess of 70 percent for PTSD is denied.

At issue is whether the Veteran is entitled to an initial disability rating in excess of 70 percent for PTSD.  The weight of the evidence indicates that the Veteran is not entitled to an increased disability rating.

In May 2024, the Veteran was granted service connection for PTSD and assigned an initial disability rating of 70 percent effective December 21, 2023.  The Veteran appealed the initial disability rating.

Disability ratings are determined by applying a schedule of ratings that is based on average impairment of earning capacity.  Separate diagnostic codes identify the various disabilities.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R., Part 4.  Each disability must be viewed in relation to its history and the limitation of activity imposed by the disabling condition should be emphasized.  38 C.F.R. § 4.1.  Examination reports are to be interpreted in light of the whole recorded history, and each disability must be considered from the point of view of the appellant working or seeking work.  38 C.F.R. § 4.2.  Where there is a question as to which of two disability evaluations shall be applied, the higher evaluation is to be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating.  Otherwise, the lower rating is to be assigned.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7.

Disability ratings for PTSD are assigned pursuant to the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders.  Under the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders, a disability rating of 70 percent is assigned when the Veteran manifests occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a worklike setting); inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.  38 C.F.R. § 4.130, General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders.

A total disability rating is assigned when the Veteran manifests total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name.  Id.

The use of the term 'such as' in the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders in 38 C.F.R. § 4.130 demonstrates that the symptoms after that phrase are not intended to constitute an exhaustive list, but rather are to serve as examples of the type and degree of symptoms, or their effects, that would justify a particular rating.  See Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436, 442 (2002).  It is not required to find the presence of all, most, or even some, of the enumerated symptoms recited for particular ratings.  Id.  The use of the phrase 'such symptoms as,' followed by a list of examples, provides guidance as to the severity of the symptoms contemplated for each rating, in addition to permitting consideration of other symptoms particular to each veteran and disorder, and the effect of those symptoms on his/her social and work situation.  Id.  In Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112 (Fed. Cir. 2013), the Federal Circuit stated that "a veteran may only qualify for a given disability under § 4.130 by demonstrating the particular symptoms associated with that percentage, or others of similar severity, frequency, and duration."  It was also noted that "§ 4.130 requires not only the presence of certain symptoms but also that those symptoms have caused occupational and social impairment in most of the referenced areas."  Id.

The Veteran underwent a VA examination in May 2024.  The Veteran reported that he had a good relationship with his family including his wife, his adult children, his grandchildren, and his brother.  The Veteran claimed that he isolated himself from society and did not engage in any hobbies.  The Veteran indicated that he was not working.  The examiner noted a number of psychiatric symptoms including: recurrent, involuntary, and intrusive distressing memories of traumatic events; recurrent distressing dreams; avoidance of distressing memories, thoughts, or feelings closely associated with traumatic events; persistent negative emotional state; feelings of detachment or estrangement from others; hypervigilance; sleep disturbances; depressed mood; anxiety; suspiciousness; chronic sleep impairment; disturbances of motivation and mood; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances including work or a worklike setting; and neglect of personal appearance or hygiene.  The examiner opined that the Veteran manifested occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.  The examiner did not opine that the Veteran manifested total occupational and social impairment.  

The weight of the evidence indicates that the Veteran is not entitled to a disability rating in excess of 70 percent.  In order to meet the criteria for a disability rating in excess of 70 percent, the Veteran needed to manifest total occupational and social impairment.  The evidence of record indicates that the Veteran has been able to maintain social relationships with his family.  Therefore, the Veteran is not totally social (and not totally occupationally and socially) impaired.  Additionally, a VA examiner opined that the Veteran did not manifest total occupational and social impairment, and the record is otherwise silent for a competent medical opinion suggesting that the Veteran manifests total occupational and social impairment.

Here, the weight of the probative evidence of record does not demonstrate that the Veteran manifests total occupational and social impairment.  Therefore, the evidence in this case is not so evenly balanced so as to allow application of the benefit-of-the-doubt rule as required by law and VA regulations.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.  As such, a disability rating in excess of 70 percent is denied.

2. An effective date earlier than December 21, 2023 for the assignment of service connection for PTSD is denied.

At issue is whether the Veteran is entitled to an effective date earlier than December 21, 2023 for the assignment of service connection for PTSD.  The weight of the evidence indicates that the Veteran is not entitled to an earlier effective date.

The Veteran filed a claim for service connection for PTSD on December 21, 2023, and, in May 2024, the RO granted service connection for PTSD effective December 21, 2023.  The Veteran appealed the effective date for the assignment of service connection.

The effective date of an evaluation and award of compensation based on a claim for service connection will be the date of receipt of the claim or the date entitlement arose, whichever is the later.  38 C.F.R. § 3.400.  The Veteran has already been assigned service connection effective the date of claim, and, as such, the Veteran has already been assigned the earliest possible effective date.

Here, the weight of the probative evidence of record does not demonstrate that he is entitled to an earlier effective date.  Therefore, the evidence in this case is not so evenly balanced so as to allow application of the benefit-of-the-doubt rule as required by law and VA regulations.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.  As such, an effective date for the assignment of service connection for PTSD earlier than December 21, 2023 is denied.

3. TDIU effective December 21, 2023 is granted.

The issue of TDIU has been raised by the record, because, as discussed supra, the Veteran's PTSD impairs the Veteran's ability to work.  Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447 (2009).  Moreover, the Veteran's PTSD causes sufficient occupational impairment such that the Veteran manifests difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances including work or a worklike setting; and neglect of personal appearance or hygiene.  Additionally, the Veteran is unemployed.  This is sufficient to find that the Veteran's PTSD prevents the Veteran from securing and maintaining substantially gainful employment.  Additionally, the Veteran meets the schedular rating criteria, because the Veteran's PTSD is more than 60 percent disabling.  As such, the criteria for TDIU have been met effective the date of the claim for service connection for PTSD; December 21, 2023.  Therefore, the evidence in this case is evenly balanced enough so as to allow application of the benefit-of-the-doubt rule as required by law and VA regulations.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.  As such, TDIU effective December 21, 2023 is granted.    

 

 

Ann K. Minami

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	David R. Seaton, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.