Citation Nr: A25034906
Decision Date: 04/16/25	Archive Date: 04/16/25

DOCKET NO. 240621-449663
DATE: April 16, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 70 percent for a psychiatric disorder, characterized as major depressive disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood, is denied.

FINDING OF FACT

Throughout the entire period on appeal, the Veteran's psychiatric disorder was manifested by occupational and social deficiencies in most areas; there is no showing of total occupational and social impairment.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for a rating in excess of 70 percent for a psychiatric disorder, characterized as major depressive disorder, have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5103, 5103A, 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.159, 4.1, 4.7, 4.130, Diagnostic Code (DC) 9434.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from October 2001 to August 2005.

The rating decision on appeal was issued in June 2023 issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO), and constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.  In his June 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal, the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal.  38?C.F.R. § 20.301.

Increased Ratings

Disability evaluations are determined by applying a schedule of ratings which is based on average impairment of earning capacity based on the specific diagnostic codes identifying the various disabilities. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. Part 4. Where there is a question as to which of two separate evaluations shall be applied, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability more closely approximates the criteria required for that particular rating. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7. While the Board typically considers only those factors contained wholly in the rating criteria, it is appropriate to consider factors outside the specific rating criteria when appropriate in order to best determine the level of occupational and social impairment. See Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436 (2002); Massey v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 204, 208 (1994).

1. Entitlement to an increased rating for an acquired psychiatric disorder

The Veteran asserts that his acquired psychiatric disorder has worsened and that a higher rating is for evaluation. Throughout the period on appeal, the Veteran has been in receipt of a 70 percent rating for an acquired psychiatric disorder under 38 C.F.R. § 4.120, DC 9434.

A 100 percent rating is warranted where there is total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication, persistent delusions or hallucinations, grossly inappropriate behavior, persistent danger of hurting self or others, intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of personal hygiene), disorientation to time or place, and/or memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name. DC 9434.

After a review of the evidence of record, the Board determines that a rating in excess of 70 percent is not warranted for any period on appeal.  

Specifically, the Veteran underwent a VA examination in May 2023 to assess the severity of his current psychiatric disorder.  During this examination, the VA examiner opined the Veteran's psychiatric disorder causes occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, and mood. His symptoms are depressed mood, anxiety, near continuous depression affecting his ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively, chronic sleep impairment, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining relationships, and difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances including work or a work like setting. Upon examination, he was alert and oriented to person, place, and situation. He appeared his stated age and was appropriately dressed with normal hygiene. His mood was depressed, but his affect was congruent. His thought process was logical and linear, and he displayed fair judgment and insight. He also had appropriate eye contact and normal speech.

Further, throughout the period on appeal, the Veteran's medical records reflect consistent mental health treatment including consistent suicidal ideation and treatment with psychotropic medication including hospitalization.  However, it is no record of psychosis or other symptoms to rise to the level of total social and occupational impairment. Further, in April 2023, a VA treatment record reflected a normal mental health examination.  The examiner noted his attention was within normal limits. He appeared his stated age with appropriate attire and adequate hygiene. His judgment was normal. His insight was normal. He was alert and fully oriented. His memory was intact and normal.

In view of his most recent clinical evaluation and VA treatment records, the Board determines that a rating in excess of 70 percent is not warranted - especially in light of the Veteran's lack of legal trouble, substance abuse, hallucinations, and no signs of psychosis. Additionally, to the extent the Veteran and his wife have reported symptoms of a higher rating, the Board determines that these statements are less probative given that they are inconsistent with the objective medical evidence. Further, while the Veteran is competent to report symptoms, they are not competent to determine if his disorder causes total occupational and social impairment. 

Next, the Board has also considered the extent to which there are other indications of total occupational and social impairment, such as gross impairment of the thought process or communication, persistent delusions or hallucinations, grossly inappropriate behavior, persistent danger of hurting self or others, disorientation to time or place. See Mauerhan, 16 Vet. App. 436, 444 (2002).

In this regard, while the Veteran's disorder reflects a significant impact on his social and occupational functioning, the evidence does not indicate that a rating in excess of 70 percent is warranted. Here, during his May 2023 VA examination reported that he is currently married and that he has had jobs, although unable to keep them, and does odd jobs including housing renovations.  Being able to obtain a job at all is inconsistent with grossly inappropriate behavior and difficulty recalling one's own name. Additionally, his wife stated that he volunteers and has nearly completed graduate coursework.  Therefore, he did not display total social and occupational impairment even when factoring in other relevant criteria outside of the rating code. See Mauerhan, 16 Vet. App. 436, 444. 

In considering the appropriate disability ratings, the Board has considered the Veteran's statements that his psychiatric disorder is worse than the rating he currently receives. In rendering a decision on appeal, the Board must analyze the credibility and probative value of the evidence, account for the evidence which it finds to be persuasive or unpersuasive, and provide the reasons for its rejection of any material evidence favorable to the claimant.  See Gabrielson v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 36, 39-40 (1994); Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49, 57 (1990).

Competency of evidence differs from weight and credibility. While the Veteran is competent to report symptoms because this requires only personal knowledge as it comes to him through his senses, he is not competent to identify a specific level of disability of his disabilities according to the appropriate diagnostic codes. 

On the other hand, such competent evidence concerning the nature and extent of the Veteran's disability has been provided by the medical personnel who have examined him during the current appeal and who have rendered pertinent opinions in conjunction with the evaluations. The medical findings (as provided in the examination and treatment reports) directly address the criteria under which this disability is evaluated.

Therefore, based on the evidence of record, an increased rating in excess of 70 percent for an acquired psychiatric is not warranted, and the appeal is denied. The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.

 

B.T. KNOPE

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	D. Billinger, Associate Counsel