Citation Nr: A25034405
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 240708-453109
DATE: April 15, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for coronary artery disease (CAD) is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for right upper extremity peripheral polyneuropathy is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for left upper extremity peripheral polyneuropathy is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for right lower extremity peripheral polyneuropathy is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for left lower extremity peripheral polyneuropathy is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Navy from December 1972 to November 1975.

In September 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, and requested readjudication of issues captioned above, most recently addressed in a September 2022 rating decision. In February 2024, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the supplemental claim decision on appeal, which found that new and relevant evidence had been received as to all claims but again denied the claims based on the evidence of record at the time of that decision. 

In the July 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the February 2024 AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

1. Entitlement to service connection for CAD is remanded.

2. Entitlement to service connection for right upper extremity peripheral polyneuropathy is remanded.

3. Entitlement to service connection for left upper extremity peripheral polyneuropathy is remanded.

4. Entitlement to service connection for right lower extremity peripheral polyneuropathy is remanded.

5. Entitlement to service connection for left lower extremity peripheral polyneuropathy is remanded.

The Board notes that the AOJ has made favorable findings that the Veteran has current disabilities of CAD and bilateral upper and lower extremity peripheral polyneuropathy. The Board is bound by these favorable findings. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c). See February 2024 Rating Decision - Narrative, pp. 4-5, 7-8, 10.

In April 2024, VA issued a Toxic Exposure Risk Activity (TERA) Memorandum indicating that the Veteran participated in a TERA during his period of active service.

Under the Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxics Act of 2022 (PACT Act), effective from August 10, 2022, Section 303 implemented 38 U.S.C. § 1168, requiring a disability examination and medical opinion be requested for certain non-presumptive conditions involving toxic exposure risk activity (TERA). For such claims, VA is required to provide a disability examination and medical opinion when the Veteran submits a claim for compensation, has evidence of a disability, had evidence of participation in a TERA, and such evidence is not sufficient to establish service connection for the disability. A Veteran can claim participation in a TERA explicitly or implicitly through service in a location presumed associated with toxic exposure, or records showing participation in a TERA; or, if VA has conceded exposure in a prior claim, or the file has a claim attributable to toxic exposure.

As there is evidence of current diagnoses and presumption of participation in a TERA, and the evidence is not sufficient to establish service connection, a VA medical opinion as to all claims is warranted under 38 U.S.C. § 1168(a).

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Obtain a VA examination on the current nature and etiology of the Veteran's CAD and bilateral upper and lower extremity neuropathy. The claims file, including a copy of this REMAND, must be made available to the examiner prior to providing an opinion. The examiner is requested to opine as to the following:

(a.) Determine whether it is at least likely as not (likelihood is approximately balanced, or nearly equal if not higher) that each condition is causally related to service.

(b.) Determine whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is approximately balanced, or nearly equal if not higher) that each condition is related to or otherwise caused by TERA.

In providing this opinion, the VA examiner is requested to determine and consider the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments and service, as well as the synergistic and combined total effect of all TERA. 

 

John R. Doolittle, II

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	R. Watkins, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.