Citation Nr: A25034930
Decision Date: 04/16/25	Archive Date: 04/16/25

DOCKET NO. 240701-452093
DATE: April 16, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for eye condition is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for heart murmur is denied.

From August 25, 2023, entitlement to a compensable rating for service-connected pseudofolliculitis barbae (PFB) is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for left ankle pain is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The probative evidence of record is against finding a causal connection between the in-service event and the Veteran's current eye disabilities.  

2. The Veteran does not have a current diagnosis of a heart murmur.  

3. At no time during the period on appeal has the Veteran's PFB been manifested by characteristic lesions involving at least 5 percent, but less than 20 percent, of the entire body or exposed areas, or treatment with systemic therapy for a total duration of less than six weeks during the past 12-month period.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for an eye condition have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.304.

2. The criteria for entitlement to service connection for heart murmur have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.304.

3. From August 25, 2023, the criteria for entitlement to a compensable rating for service-connected PFB have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7, 4.59, 4.118, Diagnostic Code (DC) 7813.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from July 1970 to July 1973.      

The rating decisions on appeal were issued in February 2024 and constitute an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.

In the July 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the February 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decisions on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of entitlement to service connection for left ankle pain, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of that claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103 (c)(2)(ii). 

In December 2024, the Board received a VA Form 21-22, electing a private attorney as the Veteran's representative. However, for appeals in the AMA system, a Veteran has 90 days from the date of the Board's receipt of the VA Form 10182 to request a change in representation. See 38 C.F.R. § 20.1304.  Here, the Form 10182 was received in July 2024, but the Form 21-22 was received in December 2024, which is past the 90-day mark, requiring good cause for the change in representation. The record does not provide any explanation for the change in representation.  Accordingly, the Board finds that good cause has not been presented.  Accordingly, the American Legion remains the Veteran's representative for this appeal. 

SERVICE CONNECTION

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from a disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active military, naval, or air service.  38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a).  Service connection may be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).

Establishing service connection generally requires (1) medical evidence of a current disability; (2) medical or, in certain circumstances, lay evidence of in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) medical evidence of a nexus between the claimed in-service disease or injury and the current disability.  Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

In rendering a decision on appeal, the Board must analyze the credibility and probative value of the evidence, account for the evidence which it finds to be persuasive or?unpersuasive and?provide the reasons for its rejection of any material evidence favorable to the claimant.  Gabrielson v. Brown, 7?Vet. App.?36, 39-40 (1994).  Competency of evidence differs from weight and credibility.

A lay person is competent to report on the onset and reoccurrence of current symptomatology.  See Layno v. Brown, 6?Vet. App.?465, 470 (1994) (a veteran is competent to report on that of which he or she has personal knowledge).? The Board must determine, on a?case-by-case?basis, whether a veteran's particular disability is the type of disability for which lay evidence may be competent.  See Kahana v. Shinseki, 24?Vet. App.?428, 438 (2011); see Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1376-77 (Fed. Cir. 2007).

Generally, the degree of probative value which may be attributed to a medical opinion issued by a VA or private treatment provider takes into account such factors as its thoroughness and degree of detail, and whether there was review of the claims file.  See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22?Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008).  

VA is responsible for determining whether the evidence supports the claim or is in relative equipoise, with a claimant prevailing in either event.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.  The claimant is entitled to the benefit of the doubt when there is an "approximate" (meaning nearly equal) balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any material determination.  See Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776, 781 (2021); Ortiz?v.?Principi, 274 F.3d 1361, 1364 (Fed. Cir. 2001).

1. Entitlement to service connection for eye condition

The Veteran asserts that his eye condition is due to service.  See July 2024 Notice of Disagreement (VA Form 10182); October 2023 Fully Developed Claim (VA Form 21-526EZ).  Specifically, the Veteran contends that he was diagnosed with conjunctivitis while stationed in Manheim, Germany.  See October 2023 Lay Witness Statement (VA Form 21-10210).  He still experiences issues with his eyes, which has resulted in him now having to wear eyeglasses.  Id.  

The Veteran has met the first element of service connection.  In a December 2023 VA examination, the Veteran was diagnosed with pinguecula, combined cataracts, and hypertensive retinopathy.  The Board notes that the Veteran was not diagnosed with conjunctivitis.  Thus, the first element of service connection is met.  

Regarding the second element of service connection, in the February 2024 rating decision on appeal, the AOJ favorably found that a qualifying event, injury, or disease had its onset during service as the Veteran's service records show a complaint of eye problem-aching sensation on June 11, 1973.  The Board is bound by this favorable finding.  38 C.F.R. § 3.104 (c).  In this regard, the June 11, 1973, service treatment record (STR), referred to in the favorable finding, was an examination that diagnosed the Veteran with conjunctivitis.  As such, the second element of service connection is met.  

Therefore, this claim depends on the third element of service connection, whether there is a nexus between any of the Veteran's current eye disabilities and his service.  The Board finds the evidence is persuasively against such a finding.  

When VA examined the Veteran in December 2023, the examiner did not diagnose the Veteran with conjunctivitis, but did diagnose the Veteran with pinguecula, combined cataracts, and retinopathy.  The Veteran reported that he had an exam during service on June 11, 1973, after suffering from aching sensation in both eyes for about 2 weeks prior.  He was diagnosed with conjunctival infection and told to return as needed.  He was unable to read handwritten notes regarding any prescribed medication.  Since the onset, the condition has resolved.  The Veteran reported no recurrences of conjunctivitis or any lasting effects or complications from the episode in 1973.  The Veteran reported that he was diagnosed with diabetic and/or hypertensive retinopathy on April 23, 2015, after a referral to ophthalmology.  Regarding cataracts, the Veteran reported onset on June 10, 2015, which were discovered in a routine eye exam. 

The examiner checked the box indicating the claimed condition was at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness.  However, the examiner's rationale was against a nexus.  The examiner reasoned that during service, the Veteran had an exam on June 11, 1973, for an aching sensation in both eyes that was diagnosed as a "conjunctival infection" (conjunctivitis) of both eyes.  The handwritten note is illegible, so the specific treatment is unable to be ascertained.  The Veteran was told to return for further care if needed.  No further visits were noted in the Veteran's service treatment records (STRs) and no ocular conditions or complaints were listed on the Veteran's separation health assessment (SHA) on May 2, 1973.  In the absence of further care, current lack of findings, lack of complaints on the SHA, and the fact that conjunctivitis itself is a temporary condition, the examiner concluded the conjunctivitis had fully resolved by separation from service.

In a February 2024 addendum opinion, the examiner clarified that the December 2023 nexus opinion should have been answered in the negative.  The February 2024 VA addendum corrected the December 2023 opinion, in which the examiner opined that the claimed 'eye condition (claimed as conjunctivitis)' was less likely than not incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness as the conjunctivitis had completely resolved while the Veteran was still in service.  Furthermore, the Veteran's diagnoses of pinguecula, combined cataracts, and hypertensive retinopathy are completely separate and unrelated to the conjunctivitis that occurred, and resolved, during service.  

The Board finds the December 2023 and February 2024 VA opinions highly probative.  The Veteran's conjunctivitis was a temporary condition that resolved during service.  The Veteran reported that he had no further complications or recurrences of conjunctivitis since 1973.  The pinguecula, combined cataracts, and retinopathy conditions were not diagnosed until years after the Veteran's service.  There was no continued symptomatology during service or since service, and the examiner found that the diagnosed conditions were completely separate and unrelated to the Veteran's conjunctivitis during service.  The Board found no other medical records showing complaints of or treatment of any of the above conditions. Additionally, the Veteran is not service connected for diabetes or hypertension.

The Board acknowledges that the Veteran believes his eye condition is related to an in-service injury, event or disease.  In an October 2023 Witness Statement (VA Form 21-10210) the Veteran reported that he was diagnosed with conjunctivitis while stationed at Mannheim, Germany.  Today, he still experiences issues with his eyes, which has resulted in him now wearing eyeglasses.  

The Board has considered all of the Veteran's statements and acknowledges that he is competent to report his symptoms and has presented credible statements in this regard.  Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 469-70 (1994).  The Veteran is not, however, competent to provide a nexus opinion regarding this issue.  The issue is medically complex, as it requires knowledge of anatomical relationships.  Woehlaert v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 456 (2007).  There is no indication that the Veteran has the medical training or credentials to decide that the symptoms he observed are manifestations of his eye condition.  Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 n.4 (Fed. Cir. 2007); see also Kahana v. Shinseki, 24. Vet. App. 428 (2011).  Therefore, to the extent that the Veteran alleges a medical nexus, the Board finds such statements have limited probative weight.

The Board notes that the VA examiner is a medical professional, competent to measure motion, determine physical characteristics and deformities, and opine as to the medical nexus of the Veteran's eye condition.  There is no evidence that the December 2023 examiner is not credible.  Moreover, the examiner provided an analysis based upon both subjective and objective information to form an opinion based upon medical expertise.  As such, the Board affords the December 2023 VA examination significant probative weight.

For the above reasons, the probative evidence of the record persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran is entitled to service connection for an eye condition.  The benefit of the doubt doctrine therefore does not apply.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc) (only when the evidence persuasively favors one side, or another is the benefit of the doubt doctrine not for application).  Further, neither the Veteran nor his representative has raised any other issues, nor have any other issues been reasonably raised by the record.  See Doucette v. Shulkin, 28 Vet. App. 366, 69-70 (2017).  Thus, the Board must deny the claim.  

2. Entitlement to service connection for heart murmur

The Veteran asserts that he has a heart murmur that is due to service.  See July 2024 Notice of Disagreement (VA Form 10182); October 2023 Fully Developed Claim (VA Form 21-526EZ).  Specifically, the Veteran contends that he was diagnosed during active duty, and the condition is being treated with medication.  See October 2023 Lay Witness Statement (VA Form 21-10210).  

In the February 2024 rating decision on appeal, the AOJ favorably found that a qualifying event, injury, or disease had its onset during service; service records show treatment for a heart murmur.  The Board is bound by this favorable finding.  38 C.F.R. § 3.104 (c).  

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in November 2023 for this claim.  The examiner did not diagnose the Veteran with a heart murmur.  The Veteran reported that he was told he had a heart murmur while in service.  He takes blood pressure medication for his high blood pressure, but otherwise does not have any other known heart conditions.  The examiner found that the Veteran does not take any medication for a heart murmur, does not have a myocardial infarction, arrhythmia, heart valve conditions, infectious heart conditions, pericardial adhesions, cardiac hypertrophy, cardiac dilation, congestive heart failure, or had any heart procedures.  Upon physical examination, the examiner found a normal heart rate, regular rhythm, 4th intercoastal space point of maximal impact, normal heart sounds, no jugular-venous distension, clear auscultation of the lungs, normal peripheral pulses, and trace peripheral edema.  The examiner conducted an interview-based metabolic equivalents (METs) test.  The Veteran denied experiencing symptoms attributable to a cardiac condition with any level of physical activity as a result of the METs test.

The examiner opined that the claimed condition was less likely than not (likelihood is less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness.  The examiner reasoned that based on review of the available evidence, it is less likely than not that the claimed condition is due to service as there is a lack of substantiating evidence supporting a nexus. There was no diagnosis warranted on exam today. Veteran's C-file indicated one exam from 1973 in which the Veteran was noted to have a murmur.  However, there was no murmur present on exam today and there has been multiple exams since 1973 in which he was noted not to have a murmur present.  Without chronicity or murmur present on exam today, it is more likely that this was a temporary condition in which has since been resolved.

The Board has carefully reviewed the Veteran's post-service treatment records for evidence of a current disability for a heart murmur but found none.  There are no records showing an active heart murmur during or proximate to the Veteran's October 2023 claim.  During a June 2018 annual examination, the Veteran's VA primary care provider evaluated the Veteran's heart as "RSR without murmur." While the Veteran's VA treatment records indicate he is prescribed medication for his "heart and blood pressure", there is no evidence currently of recent to suggest it is taken for a heart murmur.

The Board acknowledges the statements the Veteran submitted in which he highlights that he was diagnosed with a heart murmur in service and has been treated with medication.  The Board does not dispute this fact.  Indeed, it finds that this treatment satisfies the second prong of his service connection claim showing he had an in-service incurrence.  However, this is only one prong of the three-prong test which the Veteran must meet to establish service connection. 

The Board has considered all of the Veteran's statements and acknowledges that he is competent to report his symptoms and has presented credible statements in this regard.  Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 469-70 (1994).  The Veteran is not, however, competent to provide a nexus opinion regarding this issue.  The issue is medically complex, as it requires knowledge of anatomical relationships.  Woehlaert v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 456 (2007).  There is no indication that the Veteran has the medical training or credentials to decide that the symptoms he observed are manifestations of a heart murmur.  Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 n.4 (Fed. Cir. 2007); see also Kahana v. Shinseki, 24. Vet. App. 428 (2011).  Therefore, to the extent that the Veteran alleges a medical nexus, the Board finds such statements have limited probative weight.

In the absence of proof of a current disability, there can be no valid claim for service connection. Brammer v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 223, 225 (1992). The requirement that a current disability be present is satisfied "when a claimant has a disability at the time a claim for VA disability compensation is filed or during the pendency of that claim...even though the disability resolves prior to the Secretary's adjudication of the claim." McClain v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 319 (2007).

For the above reasons, the probative evidence of the record persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran is entitled to service connection for heart murmur.  The benefit of the doubt doctrine therefore does not apply.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc) (only when the evidence persuasively favors one side, or another is the benefit of the doubt doctrine not for application).  Thus, the Board must deny the claim.  

Increased Rating

Disability ratings are determined by applying a schedule of ratings that is based on average impairment of earning capacity.  Separate diagnostic codes identify the various disabilities.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R., Part 4.  Each disability must be viewed in relation to its history and the limitation of activity imposed by the disabling condition should be emphasized.  38 C.F.R. § 4.1.

Where entitlement to compensation already has been established and an increase in the disability rating is at issue, it is the present level of disability that is of primary concern.  See Francisco v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 55, 58 (1994).  The Board will consider whether separate ratings may be assigned for separate periods of time based on facts found, a practice known as "staged ratings," whether it is an initial rating case or not.  See Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505, 509-10 (2007).

Where there is a question as to which of two evaluations shall be applied, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria for that rating.  Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7.

When a Veteran seeks an increased evaluation, it will generally be presumed that the maximum benefit allowed by law and regulation is sought, and it follows that such a claim remains in controversy where less than the maximum benefit available is awarded.  AB v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 35, 38 (1993).  

3. Entitlement to a rating in excess of 0 percent for service-connected pseudofolliculitis barbae

The Veteran asserts that he is entitled to a rating in excess of 0 percent for service-connected pseudofolliculitis barbae.  See July 2024 Notice of Disagreement (VA Form 10182); October 2023 Fully Developed Claim (VA Form 21-526EZ).  

In an August 24, 2015, rating decision, the AOJ granted service connection for pseudofolliculitis barbae with a 0 percent rating effective January 30, 2014.  The Veteran did not continuously pursue the claim, as he filed an intent to file on August 25, 2023, and a Fully Developed Claim (VA Form 21-526EZ) for an increase rating on October 5, 2023, more than one year after the final August 24, 2015, rating decision.  Thus, the period on appeal is from August 25, 2022, (one year lookback) to February 13, 2024 (the date of the notification letter for the rating decision on appeal).  

The Veteran's PFB is rated under DC 7813.  Diagnostic Code 7813 provides that the disability is to be evaluated under the General Rating Formula for the Skin. Under the General Rating Formula for the Skin, a noncompensable rating is warranted if the skin condition requires no more than topical therapy required over the past 12-month period and at least one of the following: characteristic lesions involving less than 5 percent of the entire body affected; or characteristic lesions involving less than 5 percent of exposed areas affected.

A 10 percent rating is warranted if the skin condition is manifested by one of the following: characteristic lesions involving at least 5 percent, but less than 20 percent, of the entire body affected; or at least 5 percent, but less than 20 percent of exposed areas affected; or intermittent systemic therapy including, but not limited to, corticosteroids, phototherapy, retinoids, biologics, photochemotherapy, psoralen with long-wave ultraviolet-A light (PUVA), or other immunosuppressive drugs required for a total duration of less than 6 weeks over the past 12-month period.

A 30 percent rating is warranted if the skin condition is manifested by at least one of the following: characteristic lesions involving 20 to 40 percent of the entire body or 20 to 40 percent of exposed areas affected; or Systemic therapy including, but not limited to, corticosteroids, phototherapy, retinoids, biologics, photochemotherapy, PUVA, or other immunosuppressive drugs required for a total duration of 6 weeks or more, but not constantly, over the past 12-month period.

A 60 percent rating is warranted if the skin condition is manifested by at least one of the following: characteristic lesions involving more than 40 percent of the entire body or more than 40 percent of exposed area affected; or constant or near-constant systemic therapy including, but not limited to corticosteroids, phototherapy, retinoids, biologics, photochemotherapy, PUVA, or other immunosuppressive drugs required over the past 12-month period.

The Board notes that changes were made to 38 C.F.R. § 4.118, DC 7813.  Effective August 13, 2018, VA amended its regulations governing skin disabilities.  VA's intent is that the claims pending prior to the effective date will be considered under both old and new rating criteria, and whatever criteria is more favorable to the veteran will be applied.  For applications filed on or after the effective date, only the new criteria will be applied. 83 Fed. Reg. 32592 (July 13, 2018).

As noted above, the Veteran filed an intent to file on August 25, 2023, and a Fully Developed Claim on October 5, 2023.  Thus, the post-amendment criteria will be applied.  

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in November 2023, where the examiner confirmed a diagnosis of PFB.  The examiner found that the Veteran's PFB is located on his neck.  The Veteran reported that he last shaved approximately 20 years ago and tries to avoid shaving.  When the Veteran does shave, his neck becomes very itchy and irritated, with a raised bumpy rash.  The Veteran was required to shave "dry" in the military, which he attributes to the initial diagnosis.  The examiner noted that the Veteran had PFB on less than five percent of his total body area and less than 5 percent of exposed area.  The examiner also noted that the Veteran has not been treated with oral or topical medications in the past 12 months for any skin condition. The Veteran also did not have any treatments or procedures other than systemic or topical medications in the past 12 months for any skin condition.  The examiner noted that there was no scarring, lesions, or rashes present.  The Veteran did not have any tumors or neoplasms, and the condition did not impact his ability to work.   

The Veteran's VA treatment records do not show any treatment for his PFB during the period on appeal.

The evidence shows that the Veteran did not have characteristic lesions involving at least 5 percent of the entire body or exposed areas, or any systemic therapy; the minimum requirement for a compensable rating under DC 7816.  As such, the Veteran's PFB more nearly approximates the criteria for a noncompensable rating under DC 7816.  To the extent the Veteran contends his PFB warrants a compensable rating, the Board notes that he is not competent to determine a specific disability rating for this condition.  Instead, the Board finds the November 2023 VA examination to be the only probative and competent evidence in determining the current severity of the Veteran's PFB.  

Accordingly, the most probative evidence of record persuasively weighs against the claim of entitlement to a compensable rating for pseudofolliculitis barbae.  As the most probative evidence of record persuasively weighs against a compensable rating, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).  The Board notes that no other issues were raised by the Veteran or the representative, nor have any other issues been reasonably raised by the record.  See Doucette v. Shulkin, 28 Vet. App. 366, 369-70 (2017) (confirming that the Board is not required to address issues unless they are specifically raised by the claimant or reasonably raised by the evidence of record).  Therefore, the Veteran's claim is denied.  

REASONS FOR REMAND

Entitlement to service connection for left ankle pain

Under the AMA, the Board may only remand an issue for the correction of (1) duty to assist errors occurring prior to the date of the AOJ decision on appeal (i.e., pre-decisional duty to assist errors) and (2)?AOJ errors in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty, if correction of such error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the appellant's claim. ?See?38?C.F.R. §?20.802 (a).? Having reviewed the evidence of record, the Board finds that remand for pre-decisional duty to assist errors is required.

VA is required to give due consideration to all pertinent competent medical and lay evidence.  Competent lay evidence is any evidence not requiring that the proponent have specialized education, training, or experience.  Lay evidence is competent if it is provided by a person who has knowledge of facts or circumstances and conveys matters that can be observed and described by a lay person.  38 C.F.R. § 3.159 (a)(2).  

The Veteran asserts that his left ankle pain is due to service.  See July 2024 Notice of Disagreement (VA Form 10182); October 2023 Fully Developed Claim (VA Form 21-526EZ).  Specifically, the Veteran contends that he injured his left ankle while playing basketball in Germany and still experiences arthritis and pain in his left ankle.  See October 2023 Lay Witness Statement (VA Form 21-10210).  

In the February 2024 rating decision on appeal, the AOJ favorably found that a qualifying event, injury, or disease had its onset during service; service records show treatment for a left ankle condition.  The Board is bound by this favorable finding.  38 C.F.R. § 3.104 (c).  

During a November 2023 VA examination, the examiner did not diagnose the Veteran with any disability of the left ankle.  The Veteran reported that he injured his ankle while playing basketball in service.  His ankle improved since the initial injury, but he chronically still has pain.  The Veteran described the pain as aching/throbbing on the medial side of the left ankle, with intermittent needle type pain.  The Veteran uses a cane, but otherwise has no other current treatment.  The examiner found functional impairment, as the Veteran cannot run and cannot walk for prolonged periods of time due to ankle pain.  He must use the motorized carts when grocery shopping.  The examiner opined that the claimed condition was less likely than not (likelihood is less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness.  The examiner reasoned that Veteran has claimed left ankle pain as being directly related to military service.  Based on review of the available evidence, it is less likely than not that the claimed condition is due to service as there is a lack of substantiating evidence supporting a nexus.  There was no ankle diagnosis warranted on exam today and the Veteran's c-file was absent for evidence of a chronic ankle condition.  Without chronicity during service or after service, a post-service event, illness, or injury is considered to be a more likely etiology.

The Board finds the VA examination and opinion inadequate as the VA examiner did not consider the Veteran's left ankle pain rising to the level of functional impairment that impacted his earning capacity.  Regarding the "current disability" element of service connection, "pain need not be diagnosed as connected to a current underlying condition to function as an impairment."  Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356, 1364 (Fed. Cir. 2018).  Rather, "[t]o establish the presence of a disability, a veteran will need to show that [their] pain reaches the level of a functional impairment of earning capacity."  Id. at 1367-68.  This definition of "disability" does not "require that pain must affect some aspect of the normal working movements of the body" or that "pain must be tied to physical evidence of a lack of functionality and/or physical evidence of a current disease or injury."  Id. at 1366-67.  Here, the Veteran reported that he chronically still has aching/throbbing and needle type pain in his left ankle and must use a cane to walk.  He cannot run and cannot walk for prolonged periods of time due to his ankle pain.  Thus, under Saunders, the Veteran's left ankle pain could be considered a disability, and a VA opinion is required to determine if the pain rose to a level of functional impact that impacted the Veteran's earning capacity.  

Given the foregoing, the Board finds remand for a VA medical opinion is needed to determine whether the Veteran's left ankle pain is attributable to service, to include pain that causes functional impairment.  See Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356, 1368 (Fed. Cir. 2018) (holding pain alone could constitute a disability under 38 U.S.C. § 1110 when it results in functional impairment).  The failure to obtain an adequate VA medical opinion constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error, thus a remand is appropriate.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802 (a).

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Obtain an opinion to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's left ankle pain. The evidentiary record, including a copy of this remand, must be made available to, and be reviewed by the clinician. Schedule the Veteran for an examination if one is deemed necessary by the clinician. After the record review, and examination of the Veteran, if deemed necessary, the reviewing clinician is asked to respond to the following:

(a) Identify any left ankle condition by either (i) diagnosis or (ii) functional impairment.

(b) For each disability identified, opine whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) the Veteran's left ankle pain had onset in or is related service.  

The clinician should address the Veteran's lay statements from October 2023 and at the November 2023 VA examination, including that his symptoms started during service, he chronically has aching/throbbing and needle type pain in his left ankle, and must use a cane to walk.   

The clinician is reminded that the Veteran is competent to report symptoms, treatment, and injuries, and that such reports must be considered in formulating the requested opinion. If the clinician rejects the Veteran's reports, he or she must provide a rationale for doing so.  

The clinician should explain the reasoning for any opinion provided, to include the medical significance of any findings, as adjudicators are precluded from making medical findings. If the clinician is unable to offer an opinion without resort to speculation, a thorough explanation as to why an opinion cannot be rendered should be provided, identifying precisely what facts could not be determined.  In particular, the clinician should comment on whether an opinion could not be provided because the limits of medical knowledge have been exhausted or whether additional testing or information could be obtained that would lead to a conclusive opinion.  

(Continued on the next page)

?

The clinician is also reminded that the absence of contemporaneous records showing complaints of, diagnosis, or treatment for the condition alone, is insufficient rationale for a nexus opinion.

Ensure that the VA medical opinions obtained includes a complete rationale for the conclusions reached.

 

 

Tiffany Dawson

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Molitoris, Lee A.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.