Citation Nr: A25034134
Decision Date: 04/14/25	Archive Date: 04/14/25

DOCKET NO. 240703-453852
DATE: April 14, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for left ear hearing loss is remanded.

Entitlement to an initial compensable rating for right ear hearing loss is remanded.

Entitlement to an initial compensable rating for right ear drum perforation is remanded.

Entitlement to an initial compensable rating for migraine headaches is remanded.

Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 10 percent for left knee disability is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from August 2019 to August 2023.  

This matter is before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an April 2024 rating decision by a Department of Veterans Affairs Regional Office (RO).  On the Decision Review Request Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) VA Form 10182, received in July 2024, the Veteran requested a Direct Review by a Veterans Law Judge.  In this regard, the Board notes that under the direct review option, no additional evidence received after the appealed rating decision is to be considered; rather, review is limited to the evidence on record at the time of the decision.

The claims on appeal were filed within one year following the Veteran's separation from service.  Therefore, the Veteran's service treatment records (STRs) are particularly pertinent to the nature and severity of the service connection and increased rating claims on appeal.  However, STRs have not been associated with the claims file, and the record does not indicate that efforts were made to obtain them.

As such, a duty to assist existed at the time of the April 2024 rating decision to obtain the Veteran's STRs, and a remand is warranted to cure this duty to assist error.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Request the Veteran's STRs.  If multiple requests are required to obtain all the information sought, they should be made.  All requests and responses received from each contacted entity should be associated with the claims file.  If the requested STRs are unavailable, issue a formal finding of unavailability and notify the Veteran and allow him the opportunity to submit any medical records in his possession.

 

 

Marcus N. Fulton

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Lamb, Christopher

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.1303.