Citation Nr: A25034112
Decision Date: 04/14/25	Archive Date: 04/14/25

DOCKET NO. 240711-453859
DATE: April 14, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for diabetes mellitus type II as secondary to the Veteran's service-connected right shoulder and left knee disabilities is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran's service-connected right shoulder and left knee disabilities caused or aggravated his diabetes. 

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to service connection for diabetes mellitus type II as secondary to the Veteran's service-connected right shoulder and left knee disabilities have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.310.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from August 1983 to September 2003, including reenlistment in May 1988. 

The Veteran submitted a Supplemental Claim for service connection for his diabetes in September 2023. This claim was denied in a January 2024 rating decision by the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ). In July 2024, the Veteran appealed that decision via a notice of disagreement (NOD) and elected the Direct Review Docket. 

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the January 2024 AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

1. Entitlement to service connection for as secondary to the Veteran's service-connected right shoulder and left knee disabilities

The Veteran contended in an April 2023 statement in support of his claim that his diabetes is secondary to his service-connected right shoulder and left knee disabilities. 

In a brief filed in July 2024, the Veteran's representative argued that the Veteran's right shoulder and left knee disabilities caused or aggravated the Veteran's diabetes with obesity as an intermediate step. The Board notes here that the Veteran filed a new VA Form 21-22a to appoint a new representative following receipt of this brief. However, VA does not believe that proceeding without an opportunity for the new representative deprives the Veteran of his due process rights of representation because the new representative is a member of the same organization as his previous one, and the former representative is listed on the 21-22a as a person granted access to the Veteran's claims file. Further, as this is a grant of the benefit sought, the Veteran is not prejudiced by this action.

Factual Background

The Veteran's service treatment records are silent for any complaints related to diabetes mellitus type II. The Veteran's entrance exam and report of medical history are normal. His separation exam is normal - other than noted skin issues - and the associated report of medical history is negative for any then-current or historical issues with high or low blood sugar. On repeated exams and questionnaires throughout his period of service, the Veteran continually denied having diabetes. 

At his July 2003 separation exam, the Veteran's weight was recorded as being 200 pounds. 

In an April 2012 blood test, the Veteran's blood glucose level was noted as high. He was initially diagnosed as pre-diabetic in February 2015. At that time, it was noted that the Veteran was overweight, and diet and exercise were the initially outlined treatment. However, it was also noted that the Veteran stated the hardest features of diabetic self-care for him would be diet, exercise, and weight loss. 

At several VA medical center visits from at least January 2015 to April 2023, the Veteran reported either getting no exercise or only getting exercise by walking at work, although in the intervening years the importance of regular exercise - as well as diet and weight reduction - was repeatedly stressed to the Veteran as a part of diabetic care. 

In July 2015, the Veteran was given an examination for his now-service-connected right shoulder disability. The examiner noted that the Veteran had pain in his right arm on use which caused a functional loss and pain on flexion, abduction, and external and internal rotation. 

The Veteran's diabetes diagnosis was noted in VA medical center records as early as July 2016, when it was noted that he had an HbA1c greater than 7.9. In February 2017 it was noted he had new onset diabetes and an A1c of 6.5. In June 2017 VA medical center staff noted that the Veteran's diabetes was managed well with diet, and he was again provided with information on exercise. In March 2018, the Veteran reported that he feared his blood sugar was going back up, and that he hadn't been following a diet or weight loss plan as he had before, and wanted to try diet and exercise again before beginning medications for blood sugar management. At the same time, it was noted that his A1c had gone from 6.0 to 7.0 while his weight had gone from 226 to 239 pounds. 

In July 2021, the Veteran's A1c was greater than 7.9 and VA medical staff reinforced the importance of diet and exercise to diabetic care. The same notations were made again in February and March 2022. The Veteran's weight was 235 pounds, and this was noted as a three-pound weight loss since 2020. 

In December 2022, the Veteran was given an examination for his now-service-connected left knee disability. That examiner noted that the Veteran's knee pain was a chronic issue persistent since service and caused limitations on the Veteran's ability to walk, run, jump, squat or lift and the examiner determined the Veteran ought to avoid jobs requiring these sorts of physical activity. 

In April 2023, VA medical center staff recorded that the Veteran's A1c was over 7.9. In the same month, the Veteran submitted a statement in support his claim, and reported his then-current weight as 235 pounds. 

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination for his diabetes claim in May 2023. This examiner opined that the Veteran's diabetes had no relationship to his right shoulder nor his left knee disabilities because diabetes is a completely separate issue sharing no relationship with either of those service-connected disabilities. The examiner thus declined to find a nexus between the diabetes and the Veteran's claimed primary disabilities. In October 2023, the Veteran was given a new VA exam, and this examiner reached the same conclusions as to whether the Veteran's diabetes was caused by his right shoulder and left knee disabilities. This examiner also opined on whether the Veteran's diabetes was caused by in-service exposure to petroleum and wood dust, and rejected finding a nexus because of a lack of relationship between those exposures and diabetes and because of the Veteran's other diabetic risk factors - including obesity. Neither examiner opined on potential aggravation of the diabetes by the Veteran's service-connected disabilities. 

In September 2023, the Veteran submitted a private medical opinion on a potential nexus between his claimed diabetes and his right shoulder and left knee service-connected disabilities. This examiner opined that it was at least as likely as not that the Veteran's right shoulder and left knee disabilities caused or aggravated his diabetes. The examiner opined that the Veteran's right shoulder and left knee disabilities lowered the Veteran's ability to exercise or perform other physical activities, which in turn caused obesity, which then caused or worsened the Veteran's diabetes. The opinion is informed by the Veteran's lay statements and medical records, as well as medical literature describing the nexus between musculoskeletal pain and obesity as well as the relationship between obesity and diabetes. 

Analysis

Service connection may be granted for disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.  This may be accomplished by affirmatively showing inception or aggravation during service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a). Service connection may also be granted for disability shown after service, when all of the evidence, including that pertinent to service, shows that it was incurred in service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).  

Service connection may also be granted on a secondary basis for a disability which was caused or aggravated by a service-connected disability. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310. 

A VA General Counsel opinion, VAOPGCPREC 1-2017, dated January 6, 2017, has confirmed that obesity may be an intermediate step between a veteran's service-connected disorder and the veteran's current disability with entitlement to service connection on a secondary basis.

In Garner v. Tran, the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) set forth a non-exhaustive list of considerations that could give rise to a reasonably raised theory of secondary service connection with obesity as an intermediate step: (1) mobility limitations or reduced physical activity as a result of a service- connected physical disability; (2) reduced physical activity or inability to follow a course of exercise or diet as a result of service-connected mental disability; (3) side effects of medication where the medication is prescribed for a service-connected disability; (4) treatise evidence suggesting a connection between all or some combination of obesity, service-connected disability, and the claimed condition; (5) lay statements by a veteran attributing weight gain or obesity to the service-connected disability; and (6) statements by treating physicians or medical examiners attributing weight gain or obesity to the service-connected disability.  Garner v. Tran, 33 Vet. App. 241, 247-48 (2021).

In the January 2024 rating decision, the AOJ made the favorable finding that the Veteran has a current disability - diabetes mellitus type II. The Board is bound by this favorable finding. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c). Further, the Veteran's claimed primary disabilities are service-connected. Thus, the questions remaining to the Board are whether the Veteran's diabetes was directly caused by service, or whether his shoulder and knee disabilities caused or aggravated his diabetes. 

Here, there is insufficient evidence to show direct causation. First, the Veteran's service treatment records are silent for any diabetes-related complaints. Further, the October 2023 VA examination and opinion as to whether petroleum exposure caused the Veteran's diabetes is the only medical opinion speaking to this issue. That opinion rejects a nexus, and so the probative evidence does not establish this as a theory of entitlement. Finally, neither the May nor October 2023 VA exams, nor the September 2023 opine on whether there is a positive nexus directly between the Veteran's service and his diabetes. Thus, the remaining question is whether the Veteran's service-connected disabilities caused or aggravated his diabetes on a secondary basis. 

The probative evidence suggests it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran's right shoulder and left knee disabilities aggravated his diabetes. First, the VA examinations reject direct causation of diabetes by the service-connected disabilities because they are completely separate systems, but they do not squarely address whether those disabilities may have aggravated the Veteran's diabetes. The Board may read the broad statements that these disabilities are completely separate entities from diabetes as a negative statement as to aggravation, but even were the Board to do this, these opinions would still be of limited probative value because they do not address whether obesity could be a viable intermediate step causing aggravation of the Veteran's diabetes. 

Applying the Garner v. Tran considerations discussed above, the record does reasonably raise obesity as an intermediate step between the Veteran's service-connected disabilities and his diabetes. The exams for the Veteran's right shoulder and left knee disabilities show limited functionality and reduced movement caused by those disabilities. The Veteran's medical record also shows limited exercise by the Veteran - other than walking, which is an activity limited by the Veteran's knee disability. While the medical record does not directly show that the Veteran exercised regularly before service-connection for these disabilities, those disabilities by virtue of their service connection are shown to be incurred in or caused by service, and so the Board can reasonably assume that the Veteran's mobility has been limited by at least the Veteran's left knee disability since the examiner for that disability specifically found the issue has been persistent since the Veteran's separation. The record does not contradict this, nor that the Veteran's lack of exercise or limited physical activity is due to any other factor. The private opinion makes the explicit statement that the Veteran's exercise is limited by his service-connected disabilities. Finally, the private opinion makes the explicit finding - supported by the record - that the Veteran has had weight gain since service, and that there is a connection, with reference to medical literature, between the Veteran's service-connected disability, obesity, and his diabetes diagnosis. This is also supported by the October 2023 examiner's statement that the Veteran's obesity was a risk factor for diabetes. However, the opinion does not address whether obesity was caused by the Veteran's service-connected disabilities and acted as an intermediate step or aggravating factor for the Veteran's diabetes. 

The only evidence directly speaking to the potential intermediary effect of obesity on the Veteran's diabetes is the September 2023 private opinion. The private opinion writer is competent to provide such an opinion, and the writer's reference to the Veteran's medical record and application of that record to provided medical literature bolsters the credibility of the opinion. The probative argument is that the Veteran's right shoulder and left knee disabilities limited the Veteran's ability to exercise or perform physical activities, that this caused or aggravated the Veteran's obesity, which in turn caused or aggravated the Veteran's diabetes. The opinion writer makes direct reference to the Veteran's medical records including his weight gain, impact of his service-connected disabilities, and documented lack of exercise, and applies this evidence to the known risk factors of a lack of exercise in developing obesity and obesity's impact on the development or severity of diabetes. This is thus highly probative evidence of obesity as an intermediate step, which VA has recognized as a viable theory of entitlement to secondary service connection in the General Counsel opinion referenced above. 

Weighing against this theory is a lack of documentation in the medical record of any exercise post-service before the Veteran's documented weight gain. However, as discussed above this may be attributable to the effects of the disabilities which were to become service-connected. This is especially true in regard to the Veteran's knee which limited his ability to walk, which is the only form of exercise the record shows the Veteran had. Thus, even if the Veteran were able to exercise before developing his diabetes, his service-connected disabilities ultimately did and continue to limit his ability to exercise which the private opinion shows can lead to obesity which can lead to worsening of the Veteran's diabetes. The medical records also show that exercise is repeatedly recommended to the Veteran as a way to manage his diabetes. So, as made clear in the private opinion, disabilities limiting his ability to exercise limit his ability to manage his diabetes.

However, the Veteran's medical records and the VA opinions also show that the Veteran has other risk factors for diabetes - such as his age and race - beyond his weight, and the private opinion does not address these confounding factors. Thus, it may be possible that other factors have contributed to the development or severity of the Veteran's diabetes. The Veteran himself reported that diet and weight loss ranked alongside exercise as the diabetic care factors that would be most difficult for him to follow. 

(Continued on the next page)

?

Thus, viewing the record in the light most favorable to the Veteran, the Board finds that the evidence addressing whether the Veteran's obesity is secondary to his service-connected right shoulder and left knee disabilities is in at least approximate balance with evidence to the contrary. The evidence also is at the very least approximately balanced as to whether the Veteran's diabetes was caused or aggravated by his obesity.  

As a result, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule applies and the Veteran's claim for diabetes as secondary to his right shoulder and left knee disabilities is granted. 38 U.S.C. § 5107.

 

 

Thomas H. O'Shay

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	J. Kronick

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.