Citation Nr: A25034170
Decision Date: 04/14/25	Archive Date: 04/14/25

DOCKET NO. 240604-446293
DATE: April 14, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a cervical spine disability (claimed as neck pain) is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a thoracolumbar spine disability (claimed as back pain) is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for radiculopathy (claimed as tingling in arms and legs) is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from October 1958 to March 1962.

This appeal is being processed under the modernized review system, commonly referred to as the "AMA," as established by the Veterans Appeals Improvement and Modernization Act of 2017. 115 Pub. L. No. 55, 131 Stat. 1105.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal of May 2024 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) regional office, an agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ). The Veteran timely initiated this appeal to the Board by submitting a June 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), and elected the Hearing docket. 38 C.F.R. § 20.302(a).

In March 2025, the Veteran testified before a Veterans Law Judge during a Board hearing. A transcript of the hearing has been associated with the claims file. Following the hearing, in March 2025, the Veteran submitted private medical opinions, private medical records and service treatment records. In a March 2025 VA 21-4138 Statement in Support of Claim, the Veteran's representative waived the remaining 90 days to submit evidence stating no further evidence would be submitted. 

If evidence was added to the claims file during a period of time when new evidence was not allowed, the Board has not considered such evidence in this decision. As the Board is remanding the claims for further development, this additional evidence will be considered by the AOJ in adjudication of the claims. 

This appeal has been advanced on the Board's docket pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 20.900(c); 38 U.S.C. § 7107(a)(2).

1. Entitlement to service connection for a cervical spine disability.

2. Entitlement to service connection for a thoracolumbar spine disability.

3. Entitlement to service connection for radiculopathy. 

For the reasons set forth below, the Board finds that there are pre-decisional duty to assist errors that needs to be remedied before the Board may adjudicate the merits of the appeals. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802. Because the evidence at issue was before the AOJ at the time of the May 2024 rating decision, and the nature of the evidence triggers the duty to assist, it is appropriate for the Board to order the development below to correct pre-decisional duty to assist errors. For the sake of clarity, the Board will include a brief recitation of the pertinent evidence of record.

Service treatment records (STRs) reveal the Veteran was hospitalized for residuals of a motor vehicle accident from November 1961 to February 1962. Diagnoses and procedures include reduction of fracture of the mandible, debridement of wound and suture of "head or neck." Post service VA treatment records are silent for cervical or thoracolumbar spine, or extremity complaints. 

The Veteran submitted private medical opinions from chiropractor J.C., D.C. in February 2024. Dr. J.C. attributing the Veteran's cervical, thoracic and lumbar complaints to "[b]ending and twisting into small spaces while working on tanks and repetitively, wearing a 75+ pound rucksack with rifle and ammunition" in service.

A March 2024 VA examination report determined the Veteran's conditions were not related to service on the basis his neck and back complaints were not noted in service treatment records (specifically, hospitalization records following the 1961 motor vehicle accident). During the VA examination, the Veteran reported his cervical spine and upper extremity problems began in 1959 and his back problems began in 1961. He started having neck pain from wearing steel pot helmets in service. He indicated he had to do a lot of twisting and turning while working in the tanks. He reported his 1961 motor vehicle accident aggravated his neck pain.

In the May 2024 rating decision on appeal, the AOJ favorably found current disabilities had been established, as well as an inservice injury - i.e., the motor vehicle accident in November 1961. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c). The AOJ relied on the March 2024 VA examination in finding service connection was not warranted. The February 2024 private medical opinions were not listed as evidence. 

The Veteran testified at a March 2025 Board hearing. His activities working on tanks were discussed, as was the November 1961 motor vehicle accident. His testimony also recounted two other accidents in service, not previously documented in the evidence of record.  

In the evidentiary window following the Board hearing, the Veteran submitted new medical opinions from Dr. J.C. attributing the Veteran's back and neck pain to the three accidents the Veteran testified about during the Board hearing, as well as his duties in service. The gap in treatment was not addressed by Dr. J.C.

The Board finds that regrettably, a remand is required to correct pre-decisional duty to assist errors. 

When VA undertakes the effort to provide an examination, the examination must be adequate. See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007). Based on the questions posed by the AOJ, the March 2024 VA medical opinion was limited to whether the 1961 motor vehicle accident was causative of the Veteran's disabilities. The rigors in service were not addressed, although the Veteran reported such during the VA examination. The VA medical opinion relied on the absence of back and neck complaints in the STR's following the 1961 motor vehicle accident in finding a nexus was not established. Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331, 1337 (Fed. Cir. 2006) (Lay evidence cannot be discounted due solely to a lack of verifying objective evidence). The Board finds the March 2024 VA medical opinion is inadequate based on the foregoing and the AOJ's reliance on such is a pre-decisional duty to assist error warranting a remand. 

Further, the Board finds there was a pre-decisional duty to assist error in not requesting private treatment records. The February 2024 private medical opinions from Dr. J.S. were submitted prior to the May 2024 rating decision on appeal. Dr. J.S. indicated in these opinions that they were "currently treating" the Veteran for the claimed conditions. During the March 2024 VA examination, the Veteran reported receiving chiropractic care, and the VA examiner specifically referenced Dr. J.C. by name. Despite the foregoing, there was no attempt by the AOJ to obtain these records. Nor were the February 2024 private medical opinions of Dr. J.S. listed as evidence or considered in the May 2024 rating decision on appeal. Thus, remand is required for a pre-decisional duty to assist error so that the AOJ may make reasonable attempts to request the records from Dr. J.S. in accordance with 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(1). 

In remanding, the Board makes no finding regarding the Veteran's credibility as to these claims.

These matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Make reasonable efforts to obtain the Veteran's private treatment records.

2. After step one above is completed, obtain an VA addendum medical opinion by a qualified examiner for the purpose of providing an opinion to ascertain the nature and etiology of the Veteran's cervical spine disability, thoracolumbar spine disability and any associated radiculopathy. If the examiner determines that a VA examination is necessary to formulate the opinion, one shall be procured. In formulating the opinion, the examiner shall review the claims file, including this remand. The examiner is asked to opine as to:

Whether it is as approximately likely as not that the Veteran's current cervical spine disability, thoracolumbar spine disability and any and associated radiculopathy had its onset in service and/or is causally related to his active-duty service? 

A complete rationale must be provided for the opinion offered. In meeting this requirement, the examiner shall specifically consider the following: a) In addition to the1961 motor vehicle accident, the veterans lay assertions of recurrent strain or injury due to the general rigors of service as he describes (working on tanks, etc.); and b) the February 2024 private medical opinions of Dr. J.S. 

3.  Readjudicate the remanded issues.

 

JONATHAN B. KRAMER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Long, Kindra F.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.