Citation Nr: A25034280
Decision Date: 04/14/25	Archive Date: 04/14/25

DOCKET NO. 220517-244577
DATE: April 14, 2025

ISSUES

1. Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 30 percent for unspecified anxiety disorder.

2. Entitlement to a compensable disability rating for sinusitis.

3. Entitlement to service connection for a bilateral ear disorder.

4. Entitlement to service connection for a lumbar spine disorder.

5. Entitlement to service connection for a left knee disorder.

6. Entitlement to service connection for a left ankle disorder.

7. Entitlement to service connection for right wrist carpal tunnel syndrome (CTS).

8. Entitlement to service connection for left wrist CTS.

9. Entitlement to service connection for left lower extremity (LLE) radiculopathy.

10. Entitlement to service connection for a cardiovascular disorder.

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for a bilateral ear disorder is DENIED.

REMAND ORDER

Entitlement to a compensable disability rating for sinusitis is REMANDED.

Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 30 percent for unspecified anxiety disorder is REMANDED.

Entitlement to service connection for a lumbar spine disorder is REMANDED.

Entitlement to service connection for a left knee disorder is REMANDED.

Entitlement to service connection for left ankle disorder is REMANDED.

Entitlement to service connection for right wrist CTS is REMANDED.

Entitlement to service connection for left wrist CTS is REMANDED.

Entitlement to service connection for LLE radiculopathy is REMANDED.

Entitlement to service connection for a cardiovascular disorder is REMANDED.

FINDING OF FACT

The evidence of record does not show a diagnosis of a chronic bilateral ear disorder during the pendency of this appeal.  

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to service connection for a bilateral ear disorder have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.

FACTUAL AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY

The Veteran had active service in the Air Force from May 2002 until December 2010, to include service in the Southwest Asia theater of operations.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from January and February 2022 rating decisions issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).  

In January 2022, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review, and requested review of a December 2021 rating decision.  In February 2022, the RO issued the higher-level review decision on appeal, which considered the evidence of record at the time of the December 2021 rating decision.  

In the May 2022 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the December 2021 decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review for the issues of increased ratings for an anxiety disorder, bilateral wrist CTS, bilateral ear pain, and a cardiovascular disorder.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  If evidence was submitted during the period after the RO issued the decision which was subsequently subject to higher-level review, the Board did not consider it in its Decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

However, because the Board is remanding all claims with the exception of the claim of entitlement to service connection for a bilateral ear disorder, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the RO in the readjudication of those claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

For the claim decided, if the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this Decision.

As a preliminary matter, in her January 2022 brief, the Veteran asserted a challenge with respect to the October and December 2021 VA examiners.  Francway v. Wilkie, 930 F.3d 1377, 1381 (Fed. Cir. 2019).  The United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit (Federal Circuit) issued a panel decision in Francway v. Wilkie, affirming the decision of the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) which found that when a challenge to the competency of the medical examiner is raised, the Board must make a factual finding as to whether the medical examiner is competent.  Id. 

Pursuant to the provisions of the Appeals Modernization Act, the Board reviews the record, generally, to correct pre-decisional duty to assist errors.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).  In this case, the rating decisions on appeal were issued in January and February 2022; however, with respect to this specific Francway challenge, as noted above, the evidentiary record closed in December 2021.  The challenge to the VA examiner's competency under Francway was received in January 2022.  As the challenge was received after the rating decision, the failure to provide the VA examiners' qualifications to the Veteran does not represent a pre-decisional duty-to-assist error.  The duty to assist does not attach at the Board level in an AMA appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c).  Therefore, remand for that issue is not appropriate, and there is no bar to the Board proceeding with consideration of the merits of the appeal.

The Board has reviewed all evidence of record regardless of whether it is discussed in detail in the Decision.  See Newhouse v. Nicholson, 497 F.3d 1298, 1302 (Fed. Cir. 2007) (holding the Board must only discuss the evidence which is relevant to the issues on appeal).

REASONS AND BASES FOR THE FINDING AND CONCLUSION

I.

Legal Criteria - Service Connection

Service connection may be granted if the evidence demonstrates that a current disability resulted from an injury or disease incurred or aggravated in active military service.  This means that the facts establish that a particular injury or disease resulting in disability was incurred coincident with service in the Armed Forces, or if preexisting such service, was aggravated therein.  38 U.S.C. § § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a).

Establishing direct service connection generally requires (1) evidence of a current disability; (2) evidence of in-service occurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) evidence of a nexus between the claimed in-service event, disease, or injury and the present disability.  Hickson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 247, 253 (1999); 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a).

Service connection may also be granted for any injury or disease diagnosed after discharge, when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease or injury was incurred in service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).

The Board must fully consider the lay assertions of record.  A layperson is competent to report on the onset and continuity of his current symptomatology.  See Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 470 (1994) (a veteran is competent to report on that of which he or she has personal knowledge). Lay evidence can also be competent and sufficient evidence of a diagnosis or to establish etiology if (1) the layperson is competent to identify the medical condition; (2) the layperson is reporting a contemporaneous medical diagnosis; or (3) lay testimony describing symptoms at the time supports a later diagnosis by a medical professional.  Davidson v. Shinseki, 581 F.3d 1313, 1316 (Fed. Cir. 2009); Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1376-77 (Fed. Cir. 2007).   

When considering whether lay evidence is competent the Board must determine, on a case-by-case basis, whether the Veteran's particular disability is the type of disability for which lay evidence may be competent.  Kahana v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 428 (2011); see also Jandreau, 492 F.3d at 1376-77.

A veteran is entitled to the benefit of the doubt when the evidence is in approximate balance or "nearly equal," and does not require that the evidence be in exact equipoise.  Evidence is in approximate balance when the evidence in favor of and opposing the veteran's claim is found to be almost exactly or nearly equal. Lynch v. McDonough, 999 F.3d 1391 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

II.

Analysis - Bilateral Ear Disorder

The Veteran has asserted that she has bilateral ear pain and persistent ear infections, or otitis media, which began during service and have persisted since that time.  

The Veteran's service treatment records (STRs) indeed show treatment for recurring ear infections.  Specifically, she was treated for at least three ear infections during service, in March 2006, January 2007 and October 2009.  

However, the evidence does not establish the first element of service connection, a current disability.  The medical evidence of record post-service spans decades and includes both VA and private treatment records and there is no evidence of a chronic disability of ear pain or recurrent ear infections, nor any reasonably attributable symptoms.  Instead, the available records show the Veteran show consistently denying experiencing any ear pain.  While the post-service treatment records do show a single ear infection in September 2016, it was associated with an upper respiratory infection and seemingly resolved without sequalae.  In April 2021 VA treatment records, the Veteran also reported fullness in her ears, or a feeling of her ears being clogged with occasional left ear pain.  As a result, she was diagnosed with, and later service connected for, tinnitus. 

The Veteran was afforded a VA ear conditions examination in October 2021.  At that time, she reported that she was seen during service for complaints of bilateral ear pain, prescribed antibiotics, and that these infections recurred a number of times during service.  She stated that since onset, she experiences one ear infection per year, with ear pain.  The examiner noted however, that the record did not show any recurring, annual ear infections as described by the Veteran.  The examiner opined that it was less likely than not that any ear condition was related to the Veteran's active duty service, reasoning that during service the Veteran had otitis media, which was acute, and that there was no evidence of a current ear disorder.  The examiner stated that her symptoms were subjective only.  

After a careful review, the Board finds that the Veteran's claim for service connection fails because the most probative evidence of record does not show a diagnosis of a chronic ear disorder.  While there was a single, acute ear infection seen post-service, the Board affords significant probative weight to the remainder of the medical record which showed no evidence of recurring ear infections or chronicity of symptoms.  Additionally, significant probative weight is assigned to the October 2021 VA examination which was a result of an evaluation of the Veteran and a thorough review of the available claims file, wherein the examiner found no evidence of a current, chronic disorder. 

Where the record evidence does not establish that the Veteran currently has the disorder for which service connection is sought during the relevant appeal period, service connection for that disorder is not authorized under the statutes governing veterans' benefits.  Brammer v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 223, 225 (1992); Rabideau v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 141, 144 (1992).  Service connection may not be granted for a diagnosis of disability by history.  Sanchez-Benitez v. West, 13 Vet. App. 282 (1999).  Here, the medical evidence does not support the appeal as no current disorder or functional impairment is shown during the relevant appeal period.

Accordingly, the Board finds that there is no disability during the relevant appeal period.  As the evidence is persuasively against the claim, the benefit of the doubt doctrine does not apply.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.  The claim is denied.  

REASONS FOR REMAND

III.

Sinusitis & Anxiety

The Veteran has asserted that her sinusitis, currently rated as noncompensable, and her anxiety disorder, rated as 30 percent disabling, are more severe than contemplated by the currently assigned ratings. 

Considering sinusitis first, the Veteran has consistently asserted that she suffers from headaches, throat pain, purulent discharge, coughing spells, and a constant cough associated with her service-connected sinusitis.  In October 2021, she was afforded a VA examination and reported that she experienced sinus pain during weather changes, and complained of intermittent pain and discomfort in her frontal sinus area.  In December 2021, she was afforded another VA examination.  She reported that she had worsening symptoms of sinusitis, that she underwent a sinus X-ray which showed mucoperiosteal thickening of the frontal, ethmoid, and maxillary sinuses and that she was under the care of a private primary care provider for management of her sinus issues.  She noted that she started taking cetirizine daily, and had runny nose, cough, and sinus headaches.  

Importantly, the records from the Veteran's primary care provider have not been associated with the claims file.  There is also no indication that any attempt has been made to obtain these records, a pre-decisional duty to assist error which must be remedied on remand.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

Similarly, in considering the Veteran's service-connected anxiety disorder, she has asserted that her symptoms more nearly approximately occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas.  She submitted a private January 2021 opinion wherein, based on her reports, the examiner opined that her symptoms more nearly approximated occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas.  However, in September 2021, she underwent a VA examination.  After reporting her symptoms, the Veteran reported that she had sought regular counseling at a religious institution.  The examiner found that a mental disorder had been formally diagnosed, but that symptoms were not severe enough either to interfere with occupational and social functioning or require continuous medication.  

Once again, the records from the Veteran's private counseling have not been associated with the claims file.  There is also no indication that any attempt has been made to obtain these records.  In the Board's view, these records are especially pertinent given the stark difference in opinion between the private assessment submitted by the Veteran, and the VA examiner, regarding the scope of impairment caused by her service-connected anxiety disorder.  As such, this too is a pre-decisional duty to assist error which must be remedied on remand.

IV.

Lumbar Spine, Left Knee, Left Ankle & LLE Radiculopathy

The Veteran asserts that she has a lumbar spine disorder with LLE radiculopathy, left knee, and left ankle disorders which began during, or are otherwise related to active duty service.  Alternatively, she suggests that they are secondary to her service-connected right knee and ankle disorders.  The record also suggests that her symptoms may be part of an undiagnosed illness or qualifying chronic disability due to Southwest Asia service.

The record shows that the Veteran has been diagnosed with degenerative disc disease (DDD) of the lumbar spine, left ankle tendinitis, and left knee pain.  The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in July 2021 to assess her left ankle tendinitis, and she reported pain beginning during service.  Her diagnosis was confirmed, and the examiner opined that it was less likely than not that her left ankle tendinitis was proximately due to, or the result of, her right ankle tendinitis with degenerative changes.  

The examiner reasoned that there was no clear evidence from review of orthopedic literature that an injury to one joint would have any significant impact on the other, uninjured joint, unless the injury resulted in major muscle or nerve damage causing partial or complete paralysis or shortening the injured limb so that the individuals gait pattern has been altered.  

The examiner noted that this level of severity was not supported based on record review, history, or examination, stating that it was not unusual for two joints to share properties in the same person, but that one joint's disease does not spread to the other.  No secondary opinion was rendered regarding the potential causal relationship with the Veteran's service connected right knee disorder, and no direct service connection opinion was rendered. 

In December 2021, the Veteran was afforded a VA knee examination and reported that she experienced bilateral knee pain that began in service, and persisted since that time.  She also reported that she continued to experience left knee pain that had worsened since onset, describing sharp, achy, and pulling pain which was worse with certain movements.  She stated that she treated her pain with Naprosyn as needed.  The examiner found that the Veteran did not have a current, chronic, left knee disorder, as her X-ray was negative.  As a result, no nexus opinion was rendered. 

In December 2021, the Veteran was also afforded a VA spine examination, and her diagnosis of degenerative disc disease with LLE radiculopathy was confirmed.  She reported that she began experiencing low back pain during service, adding that she may have injured her back doing heavy lifting in service.  She stated that she continued to experience worsening back pain, consisting of constant, shooting lower back pain which radiated to her lower extremities.  

The examiner opined that it was less likely than not that the Veteran's current degenerative changes were proximately due to, or the result of, her service-connected right knee disorder.  The examiner reasoned that there was no clear evidence from review of orthopedic literature that an injury to one joint would have any significant impact on the other, uninjured joint, unless the injury resulted in major muscle or nerve damage causing partial or complete paralysis, or shortening the injured limb so that the individuals gait pattern has been altered.  

The examiner noted that this level of severity was not supported based on record review, history, or examination, stating that it was not unusual for two joints to share properties in the same person, but that one joint's disease does not spread to the other.  No secondary opinion was rendered regarding the potential causal relationship with the Veteran's service connected right ankle disorder, and no direct service connection opinion was rendered. 

Special service connection rules exist for Gulf War veterans.  38 U.S.C. § 1117; 38 C.F.R. § 3.317.  Under that section, service connection may be warranted for a Gulf War veteran who exhibits objective indications of a qualifying chronic disability that became manifest during active military, naval or air service in the Southwest Asia theater of operations during the Gulf War.  For disability due to undiagnosed illness and medically unexplained chronic multi-symptom illness (MUCMI), the disability must have been manifest either during active military service in the Southwest Asia theater of operations or to a degree of 10 percent or more not later than December 31, 2026.  38 C.F.R. § 3.317 (a)(1).

For purposes of 38 C.F.R. § 3.317, aside from disabilities that the Secretary has deemed as per se presumptive with Southwest Asia service, there are two types of qualifying chronic disabilities: (1) an undiagnosed illness; (2) a diagnosed MUCMI that is defined by a cluster of signs or symptoms such as chronic fatigue syndrome, fibromyalgia, and functional gastrointestinal disorders (excluding gastrointestinal diseases).

An undiagnosed illness is defined as a condition that by history, physical examination and laboratory tests cannot be attributed to a known clinical diagnosis. In the case of claims based on undiagnosed illness under 38 U.S.C. § 1117 and 38 C.F.R. § 3.317, unlike those for direct service connection, there is no requirement that there be competent evidence of a nexus between the claimed illness and service.  Gutierrez v. Principi, 19 Vet. App. 1, 8-9 (2004).  Further, lay persons are competent to report objective signs of illness.  Id.  To determine whether the undiagnosed illness is manifested to a degree of 10 percent or more the condition must be rated by analogy to a disease or injury in which the functions affected, anatomical location or symptomatology are similar.  38 C.F.R. § 3.317 (a)(5); Stankevich v. Nicholson, 19 Vet. App. 470 (2006).

The term "MUCMI" refers to a diagnosed illness without conclusive pathophysiology or etiology, that is characterized by overlapping symptoms and signs and has features such as fatigue, pain, disability out of proportion to physical findings, and inconsistent demonstration of laboratory abnormalities.  Chronic MUCMIs of partially understood etiology and pathophysiology will not be considered "medically unexplained."  38 U.S.C. § 1117; 38 C.F.R. § 3.317.

For purposes of section 3.317, disabilities that have existed for six months or more and disabilities that exhibit intermittent episodes of improvement and worsening over a six-month period will be considered chronic.  The six-month period of chronicity will be measured from the earliest date on which the pertinent evidence establishes that the signs or symptoms of the disability first became manifest.  38 C.F.R. § 3.317 (a)(4).  Notwithstanding the foregoing presumption provisions, a claimant is not precluded from establishing service connection for a disability due to Gulf War exposures with proof of direct causation.  Combee v. Brown, 34 F.3d 1039, 1042 (Fed. Cir. 1994); Ramey v. Brown, 9 Vet. App. 40, 44 (1996), aff'd sub nom, Ramey v. Gober, 120 F.3d 1239 (Fed. Cir. 1997), cert. denied, 118 S. Ct. 1171 (1998).

Additionally, during the pendency of the appeal, the law of secondary service connection changed materially.   The regulations adopted after, and because of, Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439 (1995) (en banc), provide that service connection may be granted on a secondary basis for a disability which is proximately due to, or the result of, a service-connected disease or injury.  38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a).  And that secondary service connection may be granted for aggravation of a disease or injury by a service-connected disability.  Id. § 3.310(b).  

The United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit (Federal Circuit) had recent occasion to consider matters relevant to the instant case and their holding illuminates the Board's way (and the RO's on remand). 

In Spicer v. McDonough, 61 F.4th 1360 (Fed. Cir. 2023), the Federal Circuit held that: 

§ 1110 [of Title 38 of the United States Code] plainly requires compensation when a service-connected disease or injury is a but-for cause[ ] of a present-day disability.  This broad language applies to the natural progression of a condition not caused by a service-connected injury or disease, but that nonetheless would have been less severe were it not for the service-connected disability.  Stated another way, § 1110 provides for compensation for a worsening of functionality-whether through an inability to treat or a more direct, etiological cause.  Nothing in the statute limits § 1110 to onset or etiological causes of a worsening in functionality.  

Id. at 1364 (alterations added).  

The Federal Circuit concluded the causation standard "proximately due to" under section 3.310(b) of the regulations is inconsistent with section 1110 of the statute and, therefore "unlawful."  Consequently, for "aggravation of non-service-connected disabilities" it is enough to show that "but-for" the service-connected disability the incremental increase in severity of a nonservice-connected disease or injury would not have occurred.  Id. at 1364-66.

In this case, the Board finds that the provided medical opinions are not adequate to adjudicate the claims.  First, the examiners all failed to provide a direct service connection opinion, despite the Veteran's reports of onset of pain during service due to strenuous physical activity.  Additionally, the examiners assessing her lumbar spine and left ankle disorders failed to consider the possibility of a causal relationship between both her service-connected right knee and right ankle disorders, and her lumbar spine and left ankle disorders.  

Next, the rendered secondary opinions did not address the correct legal standards and the holding in Spicer.  61 F.4th at 1364-66.  The July and December 2021 VA opinions used the proximate cause standard from the previously controlling regulation, now struck down by the Spicer court.  Accordingly, the Board finds that these opinions are inadequate because they are premised upon a standard which has departed the firmament; that is to say, it is no longer good law.  

Finally, the December 2021 VA examiner failed to render an etiological opinion regarding the Veteran's left knee disorder, finding that she did not have a current diagnosis.  However, in Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356 (Fed. Cir. 2018), the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit concluded that the term "disability", as used in section 1110 of Title 38 of the United States Code, "refers to the functional impairment of earning capacity, not the underlying cause of said disability," and held that "pain alone can serve as a functional impairment and therefore qualify as a disability."  Id. at 1363-64.  

The case reversed years of precedent that had held that "pain alone is not a disability for the purposes of VA disability compensation."  Sanchez-Benitez v. West, 13 Vet. App. 282 (1999).  In other words, where pain alone results in functional impairment, even if there is no identified underlying diagnosis, it can constitute a disability.  Saunders, 886 F.3d at 1367-68.  Thus, a nexus opinion should have been rendered. 

Additionally, the examiner did not render an opinion as to the possibility that the Veteran suffered from undiagnosed joint pain, or a MUCMI.  Once VA has provided a VA examination or obtained a medical opinion, it is required to provide or obtain one that is adequate for the purpose sought.  Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007).  And if medical evidence is inadequate, VA must supplement the record by seeking an advisory opinion or ordering another medical examination.  Colvin v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 171 (1991); Hatlestad v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 213 (1992).

Thus, the Board finds that the July and December 2021 VA opinions are inadequate because they failed to consider all possible theories of entitlement.  The Veteran should be afforded appropriate examinations to address the claimed disabilities, pertaining to her lumbar spine, left knee, and left ankle disorders, to include whether any such complaints of pain amount to a disability, an undiagnosed disability, or a diagnosed MUCMI, and whether any found disability or disabilities are related to his conceded toxic exposure risk activity (TERA) in the Persian Gulf or in-service complaints. 

With regard to the claim of entitlement to service connection for LLE radiculopathy, this claim is inextricably intertwined with the claim for service connection for a lumbar spine disability.  Specifically, the December 2021 VA examiner found that the Veteran had LLE radiculopathy which was associated with her degenerative disc disease of the lumbar spine.  As any development or additional allowances of this claim could affect the outcome of the LLE radiculopathy claim, the appropriate remedy for the inextricably intertwined issue is a remand pending resolution of the inextricably intertwined issues.  Harris v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 180, 183 (1991), overruled on other grounds, Tyrues v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 166, 178 (2009)  (issues are "inextricably intertwined" when a decision on one issue would have a "significant impact" on a claim for the second issue).

V.

Bilateral Wrist Disorders

The Veteran asserts that she has bilateral wrist disorders which are a result of her active duty service.  Specifically, she has developed CTS in her wrists bilaterally, which she asserts began during service, and has persisted since that time.  

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in April 2021, and reported that she was not diagnosed with CTS until 2016, but that she had pain beginning in service as a result of constant lifting of supply assets and typing on computers to input data.  She described the pain as achy, with numbness, burning, and tingling, and sharp pain shooting from her wrists to her hands.  She added that she used a brace, ibuprofen, and tramadol for treatment.  The examiner opined that the Veteran's CTS is less likely than not a disability pattern or diagnosed disease related to specific exposures experienced by the Veteran while service in Southwest Asia.  The examiner stated that in a review of STRs, there was no treatment for CTS and no nexus could be established, stating that CTS was caused by pressure on the median nerve, and that it was a narrow passageway surrounded by bones and ligaments to the palm side of the hand, causing numbness, tingling and weakness.  

The Board finds the VA opinion inadequate to decide the claims.  Barr, 21 Vet. App. 303.  The April 2021 VA examiner's opinion was based on lack of medical evidence in STRs; however, the lack of contemporaneous records, alone, does not preclude granting service connection for a claimed disability.  Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1337 (Fed. Cir. 2006). 

Given the current diagnosis of bilateral wrist CTS, the Veteran's statements regarding onset during service, and the nature of her military service, which did involve significant clerical work, the Board finds that remand is needed to obtain an addendum opinion properly considering a direct theory of entitlement.  Failure to obtain this addendum opinion constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error which must be remedied on remand.  

VI.

Cardiovascular Disorder

The Veteran asserts that she has a cardiovascular disorder which began during service and has persisted since that time.  

The Veteran's STRs reflect that she was treated for sinus bradycardia and sinus arrythmia during service in July 2006.  She was afforded a VA examination in October 2021, and reported that she was treated for complaints of weakness, slight chest pain, and dizziness during service, and that an EKG conducted in July 2006 showed that she had sinus bradycardia and sinus arrythmia.  Since onset, she stated that she had heart palpitations every two months and intermittent chest pain, and that she saw a cardiologist that year who asked if she had anxiety and stress, and that they may be related.  The examiner opined that the etiology of her sinus bradycardia and sinus arrythmias in 2006 were unknown, but that she did not have any pathology on examination.  The examiner stated that it was less likely than not that she had a heart disorder related to service, as there was no evidence of chronicity of care from 2006 until 2021, which was a fifteen year gap.  The examiner found that her symptoms were subjective only and that the current physical examination was normal.  

After careful review, the Board concludes that the October 2021 VA opinion is inadequate for adjudicative purposes.  First, the examiner based the negative opinion on a lack of chronicity of care following service, an incorrect legal standard.  Id.  Additionally, it is unclear from the VA examination and report whether the Veteran's chest pains and heart palpitations with sinus bradycardia and arrythmias are symptoms of a condition, or independent medical conditions in-and-of themselves.  Though it is the responsibility of the Board to weigh all the evidence of record, the Board is mindful that it cannot make its own independent medical determinations.  Colvin v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 171 (1991).  Thus, clarification of the record on this issue is needed on remand.  

Next, the Veteran reported that she was seeking care with a private cardiologist; however, there is no indication that those records have been obtained by the RO, nor that there has been any attempt to obtain them.  As these records are potentially relevant to the issue on appeal, this is a pre-decisional duty-to-assist error, which must be remedied on remand.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

While the Board is remanding this matter to obtain adequate VA opinions, the Board is mindful of the holding in Smith v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 332 (2020) and the impact of implicit credibility determinations within remand orders.  The Board does not at this time make any determinations regarding the credibility of any evidence currently of record, to include those described in this remand.

The matter is REMANDED for the following actions:

1. Contact the Veteran and afford her the opportunity to identify, provide appropriate releases for, and submit any relevant records regarding her sinusitis, psychiatric disorder, and cardiovascular disorder, specifically with her primary care provider, mental health counselor, and cardiologist.  Provide any necessary assistance to obtain such records and associate them with the claims file.  All attempts to obtain the records should be documented in the claims file.

2. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination(s) with an appropriate clinician(s) to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's lumbar spine, left knee, and left ankle disorders.  The entire claims file should be made available to, and reviewed by, the examiner.  Any indicated studies should be performed.  Following a review of the claims file, the clinician is asked to address the following:

(a.) Clarify whether any back, left knee, or left ankle complaints or disabilities found are the result of an "undiagnosed illness" or a diagnosed MUCMI.

The examiner is advised that the term "MUCMI" refers to a diagnosed illness without conclusive pathophysiology or etiology, that is characterized by overlapping symptoms and signs and has features such as fatigue, pain, joint pain, disability out of proportion to physical findings, and inconsistent demonstration of laboratory abnormalities.  Chronic MUCMIs of partially understood etiology and pathophysiology will not be considered "medically unexplained."

An "undiagnosed illness" means a condition that by history, physical examination and laboratory tests cannot be attributed to a known clinical diagnosis.

(b.) If the Veteran's lumbar spine, left knee, or left ankle complaints are neither an undiagnosed illness nor a MUCMI, identify any and all lumbar spine, left knee, and left ankle disabilities found during the pendency of the appeal even if resolved now, to include "pain" manifested by functional impairment (which is deemed a disability for VA purposes).

In so opining, the examiner is directed to address and consider treatment records reflecting any treatment in STRs, and after service.  

(c.) For each identified lumbar spine, left knee, and left ankle diagnosis, opine as to whether such disabilities are at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) due to any incident of her active-duty service, with onset therein, to include any conceded TERA exposures in PGW and/or in-service complaints. 

The examiner is directed to consider the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran.

(d.) For each identified lumbar spine, left knee, and left ankle diagnosis, opine as to whether the Veteran's service-connected disabilities, to specifically include her right knee and ankle disorders, are at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) a "but-for" cause (caused an increase in the severity of, or an inability to treat) of the Veteran's lumbar spine, left knee, or left ankle disorders.

That is, would the Veteran's lumbar spine, left knee, or left ankle disorder have been less severe "but for" the service-connected disability, either because there is an etiological link or because the condition resulted in the inability to treat the lumbar spine, left knee, or left ankle disability.  Spicer, 61 F.4th at 1364-66.

The clinician is advised there is no temporal requirement to secondary service connection.  In other words, the mere fact that one disorder was diagnosed before the other cannot be the sole reason for a negative opinion.  

In considering any lay statements of record, the clinician should note that the Veteran is competent to attest to matters of which she had first-hand knowledge, including observable symptomatology.  If there is a medical basis to support or doubt the history provided by the Veteran, the clinician should provide a fully reasoned explanation.

If medical literature is relied upon, the clinician should identify and specifically cite each reference material used.  The clinician should specifically discuss any contradictory evidence in the claims file and reconcile that evidence with their findings.

All opinions should be accompanied by a thorough supporting rationale explaining how the clinician arrived at the conclusions expressed. 

If the clinician determines that they cannot provide an opinion without resorting to speculation, the clinician should explain the inability to provide an opinion, identifying precisely what facts could not be determined.  

They should comment on whether an opinion could not be provided because the limits of medical knowledge have been exhausted or whether additional testing or information could be obtained that would lead to a conclusive opinion.

3. Obtain an addendum opinion from a qualified clinician to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's bilateral wrist CTS.  The entire claims file should be made available to, and reviewed by, the examiner.  Another VA examination should not be scheduled unless deemed necessary by the examiner.  Following a review of the claims file, the clinician is asked to provide an opinion regarding the following:

(a.) Whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's bilateral wrist CTS is due to any incident of her active duty service, to include clerical work completed during service.  

In so opining, the clinician is advised that the lack of treatment in service alone cannot service as the basis of a negative etiological opinion.  

The clinician is advised that the Veteran is competent to report her symptoms and history, and such reports should be acknowledged and considered in formulating any opinion.  If the examiner discounts the Veteran's credibility, it is important that it is supported by a rationale.  

If medical literature is relied upon, the clinician should identify and specifically cite each reference material used.  The clinician should specifically discuss any contradictory evidence in the claims file and reconcile that evidence with their findings.

All opinions should be accompanied by supporting rationale explaining how the clinician arrived at the conclusions expressed.

If the clinician determines that they cannot provide an opinion without resorting to speculation, the clinician should explain the inability to provide an opinion, identifying precisely what facts could not be determined.  In particular, they should comment on whether an opinion could not be provided because the limits of medical knowledge have been exhausted or whether additional testing or information could be obtained that would lead to a conclusive opinion.

A thorough rationale should be provided for any opinion rendered. 

4. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination(s) with an appropriate clinician(s) to determine the nature and etiology of any cardiovascular disorder.  The entire claims file should be made available to, and reviewed by, the examiner.  Any indicated studies should be performed.  Following a review of the claims file, the clinician is asked to address the following:

(a.) Clarify any relevant cardiovascular diagnoses or disorders identified during the relevant appeal period.  If the examiner determines that the Veteran does not have a cardiovascular disorder, the examiner should provide clarification as to whether her reported chest pain and heart palpitations are merely symptoms of another disorder, or separate diagnoses.  

A through rationale should accompany any opinion rendered. 

(b.) For any cardiovascular disorder diagnosed, the examiner should opine whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the disorder is due to any incident of her active duty service, to include her in-service treatment for sinus bradycardia and sinus arrythmias.  

In so opining, the examiner is advised that a lack of chronicity of care alone may not serve as the basis of a negative etiological opinion.   

The clinician is advised that the Veteran is competent to report her symptoms and history, and such reports should be acknowledged and considered in formulating any opinion.  If the examiner discounts the Veteran's account, in whole or part, or find it incredible, it is important that it such a determination is supported by a rationale.  

If medical literature is relied upon, the clinician should identify and specifically cite each reference material used.  The clinician should specifically discuss any contradictory evidence in the claims file and reconcile that evidence with their findings.

All opinions should be accompanied by supporting rationale explaining how the clinician arrived at the conclusions expressed.

If the clinician determines that they cannot provide an opinion without resorting to speculation, the clinician should explain the inability to provide an opinion, identifying precisely what facts could not be determined.  In particular, they should comment on whether an opinion could not be provided because the limits of medical knowledge have been exhausted or whether additional testing or information could be obtained that would lead to a conclusive opinion.

A thorough rationale should be provided for any opinion rendered. 

 

 

STEVEN V. ADLER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	M. Yacoub, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.