Citation Nr: A25034770
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 241004-479763
DATE: April 15, 2025

REMANDED

The issue of entitlement to service connection for hypothyroidism is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from January 1972 to January 1974, and from January 1974 to January 1980.

The rating decision on appeal was issued in September 2024 and constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.  

In the October 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the September 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of entitlement to service connection for hypothyroidism, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of that claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

The Board acknowledges that less than a year has passed since the issuance of the rating decision on appeal, and so the Veteran is within the one-year timeframe during which he could choose to change which docket lane his appeal is docketed under. However, because the claim is being remanded to correct a pre-decisional duty-to-assist error by the AOJ, the Veteran will suffer no prejudice from the Board's addressing his appeal at this time.

Service connection for hypothyroidism is remanded.

The Veteran contends that his hypothyroidism disability is related to his active service, specifically that it is related to his exposure to contaminated water at Camp Lejeune. See February 2024 Claim. 

The September 2024 rating decision denied service connection for hypothyroidism because it found, based on a March 2024 VA medical opinion, that the Veteran's hypothyroidism was not incurred in or caused by the Veteran's military service, to include his presumed toxic exposure risk activities (TERA). In the September 2024 rating decision, the AOJ favorably found that the Veteran has a diagnosis of hypothyroidism, and that his TERA participation is conceded because he served at Camp Lejeune during the contaminated water period. The Board is bound by these favorable findings. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).

The Veteran's service records additionally contain evidence of non-deployment related exposure through his MOS of Communications Chief and Communications Center Man. See May 19, 1972 DD Form 214; March 6, 2024 TERA Memo. 

The service treatment records do not show that the Veteran was treated for or diagnosed with hypothyroidism or a related condition during service.

Regarding the onset and course of the Veteran's hypothyroidism condition, the March 2024 VA examiner noted the Veteran's report that 

around 1996, he developed low-energy, daily fatigue, and was gaining weight.  He was then seen and evaluated by his PCP, and referred to an Endocrinologist, and diagnosed with Hypothyroidism.  He was then started on Levothyroxine 50mcg daily.  His Hypothyroidism condition worsened though the years.  Currently he takes Levothyroxine 75mcg daily, and gets a follow-up appointment from his PCP yearly.  No[w] has no fatigue, not gaining weight, no brain fog.

In the March 2024 medical opinion, the VA examiner concluded that the Veteran's hypothyroidism did not result from his exposure to contaminated water at Camp Lejeune based on hypothyroidism not being among the conditions presumed to be caused by Camp Lejeune contaminated water, noting that the most common cause of hypothyroidism is Hashimoto's disease, and because:

Review of other Medical literatures/journals related to MILITARY ENVIRONMENTAL EXPOSURES to Perchloroethylene (PCE), trichloroethylene (TCE), vinyl chloride, benzene, did not establish a direct cause and effect correlation with developing Hypothyroidism condition from the exposures.  

In doing so, however, the March 2024 VA examiner failed to address the Veteran's MOS-related exposure and failed to explain why the combined and synergistic effects of MOS-related exposure in addition to contaminated water at Camp Lejeune throughout all of the Veteran's military deployments did not cause his hypothyroidism, which renders the opinion insufficient. Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 124 (2007).

In the September 2024 decision, the AOJ denied the claim without obtaining an addendum or new VA examination to address the above-noted deficiency. This is a pre-decisional duty to assist error. A remand is necessary to correct it.

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Obtain an addendum opinion from an appropriate clinician, other than the March 2024 VA examiner, to address the claimed hypothyroidism disability. The clinician must address the following:

Whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that there is a nexus between the Veteran's hypothyroidism and his TERA, to specifically include exposure to contaminated water at Camp Lejeune and MOS-related exposures.

In doing so, the clinician must specifically consider, the following: 1) the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran, specifically addressing both the Camp Lejeune and MOS-related exposures, as well as the chemical components or toxins involved therein; and 2) the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran, specifically addressing both the Camp Lejeune and MOS-related exposures, as well as the chemical components or toxins involved therein.

Complete rationale must be provided for all opinions rendered.

The examiner is asked to explain the reasons behind any opinions expressed and conclusions reached. The examiner is reminded that the term "as likely as not" does not mean "within the realm of medical possibility," but rather, that the likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher. Note that the lack of documented treatment in service, or a long period after, while probative, cannot serve as the sole basis for a negative finding. The Veteran's lay contentions must be considered and weighed in making the determination. 

 

 

S. Kim

Acting Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	R. West

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.