Citation Nr: A25034875
Decision Date: 04/16/25	Archive Date: 04/16/25

DOCKET NO. 240507-438305
DATE: April 16, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a left foot disorder is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a right foot disorder is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral hearing loss is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for tinnitus is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a vision disorder is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from March 1976 to March 1979.

In the May 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Submission docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the November 2023 and January 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim[s], considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the Veteran's service connection claims any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

1. Entitlement to service connection for a left foot disorder is remanded.

2. Entitlement to service connection for a right foot disorder is remanded.

3. Entitlement to service connection for post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is remanded.

4. Entitlement to service connection for bilateral hearing loss is remanded.

5. Entitlement to service connection for tinnitus is remanded.

6. Entitlement to service connection for a vision disorder is remanded.

The Veteran seeks service connection for bilateral foot disorders, PTSD, bilateral hearing loss, tinnitus, and a vision disorder. After a review of the evidence of record, the Board has determined that these claims must be remanded to correct pre-decisional duty to assist errors.

The Board notes that the Veteran has not received VA examinations for his PTSD or vision disorder. The threshold for finding a link between a current disability and service so as to require medical examination is low. Locklear v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 410 (2006); McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 83-86 (2006). The Veteran's statements meet this threshold and the failure of the AOJ to obtain examinations is a pre-decisional duty to assist error.

The Veteran was provided with examinations for his right and left feet in May 2023 and January 2024. The examiners concluded that the claimed disorders were less likely than not related to active-duty service finding that documented injuries during service either resolved or that the Veteran never suffered injuries to a given foot. These conclusions are not adequate as the Veteran's lay statements were not considered by the examiners. The failure of the AOJ to obtain proper examinations is a pre-decisional duty to assist error. 

Finally for the Veteran's hearing loss and tinnitus claims, the October 2023 examiner indicated that they could not perform the puretone threshold or Maryland CNC testing and noted that reliability was the primary issue. It is not clear what the examiner meant when citing this as a reason that testing could not be performed. Even in that instance, estimates could have been provided. Therefore, the examination and opinion is inadequate. The failure of the AOJ to obtain an adequate examination with either recorded or estimated hearing testing readings is a pre-decisional duty to assist error. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Schedule the Veteran for new examinations, with an appropriate clinician, other than the previous examiners to the extent possible, to determine the nature, extent, onset, and etiology of his bilateral foot disorders, PTSD, bilateral hearing loss, tinnitus, and a vision disorder. 

The complete claims file should be made available to the examiner(s).  The examiner(s) should provide opinions as to whether it is at least as likely as not that his bilateral foot disorders, PTSD, bilateral hearing loss, tinnitus, and a vision disorder are etiologically related to the Veteran's period of service, or to another diagnosed disorder, to include via any prescribed medications.

The examiner(s) is reminded that the secondary service connection opinions must discuss both causation and aggravation (beyond a natural course) separately.

All opinions should be accompanied by adequate reasons and bases. If the examiner(s) cannot provide the requested opinion without resorting to mere speculation, they should provide a complete explanation stating why this is so. Any provided opinion must include a discussion of the Veteran's lay statements. 

In so doing, the examiner(s) should explain whether the inability to provide a more definitive opinion is the result of a need for additional information or that they have exhausted the limits of current medical knowledge in providing an answer to that particular question(s).

 

 

JIMMY L. BARDIN

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Q. Hernan, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.