Citation Nr: A25034753
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 240320-425204
DATE: April 15, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to a rating of 30 percent, but no higher, from March 23, 2022, to present, for service-connected insomnia disorder, is granted.

Entitlement to a total disability rating based on individual unemployability due to service-connected disabilities (TDIU) is granted.

REMANDED

Entitlement to a compensable rating for left hip strain (thigh, limitation of extension) is remanded.

Entitlement to a compensable rating for left hip strain (thigh, impairment of) is remanded.

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent for left hip strain (limitation of flexion) is remanded.

Entitlement to a compensable rating prior to July 18, 2023, and to a rating in excess of 10 percent from July 18, 2023, to present, for right hip strain (thigh, limitation of extension), is remanded.

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent for meniscal tear, right knee, is remanded.

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 20 percent for lumbar strain is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran's service-connected insomnia disorder is not manifested by occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.

2. The Veteran's combined service-connected disabilities preclude him from obtaining or maintaining substantial, gainful employment.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for entitlement to a rating of 30 percent, but no higher, from March 23, 2022, to present, for service-connected insomnia disorder have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.59, 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 9423.

2. The criteria for entitlement to a TDIU have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5103, 5103A, 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.340, 3.341, 4.16.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the Army from November 2016 to April 2019.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a November 2023 rating decision by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO), also known as the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).

In the March 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the November 2023 AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim[s], considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

Increased Ratings

Disability evaluations are determined by the application of the VA Schedule for Ratings Disabilities (Rating Schedule).  38. C.F.R. Part 4.  The percentage ratings contained in the Rating Schedule represent, as far as can be practicably determined, the average impairment in earning capacity resulting from diseases and injuries incurred or aggravated during military service and their residual conditions in civil occupations.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1.  Any reasonable doubt regarding the degree of disability will be resolved in favor of the claimant.  38 C.F.R. § 4.3.  

The veteran's entire history is to be considered when making disability evaluations. 38 C.F.R. § 4.1; Schafrath v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 589 (1995). Where, as here, the question for consideration is the propriety of the initial rating assigned, evaluation of the medical evidence since the effective date of the grant of service connection and consideration of the appropriateness of the assignment of different ratings for distinct periods of time, based on the facts found is required. Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119 (1999); Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505, (2007).

If two evaluations are potentially applicable, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that evaluation; otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7.  A disability may require re-evaluation in accordance with changes in a veteran's condition.  It is thus essential, in determining the level of current impairment, that the disability be considered in the context of the entire recorded history.  38 C.F.R. § 4.1.

When evaluating musculoskeletal disabilities based on limitation of motion, 38 C.F.R. § 4.40 requires consideration of functional loss caused by pain or other factors listed in that section that could occur during flare-ups or after repeated use and, therefore, not be reflected on range-of-motion testing. 38 C.F.R. § 4.45 requires consideration also be given to less movement than normal, more movement than normal, weakened movement, excess fatigability, incoordination, and pain on movement. See DeLuca v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 202 (1995); see also Mitchell v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 32, 44 (2011). Nonetheless, even when the background factors listed in § 4.40 or 4.45 are relevant when evaluating a disability, the rating is assigned based on the extent to which motion is limited, pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a; a separate or higher rating under § 4.40 or 4.45 itself is not appropriate. See Thompson v. McDonald, 815 F.3d 781, 785 (Fed. Cir. 2016) ("[I]t is clear that the guidance of § 4.40 is intended to be used in understanding the nature of the veteran's disability, after which a rating is determined based on the § 4.71a criteria.").

In Correia v. McDonald, 28 Vet. App. 158 (2016), the Court held that the final sentence of 38 C.F.R. § 4.59 requires that the examiner record the results of range of motion testing "for pain on both active and passive motion [and] in weight-bearing and non-weight-bearing and, if possible, with range of motion measurements of the opposite undamaged joint." The spine has no opposite joint.

In Sharp v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 26 (2017), the Court held that VA examiners must obtain information about the severity, frequency, duration, precipitating and alleviating factors, and extent of functional impairment of flares from the veterans themselves, when a flare-up is not observable at the time of examination.

1. Entitlement to a rating of 30 percent, but no higher, from March 23, 2022, to present, for service-connected insomnia disorder, is granted.

The Veteran contends that his service-connected insomnia disorder warrants an increased rating prior to July 18, 2023, and from July 18, 2023, to present.  See March 2024 NOD.  The Veteran's service-connected insomnia disorder is currently rated at 10 percent from April 11, 2019, to July 18, 2023, and at 30 percent from July 18, 2023, to present.

By way of background, the Veteran was granted service connection for insomnia disorder by rating decision dated May 24, 2019.  On March 23, 2022, the Veteran filed VA Form 21-8940 Application for Increased Compensation Based on Unemployability and VA Form 21-526EZ Fully Development Claim for Compensation.  By rating decision dated July 22, 2022, the AOJ denied the Veteran's request for an increased rating for his service-connected insomnia disorder.  On July 18, 2023, the Veteran filed VA Form 21-8940 Application for Increased Compensation Based Unemployability and VA Form 20-0995 Supplemental Claim Application.  In the November 2023 rating decision on appeal, the AOJ granted an increased rating of 30 percent for this disability, effective as of the July 18, 2023, date on which the Veteran filed his Supplemental Claim.

Under the AMA, a determination on a claim by the AOJ becomes final unless the claimant continuously pursues the claim by filing a supplemental claim, a request for higher-level review, or an appeal to the Board within one year of the date the AOJ mails notice of the decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.1103, 3.2500(c)(1). If a claimant continuously pursues an issue by filing one of these administrative review options within one year, the effective date will be the date of receipt of the initial claim or the date entitlement arose, whichever is later. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2500(h)(1). If a supplemental claim is received more than one year after the date on which the AOJ issued notice of a decision, the effective date will be the date of receipt of the supplemental claim, or the date entitlement arose, whichever was later. 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.400, 3.2500(h)(2).

In light of the foregoing, the Board finds that as a procedural matter, the Veteran's claim for an increased rating for his service-connected insomnia disorder has been continuously pursued since the filing of his March 23, 2022, forms 21-8940 and 21-526EZ.  The Veteran's July 18, 2023, Supplemental Claim was filed within 12 months of the issuance of the July 22, 2022, rating decision denying an increased rating for this condition.  Under the AMA, therefore, the Veteran properly continuously pursued this claim.

Turning to the issue of whether the evidence of record supports a rating in excess of 10 percent from March 23, 2022, to July 18, 2023, and in excess of 30 percent from July 18, 2023, to present, the Veteran's service-connected insomnia disorder is currently rated under Diagnostic Code (DC) 9423, which falls under the General  Rating Formula for Mental Disorders.  

Under the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders:

A 10 percent rating is assigned when mild or transient symptoms which decrease work efficiency and ability to perform occupational tasks only during periods of occasional stress, or symptoms controlled by medication cause occupational and social impairment.

A 30 percent rating where there is occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks (although generally functioning satisfactorily, with routine behavior, self-care, and conversation normal), due to such symptoms as: depressed mood; anxiety; suspiciousness; panic attacks (weekly or less often); chronic sleep impairment; and mild memory loss (such as forgetting names, directions, recent events).

A 50 percent rating is warranted when there is occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity, due to such symptoms as: flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short- and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships.

A 70 percent rating is warranted when there is occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or work-like setting); and inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.

A 100 percent rating is warranted when there is total occupational and social impairment due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent ability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; and memory loss for names of closest relatives, own occupation, or own name.

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination for his mental disorders in April 2022.  The Veteran was diagnosed with insomnia.  The Veteran reported that he lives alone, has some friends and enjoy social interactions, remains in contact with extended family, and has a strong support system.  He reported that he has not worked since leaving service other than seasonal, time limited sales positions, and reported that his physical limitations prevent him from performing even "light duty" work.  On examination, the examiner found that the Veteran has occupational and social impairment due to mild or transient symptoms which decrease work efficiency and ability to perform occupational tasks only during periods of significant stress, or symptoms controlled by medication.  The examiner found that the Veteran has symptoms of chronic sleep impairment, and that on mental status examination (MSE), the Veteran was cooperative and easy to engage in conversation; coherent, expressed himself clearly; was well groomed addressed his activities of daily living adequately; had an easygoing demeanor, euthymic mood/affect, was oriented to person, time, place; was able to understand questions posed and respond accordingly.

The Veteran was afforded another VA examination for his mental disorders in August 2023.  The Veteran was again diagnosed with an insomnia disorder.  The Veteran reported that principally due to his physical disorders he is unable to socialize much, and that he has difficulty going out because of his back problems.  He reported that he only occasionally has visitors, lives alone, and otherwise spends his time watching television or playing games.  On examination, the examiner found that the Veteran has occupational and social impairment due to mild or transient symptoms which decrease work efficiency and ability to perform occupational tasks only during periods of significant stress, or symptoms controlled by medication.  The examiner found that the Veteran has symptoms of chronic sleep impairment and disturbances of motivation and mood.  On mental status examination (MSE), the Veteran presented with predominantly neutral mood and affect; he became angry when he spoke about ongoing problems with VA; he was otherwise alert and cooperative and in no obvious distress; his memory appeared intact and he was well-oriented; no evidence of thought disorder and his judgment indicated he has the ability to make clear decisions; eye-contact was positive and attention and concentration were within normal limits; no evidence of unusual psychomotor activity; speech was clear, with appropriate rate and volume; estimated level of intelligence was within the average range.

The Veteran's VA treatment records are generally silent for any complaints or treatment for a mental condition, aside from documenting the continued presence of an insomnia disorder.

In November 2023, however, the Veteran underwent an initial treatment plan with his mental health provider.  The Veteran reported that the VA was stressing him out and he believed that his primary challenge is that in order to maintain his lifestyle he would need to receive a service-connected rating of 100 percent.  The provider diagnosed the Veteran with major depressive disorder, recurrent, and moderate insomnia, and collaborated with the Veteran on a treatment plan going forward.

As previously outlined above, the Veteran was granted an increased rating of 30 percent for his insomnia disorder effective July 18, 2023. The Board notes, however, that it appears that the AOJ arbitrarily set the date of this increase based on the date of the July 18, 2023, submission of the Veteran's Supplemental Claim, a practice that was explicitly rejected in Swain v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 219 (2015). The Veteran's lay statements, VA and private treatment notes, and the April 2022 VA examination for mental disorders all indicate that the Veteran's symptomatology and limitations have been consistent prior to, and subsequently to, July 18, 2023.  In light of the Board's finding, above, that this claim has been continuously pursued since March 23, 2022, the Board finds that the rating of 30 percent for insomnia disorder should be effective as of March 23, 2022.

The probative evidence of record, however, persuasively weighs against finding that the level of occupational and social impairment more closely approximated occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity during the period considered. The Veteran repeatedly reported to the VA examiners that his occupational and social impairment were principally due to his physical impairments. At no point did he did not appear to assert that his psychiatric symptoms alone resulted in occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity, and no VA examiner nor any of the Veteran's VA or private treatment records found that his psychiatric symptoms along resulted in occupational and social impairment with reduced liability and productivity. Accordingly, the probative evidence persuasively weighs against finding that the Veteran had occupational and social impairment with reduced liability and productivity during the period considered.

Accordingly, the Board concludes that the evidence warrants a rating of 30 percent, but no higher, for the Veteran's service-connected insomnia disorder.

2. Entitlement to a total disability rating based on individual unemployability due to service-connected disabilities (TDIU) is granted.

The Veteran maintained that his service-connected disabilities precluded him from obtaining and maintaining full-time, competitive gainful employment.  See July 2023 VA Form 21-8940.

VA law provides that a total rating for compensation may be assigned where the schedular rating is less than total when it is found that the disabled person is unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation as a result of a single service-connected disability ratable at 60 percent or more or as a result of two or more disabilities, provided at least one disability is ratable at 40 percent or more, and there is sufficient additional service-connected disability to bring the combined rating to 70 percent or more.  38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a).  Nevertheless, even when the percentage requirements are not met, entitlement to a TDIU on an extraschedular basis may be granted in exceptional cases when the veteran is unable to secure and follow a substantially gainful occupation by reason of service-connected disabilities.  38 C.F.R. § 4.16(b).

Entitlement to a total rating must be based solely on the impact of service-connected disabilities on the ability to keep and maintain substantially gainful employment.  See 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.340, 3.341, 4.16.  The central inquiry is "whether the veteran's service-connected disabilities alone are of sufficient severity to produce unemployability."  Hatlestad v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 524, 529 (1993).  For VA purposes, the term "unemployability" is synonymous with inability to secure and follow a substantially gainful occupation.  VAOPGPREC 75-91, 57 Fed. Reg. 2317 (Jan. 21, 1992).

"Substantially gainful employment" is not currently defined in VA regulations; however, the term has been defined as having two components: one economic and one noneconomic. The economic component means an occupation earning more than marginal income (outside of a protected environment) as determined by the U.S. Department of Commerce as the poverty threshold for one person. The noneconomic component includes consideration of the veteran's history, education, skill, and training, whether the veteran has the physical ability to perform the type of activities required by the occupation at issue, and whether the veteran has the mental ability to perform the activities required by the occupation at issue. In other words, the noneconomic component requires consideration of a veteran's ability to secure or follow that type of employment. Ray v. Wilkie, 31 Vet. App. 58 (2019).

Marginal employment shall not be considered substantially gainful employment. 38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a). Factors to be considered in determining whether unemployability exists are the veteran's education and employment history, and loss of work-related functions due to pain. Ferraro v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 326, 330, 332 (1991). Consideration may not be given to the veteran's age or to any impairment caused by nonservice-connected disabilities. 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.341, 4.16, 4.19. For a veteran to prevail on a claim of entitlement to a TDIU, the record must reflect some factor which takes the case outside the norm. The fact that a veteran may be unemployed or has difficulty obtaining employment is not determinative. The ultimate question is whether the veteran, because of service-connected disabilities, is incapable of performing the physical and mental acts required by employment, not whether he or she can find employment. Van Hoose v. Brown, 4 Vet. App. 361, 363 (1993).

For the period under consideration, service connection was in effect for: (1) insomnia disorder, rated at 10 percent from April 11, 2019, and at 30 percent from March 23, 2022; (2) lumbar strain, rated at 10 percent from April 11, 2019, and at 20 percent from March 29, 2021; (3) left hip strain (limitation of flexion), rated at 10 percent from April 11, 2019; (4) right hip strain (limitation of flexion), rated at 10 percent from April 11, 2019; (5) meniscal tear, right knee, rated at 10 percent from April 11, 2019; (6) metatarsalgia right foot, rated at 10 percent from April 11, 2019; (7) right foot hallux valgus associated with metatarsalgia right foot, rated at 10 percent from March 29, 2021; (8) right ankle retrocalcaneal bursitis with Haglund deformity, rated at 10 percent from April 8, 2021; (9) degenerative arthritis, left knee, rated at 10 percent from November 10, 2021, and at 10 percent from April 11, 2022; (10) right hip strain (thigh, limitation of extension), rated noncompensably from March 23, 2022, and at 10 percent from July 18, 2023; (11) right hip limitation of internal rotation, rated noncompensably from April 11, 2019; (12) left hip strain (thigh, limitation of extension), rated noncompensably from March 23, 2022; (13) left hip strain (thigh, impairment of), rated noncompensably from March 23, 2022.  Therefore, the Veteran meets the schedular criteria for consideration of entitlement to a TDIU on a schedular basis from April 8, 2021. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a).

Turning to the issue of whether the Veteran has been rendered unemployable because of his service-connected disabilities, in the Veteran's July 2023 VA Form 21-8940, the Veteran averred that the Veteran become too disabled to work in January 2020 as a result of his lumbar strain, as well as his hip, foot, and knee disabilities.  The Veteran further reported that he had not worked on a substantial, gainful basis since at least as early as 2019.

The Veteran was afforded numerous VA examinations for his service-connected conditions, several of which corroborate the Veteran's work-related limitations.  See May 2019 examination for hip and thigh conditions (the Veteran cannot run or walk for long periods of time); May 2019 examination for back conditions (the Veteran cannot bend over, lift heavy objects, or sit for long periods of time); May 2019 examination for foot conditions (Veteran cannot walk for long periods of time and cannot use the stairs); March 2020 examination for knee and lower leg conditions (Veteran has difficulty with prolonged walking, standing, and squatting); April 2021 examination for hearing loss and tinnitus (Veteran does well in quiet settings, but if there is background noise he would have difficulties at work); April 2021 examination for back conditions (Veteran is unable to sit, stand, and walk for longer than 20 minutes without experiencing pain, and has difficulty bending and lifting objects greater than 20 pounds).

The Veteran was also awarded a Fully Favorable Decision by the Social Security Administration granting Social Security Disability benefits as of June 2021, finding that the Veteran's dysfunction of major joints, with chronic neck, back, bilateral hip, knee, and ankle pain preclude the Veteran from obtaining and maintaining substantial, gainful employment.

In July 2023, the Veteran submitted a vocational report from a private vocational consultant.  In her report, the private vocational consultant conducted a detailed analysis of the Veteran's education, employment, and medical history.  The private vocational consultant then opines that, as a direct result of the Veteran's service-connected medical conditions, the Veteran was at least as likely as not unable to secure and follow substantially, gainful employment, in any occupation regardless of skill or exertional level, from at least as early as November 2021.

The Board grants great probative weight to the opinion of the private vocational consultant as this opinion is consistent with the opinions of the various VA examiners, the favorable disability award from the Social Security Administration, and the Veteran's VA and private treatment records.

In light of the foregoing, the Board finds that the probative evidence of record is at least approximately balanced that the Veteran was unable to obtain, or maintain, substantial, gainful employment from April 8, 2021, to present.  The Veteran's reported symptoms and work-related limitations at the foregoing examinations are consistent with his VA and private treatment notes, the favorable disability award from the Social Security Administration, as well as the conclusions of the VA examiners themselves and the conclusions of the private vocational consultant.  Moreover, the foregoing evidence is not meaningfully contradicted by any medical or vocational evidence of record.  As such, the Board finds the Veteran's reported difficulties in work-related activities and claims that he could no longer perform substantial, gainful employment to be competent and credible.

Accordingly, entitlement to TDIU is granted.

REASONS FOR REMAND

3. Entitlement to a compensable rating for left hip strain (thigh, limitation of extension) is remanded.

4. Entitlement to a compensable rating for left hip strain (thigh, impairment of) is remanded.

5. Entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent for left hip strain (limitation of flexion) is remanded.

6. Entitlement to a compensable rating prior to July 18, 2023, and to a rating in excess of 10 percent from July 18, 2023, to present, for right hip strain (thigh, limitation of extension), is remanded.

7. Entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent for meniscal tear, right knee, is remanded.

8. Entitlement to a rating in excess of 20 percent for lumbar strain is remanded.

The Veteran contends that his service-connected bilateral hip disabilities, right knee disability, and lumbar spine disability, warrant ratings in excess of those which are currently assigned.  See March 2024 NOD.

Recently, in Ingram v. Collins, No. 23-1798, 2025 U.S. Vet. App. Claims LEXIS 327 (Vet. App. Mar. 12, 2025), the U.S. Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims held that when evaluating musculoskeletal conditions, the beneficial effects of medications must be discounted where the applicable diagnostic code does not reference medication as a factor in evaluation.  Here, the Veteran was afforded VA examinations in August 2023 for his hip and thigh conditions, knee and lower leg conditions, and back conditions, where he reported that he takes tramadol, cyclobenzaprine, Gabapentin, and Ibuprofen for these disabilities to alleviate pain.  As the diagnostic codes used to evaluate these disabilities do not consider medication as a factor in evaluation, the Board finds that additional clarification is required. 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

(Continued on the next page)

(Continued on the next page)

?

?

1. Obtain an addendum opinion from an appropriate VA examiner to provide an opinion as to the severity of the Veteran's bilateral hip, right knee, and lumbar spine disabilities absent the ameliorative effects of medication. 

The examiner is asked to quantify the extent to which the Veteran's use of pain medication ameliorates the functional impairment of his bilateral hip, right knee, and lumbar spine disabilities. If possible, please attempt to estimate this in terms of degrees of range of motion. 

If this is not feasible, the examiner should provide a detailed explanation and rationale for why this could not be accomplished. Specifically, if the examiner cannot provide an opinion without resort to speculation, he or she should explain why an opinion cannot be rendered. 

If an opinion cannot be given without resorting to speculation, the examiner should explain why and state whether the need to speculate is due to a deficiency in the state of general knowledge (no one could respond given medical science and the known facts), the record (additional facts are required), or the examiner (does not have the knowledge or training).

If the inability to provide an opinion without resorting to speculation is due to a deficiency in the record (additional facts are required), the AOJ should develop the claim to the extent it is necessary to cure any such deficiency. If the inability to provide an opinion is due to the examiner's lack of requisite knowledge or training, then the AOJ should obtain an opinion from a medical professional who has the knowledge and training needed to render such an opinion.

 

   

M. Mills

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	B. Hillman, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.