Citation Nr: A25034186
Decision Date: 04/14/25	Archive Date: 04/14/25

DOCKET NO. 210216-141783
DATE: April 14, 2025

ISSUE

Entitlement to a waiver of recovery of an overpayment of Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) compensation benefits, in the amount of $20,826.16.

ORDER

Entitlement to a waiver of recovery of an overpayment of Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) compensation benefits, in the amount of $20,826.16 is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran received VA compensation benefits in the amount of $20,826.16, during a period from March 10, 2019, through June 2, 2020, whereby he was subject to an outstanding felony arrest warrant, and therefore ineligible to receive such benefits.

2. The overpayment of VA compensation benefits in the amount of $20,826.16 was not due to the Veteran's fraud, misrepresentation, or bad faith.

3. The Veteran was at fault in the creation of the overpayment debt, due to his receipt of VA compensation benefits during a time when he was subject to an outstanding felony arrest warrant.

4. The balance of fault lies with the Veteran for the creation of the overpayment debt, as opposed to VA.

5. Recovery of the overpayment would not result in undue hardship against the Veteran.

6. Recovery of the overpayment would not defeat the intended purpose of the compensation benefits.

7. Waiver of recovery of the overpayment would result in unjust enrichment of the Veteran at government expense.

8. The Veteran did not change his position, nor incur a liability to his detriment, in reliance of the VA compensation benefits.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The recovery of the overpayment of VA compensation benefits in the amount of $20,8826.16 would not be against the standards of equity and good conscience and, therefore, the overpayment indebtedness is not waived. 38 U.S.C. §§ 5107, 5302(a), 5313B; 38 C.F.R. §§ 1.962, 1.963, 1.965, 3.665

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the Army from March 2014 to September 2017. This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a November 2020 Decision, issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Committee on Waivers and Compromises (COWC).

Following the November 2020 COWC decision, the Veteran filed a VA Form 10182, Notice of Disagreement (NOD). The Veteran selected the Evidence Submission docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the November 2020 COWC Decision on appeal, and within 90 days from the date that the VA Form 10182 NOD was received. 38 C.F.R. § 20.303. The Board cannot consider evidence submitted or received outside of those periods. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. 

If evidence was associated with the claims file during a period of time when additional evidence was not allowed, the Board has not considered it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. § 20.300. If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was added to the claims file that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

Of note, the Veteran, through his Representative, also submitted a Motion for an extension of time to submit evidence, received by VA in August 2021. That Motion was granted by the Board in August 2021, and the AMA evidence window was thereby extended an additional 90 days. The time to submit additional evidence has since closed, and the Board may now review the appeal.

Additionally, the Veteran has not disputed the validity of the debt. The Veteran has only claimed entitlement to a waiver of recovery of an overpayment of VA compensation benefits, in the amount of $20,826.16. The claim on appeal has therefore been characterized to reflect that claim.

Entitlement to a waiver of recovery of an overpayment of Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) compensation benefits, in the amount of $20,826.16.

The Veteran has claimed entitlement to a waiver of recovery of an overpayment of VA compensation benefits. The Board observes that the debt stems from a period whereby the Veteran was subject to an outstanding fugitive felon warrant.

Effective December 27, 2001, 38 U.S.C. § 5313B was enacted by Congress which provides that a Veteran may not be paid compensation benefits for any period during which such Veteran is a fugitive felon. A "fugitive felon" is defined by 38 U.S.C. § 5313B (b) as including a person fleeing to avoid prosecution, custody, or confinement relating to a felony offense, as well as a person violating a condition of probation or parole imposed for a felony.

The implementing regulation governing pensions for fugitive felons, under 38 C.F.R. § 3.665 (n), provides that: (1) Compensation is not payable on behalf of a Veteran for any period during which he or she is a fugitive felon; (2) the term "fugitive felon" means a person who is a fugitive by reason of: (i) Fleeing to avoid prosecution, or custody or confinement after conviction, for an offense, or an attempt to commit an offense, which is a felony under the laws of the place from which the person flees; or (ii) Violating a condition of probation or parole imposed for commission of a felony under the Federal or State law. The term "felony" includes a high misdemeanor under the laws of a State which characterizes as high misdemeanors offenses that would be felony offenses under Federal law. 38 C.F.R. § 3.665 (n)(3).

VA's Adjudication Procedure Manual provides additional guidance with respect to issues relating to fugitive felons. See M21-1MR, Part X, Chapter 16. Under those guidelines, a beneficiary who is the subject of a valid outstanding felony arrest warrant is presumed to be a fugitive felon for VA purposes. M21-1MR, Pt. X, Ch. 16.1c. An arrest warrant is simply an order from a magistrate or other official authorized to issue such warrants directing that a named individual be arrested and brought before the issuing official. Id.

When a warrant is dismissed, recalled, or quashed, there was still a valid warrant up until the date the warrant was cleared and VA benefits are subject to adjustment from the warrant date until the date it is recalled, dismissed, or quashed, unless there was a specific determination that the warrant was void from its inception because of mistaken identity or a defect in the warrant, or the court order specifically states that the recall is effective from a specific date that is on or before the date of the warrant, or uses the terminology nunc pro tunc, which refers to changing back to an earlier date. M21- 1MR, Pt. X, Ch. 16.2f.

By way of background, in January 2020 VA was informed by the Bureau of Prisons that the Veteran had been flagged as subject to an outstanding felony arrest warrant. The warrant was issued by the Nashville Metro Police Department in Tennessee, with an issuance date of March 10, 2019.

The following month, VA contacted the Veteran at his current address of record and informed him that they had received information about the outstanding felony arrest warrant. VA was therefore proposing to terminate the Veteran's benefits retroactively from the date of the warrant being issued. The Veteran was informed that he had 60 days to respond to the letter and was urged to contact the local authority to clear the warrant. Alternatively, the Veteran could submit evidence that the warrant had been cleared.

The Veteran did not respond, and so in May 2020, VA implemented the proposed termination of VA compensation benefits. Per law and regulation, the termination was retroactive to the date of the issued standing felony warrant, from March 10, 2019. The Veteran was informed that this had resulted in an overpayment of VA compensation benefits.

In July 2020, a letter was uploaded to the claims file from a representative from the Nashville Public Defender's office. The letter said that the Veteran had a court hearing in September 2020. The letter did not say that the outstanding warrant had been cleared, nor satisfied.

In a Report of contact from July 2020, a VA representative informed the Veteran the information that was required to "prove that the warrant is cleared."

Upon a second call from the Veteran, VA contacted the Nashville Circuit Court in August 2020. The Circuit Court representative confirmed that the Veteran's outstanding warrant was from March 10, 2019, and that it was closed on June 2, 2020. The warrant was not noted to be invalid from an earlier effective date, nor was it void nunc pro tunc.

VA restarted the Veteran's benefits in August 2020, effective from June 2, 2020. The retroactive resumption of compensation benefits resulted in an award of $3,531.74.

In September 2020, the Veteran was sent a letter from the Debt Management Center (DMC), informing him that an overpayment had been created in the amount of $20,826.16. The Veteran was informed of his rights to dispute the debt and/or to request a waiver of recovery of the debt.

In response, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 5655, Financial Status Report (FSR). He wrote that he was presently employed and made $400.00 per month. The Veteran wrote that he was married, but he did not list his spouse's income. He included expenses of $900 for rent, $200 for food, and $200 for utilities/heat. The Veteran reported $548.45 cash in the bank, and $22.54 cash on hand. The Veteran did not have a car, but he also had no installment contracts to report.

The Veteran's waiver claim was forwarded to the COWC, who denied the claim in November 2020. The COWC reasoned that the Veteran reported income from a salary position, but that he neglected to include his VA compensation, which was approximately $1,795.80 per month, and thus he would not face undue financial hardship through recovery of the debt. The COWC also reasoned that the Veteran was at fault for the fugitive felon warrant, and that he was therefore unjustly enriched.

The Veteran then submitted his VA Form 10182, NOD. He wrote that he was appealing the November 2020 COWC Decision, which denied the waiver claim. The Veteran wrote that he would face financial hardship through recovery of the debt, and that collection of the debt defeated the purpose of the benefits because he could not provide for his basic needs. The Veteran selected the Evidence Submission docket.

In an attached statement from February 2021, which the Board may review as it falls within the AMA evidentiary review window, the Veteran wrote that he was facing undue hardship, and that he was at limited fault for the debt. He argued that he had since divorced, and so he "can no longer afford my monthly rent." The Veteran stated that his rent was going to be increased by $100.00, and that he was struggling to find work because of his anxiety and panic attacks. Regarding fault, the Veteran stated that he was not aware that he was subject to an outstanding felony arrest warrant from Tennessee. The Veteran stated that he was living in California at the time, and only found out about the warrant when VA informed the Veteran that his disabilities had been terminated. The Veteran wrote that "I took care of my warrant, and it was cleared on June 2, 2020, only 2 days after me finding out about the warrant."

The Veteran also submitted an updated FSR in February 2021. The Veteran wrote that he was no longer married, nor presently employed. The Veteran wrote that his VA benefits were $1,100.35 per month. Rent was reported at $895.22, food at $350.0, utilities/heat at $300.00. other expenses included a phone bill and "uber share rides," at $150.00. Cash in the bank was listed at $50.63, with no cash on hand. The Veteran did not have a vehicle, nor did he have any installment contracts or other debts.

In an Appellate Brief from the Veteran's Representative, uploaded in October 2021 during the period of evidentiary review whereby the Motion for a time extension was granted, the Veteran's Representative argued that the Veteran faced undue financial hardship. They wrote that he Veteran's monthly compensation benefits had been reduced following his divorce, from $1,795.80 to $1,679.35. they wrote that the Veteran's reduced assets indicate his difficulty in paying for monthly expenses, including his housing. They also argued that recovery of the debt would defeat the purpose of the benefits, which are to "compensate a claimant for average impairments in earning capacity resulting from service-connected disability in civil occupations." They therefore requested that the overpayment on appeal be waived.

The Veteran's claim is now before the Board.

As an initial matter, the Board finds that there has been no evidence of fraud, misrepresentation, or bad faith in the present case.

In cases where fraud, misrepresentation, or bad faith on the Veteran's part with respect to the creation of the overpayment at issue have not been demonstrated, and, therefore, waiver is not precluded pursuant to 38 U.S.C. § 5302 (a), the Board must determine whether recovery of the indebtedness would be against equity and good conscience, thereby permitting waiver under 38 U.S.C. § 5302 (a) and 38 C.F.R. §§ 1.963 (a), 1.965(a).

The standards of "equity and good conscience" will be applied when the facts and circumstances in a particular case indicate a need for reasonableness and moderation in the exercise of the Government's rights. The decision reached should not be unduly favorable or adverse to either side. The phrase "equity and good conscience" means arriving at a fair decision between the obligor and the Government. In making this determination, consideration will be given to the following elements, which are not intended to be all-inclusive:

1. Fault of debtor. Where actions of the debtor contribute to creation of the debt.

2. Balancing of faults. Weighing faults of the debtor against VA fault.

3. Undue hardship. Whether collection would deprive debtor or family of basic necessities.

4. Defeat the purpose. Whether withholding of benefits or recovery would nullify the objective for which the VA benefits were intended.

5. Unjust enrichment. Failure to make restitution would result in unfair gain to the debtor.

6. Changing position to one's detriment. Reliance on VA benefits results in relinquishment of a valuable right or incurrence of a legal obligation.

38 C.F.R. § 1.965(a).

Turning to the first factor, the Board finds the Veteran at fault for the creation of the debt. Simply put, the Veteran was subject to an outstanding felony arrest warrant during a time that he received VA compensation, which is prohibited. VA was not alerted to this fact, until an update from the Bureau of Prisons through an interagency match program. But for that match, it is unclear if VA would have received information about the outstanding felony arrest warrant from March 10, 2019, through June 2, 2020. The Veteran is reasonably expected to know when he is subject to an outstanding felony arrest warrant. He has argued that he was in California at the time, and only found out about this when VA terminated his benefits retroactively. Understandable as that fact pattern may be, it does not change the fact that an outstanding warrant was issued for the Veteran's arrest, which was subsequently not cleared, during a time that he received VA compensation. To the extent that he has argued that he acted quickly "only 2 days after finding out about the warrant," this also does not change the fact that an outstanding warrant for his arrest existed for the period from March 10, 2019, through June 2, 2020. Furthermore, there is no specific determination that the warrant was void from its inception, and the court orders of record do not specifically state that they were invalid from an earlier effective date, nor do they use the terminology nunc pro tunc. M21- 1MR, Pt. X, Ch. 16.2f. Thus, the outstanding warrant was still in effect from March 10, 2019, through June 2, 2020, during a period whereby the Veteran was still receiving VA compensation benefits. Because those benefits could not be disbursed during a period whereby the Veteran was subject to a felony arrest warrant, an overpayment was created in the Veteran's name. The Veteran is therefore at fault for the creation of the debt.

Comparatively, VA does not bear fault for the creation of the debt. VA was only alerted to the Veteran's outstanding felony arrest warrant in January 2020. VA immediately contacted the Veteran at his address of record, informed him of the information that VA had received, and that they were proposing to terminate his benefits. The Veteran did not respond within the allotted time period, and so that proposed action was taken. The Veteran was informed of his due process rights at all stages, and without delay on the part of VA. Thus, comparatively, VA does not bear fault for the creation of the debt.

Turning to the third factor, the Board has considered the Veteran's initial FSR, as well as his updated FSR. The Board also appreciates that the Veteran, as of the evidentiary window, was unemployed, and that his VA compensation benefits had been reduced following his divorce. Having said that, the Veteran has on two occasions incorrectly noted his VA compensation benefits in the "income" section of the FSRs submitted: first they were unlisted, and in the more recent FSR they were underreported. While this does not rise to the level of a finding of bad faith, the Board still takes judicial notice of the higher VA compensation level. The Representative does acknowledge the Veteran's monthly compensation, and the fact that it has been restarted following the termination due to the then-outstanding warrant. While the Veteran's income is very close to his expenses, the Board also recognizes financial factors in the Veteran's favor, such as the lack of vehicle costs, the lack of installment contracts, and no present dependents to take care of. The Board has considered the Veteran's arguments regarding financial hardship, including the difficulty faced with the increased cost of his rent. Having said that, the financial picture painted is not one whereby the Veteran could not adequately address the debt through a structured payment plan and/or effective budgeting. Thus, while there is certainly some financial hardship, which is to be expected when repaying a debt, that hardship is not undue.

The fourth element to be addressed is whether recovery of the overpayment would defeat the purpose for which the benefits were intended. Here, VA awarded compensation disability benefits based on the Veteran's decrease in earning capacity due to service-connected disabilities. However, 38 C.F.R. § 3.665 precludes receipt of compensation benefits for Veterans with an active fugitive felon warrant. A Veteran under fugitive felon status should not be able to use VA benefits, as presumably those benefits could be put towards further evasion of the law.

Furthermore, compensation benefits are intended to compensate Veteran's for reductions in earning capacity in civilian occupations, as correctly argued by the Veteran's Representative. Having said that, in this case, recovery of the debt would not further reduce the Veteran's functional earning capacity in civilian occupations. Thus, recovery of the debt would not defeat the purpose of the benefits themselves.

Also, for consideration is whether a waiver of overpayment would cause "unjust enrichment." Put another way, the Board must contemplate whether failure to make restitution would result in unfair gain. The Board finds that there would be unfair gain because for this period the Veteran was not entitled to those payments. The Veteran received VA compensation benefits when he was not legally entitled to them, as he was subject to an outstanding felony arrest warrant. He was therefore unjustly enriched during the overpayment period.

The sixth element to be considered is whether reliance on VA benefits resulted in a veteran relinquishing a valuable right or incurring a legal obligation. The Veteran had not claimed that he relinquished any right or incurred any legal obligation or that he relied upon VA to his detriment during his lifetime, nor do the facts show such. Thus, this sixth element does not support the request for a waiver of recovery of the overpayment.

The record does not demonstrate any additional factors which should be considered in adjudicating the claim for a waiver of the indebtedness. Neither the Veteran, nor his Representative, have identified any other such factors.

Balancing the above referenced factors, the Board finds that the Veteran's fault in creating the debt due to his outstanding fugitive felony warrant and his unjust enrichment must be accorded significantly greater weight than other elements. The Board is also cognizant that, while the Veteran faces some financial hardship through recovery of the debt, that hardship is not undue.

Based on the totality of the evidence and the foregoing analysis, waiver of recovery of the indebtedness is not justified pursuant to the principles of equity and good conscience. 38 U.S.C. § 5302; 38 C.F.R. § 1.965 (a).

As such, the Veteran's request for a waiver must be denied.

 

 

Michael A. Pappas

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	G. Mulrain, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.