Citation Nr: A25034815
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 241009-482624
DATE: April 15, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 50 percent for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is denied.

FINDING OF FACT

For the entire period on appeal, the severity, frequency, and duration of the Veteran's PTSD symptoms do not more closely approximate occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for a rating in excess of 50 percent for PTSD have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.126, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9411.

?

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served in the United States Army National Guard from November 2005 to November 2017 with a period of active duty from May 2009 to March 2010. 

The present appeal comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeal (Board) following a September 2024 Higher-Level Review rating decision. The Veteran appealed that decision by filing a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) in October 2024. He elected the Direct docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the May 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

The Board acknowledges that the Veteran was notified of the AOJ September 2024 decision on appeal on September 13, 2024, which is within one year of the issuance of this decision, and the opportunity to request a different Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), VA Form 10182, docket has not fully expired. See Williams v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 305, 311 (2024). However, the Board interprets the Veteran's statements as reflecting an intent to have this matter reviewed in an expeditious manner, which the Board finds to be an implicit waiver of the Veteran's right to change Board dockets under Williams.

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 50 percent for PTSD. 

The Veteran asserts he is entitled to an increased disability rating for PTSD which is currently rated at 50 percent. See January 2024 VA Form 20-0995 Supplemental Claim Application. Following a review of the evidence, the Board finds the Veteran's PTSD symptoms did not more nearly approximate the level of impairment required for a disability rating of 70 percent or higher. Rather, the Veteran's symptoms more closely approximated the symptoms associated with a 50 percent rating under the relevant rating criteria. 

Disability evaluations are determined by the application of VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities (Rating Schedule), 38 C.F.R. Part 4. This Rating Schedule is primarily a guide in the rating of disability resulting from all types of diseases and injuries encountered as a result of or incident to military service. The percentage ratings represent as far as can practicably be determined the average impairment in earning capacity resulting from such diseases and injuries and their residual conditions in civil occupations. Generally, the degrees of disability specified are considered adequate to compensate for considerable loss of working time from exacerbations or illnesses proportionate to the severity of the several grades of disability. For the application of this schedule, accurate and fully descriptive medical examinations are required, with emphasis upon the limitation of activity imposed by the disabling condition. Over a period of many years, a veteran's disability claim may require re-ratings in accordance with changes in laws, medical knowledge and his or her physical or mental condition. It is essential, both in the examination and in the evaluation of disability, that each disability be viewed in relation to its history. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1.

VA law provides that under the General Formula for Mental Disorders (General Formula), the Board must conduct a "holistic analysis" that considers all associated symptoms, regardless of whether they are listed as criteria. See Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 10, 22 (2017). "[T]he presence or lack of evidence of a specific sign or symptom listed in the evaluation criteria is not necessarily dispositive of any particular disability level." Id. The Board must determine whether unlisted symptoms are similar in severity, frequency, and duration to the listed symptoms associated with specific disability percentages. Then, the Board must determine whether the associated symptoms, both listed and unlisted, caused the level of impairment required for a higher disability rating. 38 C.F.R. § 4.126; see also Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 114-118 (Fed. Cir. 2013).

The Veteran's PTSD is currently rated at 50 percent disabling under the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders (General Formula). 

A 50 percent rating is assigned with an occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to such symptoms as: flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short- and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships.

A 70 percent rating is assigned with an occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to symptoms to such as suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant speech; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a worklike setting); or inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.

A 100 percent rating is assigned with a total occupational and social impairment due to symptoms such as gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; or memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation or own name.

?

The list of symptoms under the rating criteria are examples of symptoms that would warrant the rating, but they are not meant to be exhaustive. The Board need not find all or even some of the symptoms to award a specific rating. See Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436, 442-43 (2002). However, a veteran may only qualify for a specific disability rating under 38 C.F.R. § 4.130 by demonstrating the symptoms associated with that percentage or others of similar severity, frequency, and duration, and that such symptoms have resulted in the type of occupational and social impairment associated with that percentage. See Vazquez-Claudio, 713 F.3d at 117-18. The rating agency shall assign a rating based on all the evidence of record that bears on occupational and social impairment rather than solely on the examiner's assessment of the level of disability at the moment of the examination. When rating the level of disability from a mental disorder, the rating agency will consider the extent of social impairment but shall not assign a rating solely on the basis of social impairment. 38 C.F.R. § 4.126.

It is the policy of VA to administer the law under a broad interpretation, consistent with the facts in each case with all reasonable doubt to be resolved in favor of the claimant. However, the reasonable doubt rule is not a means for reconciling actual conflict or a contradiction in the evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 4.3.

The evidence overall does not demonstrate the level of impairment associated with a 70 percent rating. The majority of the Veteran's symptoms were either contemplated by or more consistent with a 50 percent rating under the General Formula. While the Veteran does have difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a worklike setting), which is associated with a 70 percent rating, the evidence does not show he experienced occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, and mood due to his PTSD.

During the Veteran's most recent VA examination, in February 2024, the Veteran reported having been married to his current wife since 2018. See C&P Exam. He lives with his two biological children and one stepchild. He described his relationship with his wife and children as "loving but tense at times" as he can be easily aggravated. The Veteran reported the same in his private treatment records consistently describing his mood as irritable, even when he doesn't have a reason to be, throughout the period on appeal. See October 2022 Medical Treatment Record - Non-Government Facility. Specifically, the Veteran reports that he feels "cut off" from everyone and isolates from his family to be alone. During a November 2022 VA examination, he continued to endorse an irritable mood and isolating from others. See November 2022 C&P exam. He even expressed feelings of guilt regarding his role as a father stating he is not "the father to his children that he wants to be." Outside of his family, the Veteran reported avoiding crowds and consistently reported having few or no close friends. He described his relationship with his family of origin as "distant." He stated that he will visibly shake when in crowds. This includes shopping centers, school events, work conferences, and grocery stores. The Veteran reported experiencing anxiety on a daily basis in June 2022. However, he stated that his last panic attack was six months prior. Additionally, he reports having nightmares throughout the period on appeal which cause him to wake up throughout the night and occasionally be violent while he is sleeping. 

During the period on appeal, the Veteran maintained full-time employment with a beverage group who oversees numerous store chains. In July 2022, he reported he "dreaded" going to work and feeling like he didn't want to interact with anyone. He even stated that he can get so irritated with others that "he wants to scream." In February 2024, the Veteran described his work as "stressful due to many employees being 'middle eastern.'" He told his private physician that he finds himself "fussing with others" often and wanted to be alone. The February 2024 VA examiner opined that the Veteran's mild discomfort around some coworkers does not significantly impair his performance based on the Veteran's prior statements. Despite these limitations, the Board notes that in September 2022, the Veteran told his private physician that he was able to express his concerns about the company to his boss "in a respectful way." The Board finds such is indicative of the Veteran's ability to effectively communicate in the workplace despite his irritability, negative emotions, and tendency to isolate. 

?

In a January 2024 statement, prepared by the Veteran's attorney, the Veteran reported symptoms such as presenting a danger of hurting himself or others, suicidal thoughts or feelings, and "planning suicide" as a result of his PTSD and depression. See January 2024 Correspondence. The Board is mindful of the decision in Bankhead, in which the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (the Court) held that the presence of suicidal ideation alone may cause occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas (a 70 percent disability rating under 38 C.F.R. § 4.130). See Bankhead, at 19-23. 

Under the unique facts of Bankhead, the claimant was noted to have had recurrent suicidal thoughts and behaviors of varying severity, frequency, and duration throughout the relevant appeal period. Id. The Bankhead Court provided a discussion on the background of "suicidal ideation," explaining that VA defines it as "'[t]houghts of engaging in suicide-related behavior' with 'various degrees of frequency, intensity, and duration." Id, at 19 (quoting VA/DoD Clinical Practice Guideline for Assessment and Management of Patients at Risk for Suicide 13 (June 2013)). The Court went on to further describe that, "both passive and active suicidal ideation are comprised of thoughts: passive suicidal ideation entails thoughts such as wishing that you were dead, while active suicidal ideation entails thoughts of self-directed violence and death." Id.

The holding in Bankhead does not create a compulsory award of a higher evaluation solely based upon the presence of such symptom. To the contrary, Bankhead succinctly states that "the presence or lack of evidence of a specific sign or symptom listed in the evaluation criteria is not necessarily dispositive of any particular disability level." Id, at 22 (citing Vazquez-Claudio, 713 F.3d at 115). Instead, the Court again implores it upon VA to "engage in a holistic analysis in which it assesses the severity, frequency, and duration of the signs and symptoms of the veteran's service-connected mental disorder; quantifies the level of occupational and social impairment caused by those signs and symptoms; and assigns an evaluation that most nearly approximates that level of occupational and social impairment." Id.

?

Here, and contrary to statement made by his attorney, the record demonstrates that the Veteran consistently denied suicidal ideation throughout the period on appeal. The Board does not wish to minimize such a serious symptom but points out that the single report of this symptom did not impact his social and occupational functioning beyond the currently assigned 50 percent rating. In this respect, the Veteran reported suicidal ideations only once during the period on appeal in correspondence prepared by his attorney. Other than this, he consistently denied thoughts, intent, or a plan involving self-harm in his treatment records. Most notably, he denied suicidal ideations during the February 2024 C&P exam one month after the correspondence. Additionally, he consistently denied thoughts, intent, or a plan involving self-harm in the following treatment records: June 2022 psychological evaluation, July 2022 primary care appointment, September 2022 psychiatric progress note, June 2023 psychological evaluation. See October 2022 CAPRI; November 2022 CAPRI; October 2022 Medical Treatment Record - Non-Government Facility; March 2024 CAPRI. 

The Board emphasizes that the statements made for diagnosis and treatment during the period on appeal are more probative than those made in pleadings in connection with the appeal of the denial of compensation benefits. Fed. R. Evid. 803(4) (noting that statements made to physicians for the purposes of diagnosis and treatment are exceptionally trustworthy and not excluded by the hearsay rule because the declarant has a strong motive to tell the truth in order to receive proper care); see also Rucker v. Brown, 10 Vet. App. 67, 73 (1997) ("[R]ecourse to the [Federal] Rules [of Evidence] is appropriate where they will assist in the articulation of the Board's reasons.")); see also Pond v. West, 12 Vet. App. 341, 345 (1999); see also Cartright v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 24, 25 (1991) (interest may affect the credibility of testimony). Thus, the Veteran's singularly report of suicidal ideation is not similar in severity, frequency, and duration to the criteria for a 70 or 100 percent rating.

Based on the foregoing, the Board finds the evidence persuasively weighs against a finding that the Veteran's PTSD symptoms amount to occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgement, thinking, and mood. The Veteran's PTSD causes him to be socially isolative, anxious, and irritable. Additionally, the Veteran's PTSD affects his motivation causing a decreased engagement in his interests and activities. He describes himself as wanting to lay in bed and be alone. Despite these symptoms, the Veteran maintains "loving" relationships with his wife and children and maintains full-time employment with the same employer for several years. Most recently, he even endorsed enjoying fishing as a hobby. The Board notes that while the Veteran hs received some professional treatment for his PSTD symptoms, such treatment is sporadic throughout the period on appeal, lasting a couple months at a time. At the time of his most recent examination, he denied receiving any treatment for his PTSD. The Board finds the foregoing evidence is against a finding that the Veteran's PTSD causes occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas. While the Veteran may experience frequent irritability, lack of motivation, and anxiety, the severity, frequency, and duration of such symptoms does not rise to the level of impairment associated with a 70 percent disability rating. Rather, his PTSD symptoms more closely approximate the level of impairment associated with a 50 percent rating.

As the Veteran's current 50 percent disability rating already contemplates his existing occupational and social impairment, the Board finds that the evidence persuasively weighs against a finding that the Veteran has shown deficiencies in most areas to warrant an increased 70 percent disability rating for all the reasons laid out above. As the Veteran's PTSD symptoms do not meet the rating criteria for an increased 70 percent disability rating for any period on appeal, it follows that such symptoms also do not meet the more severe rating criteria of total occupational and social impairment for an increased 100 percent disability rating for the appeal period. Significantly, the Veteran has not shown the required severity of occupational and social impairment necessary for an increased 70 or 100 percent disability rating during the period on appeal, and his PTSD symptoms as a whole are not of similar severity, frequency, and duration as those particular symptoms associated with an increased 70 or 100 percent disability rating.

For the above reasons, the evidence is neither evenly balanced nor approximately so with regard to whether an increased disability rating in excess of 50 percent for PTSD is warranted. Rather, the evidence persuasively weighs against an increased disability rating in excess of 50 percent for PTSD for the entire period on appeal, as the Veteran's service-connected PTSD symptoms do not more closely approximate occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas or total occupational and social impairment. The benefit of the doubt doctrine, see 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b), is therefore not for application, and the claim is denied. See Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc) (only when the evidence persuasively favors one side or another is the benefit of the doubt doctrine not for application). 

 

MICHAEL A. HERMAN

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Michelle B., Associate Attorney

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.