Citation Nr: A25034305
Decision Date: 04/14/25	Archive Date: 04/14/25

DOCKET NO. 230622-356181
DATE: April 14, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to Veteran Readiness and Employment (VR&E) benefits, other than employment services, under the provisions of Chapter 31, Title 38, United States Code, is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the U.S. Marine Corps from October 2004 to March 2011, to include service in Iraq.  His decorations include the Iraq Campaign Medal.

This matter comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a November 2022 decision issued by the VR&E Division of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office in Houston, Texas.  The Veteran timely appealed to the Board by filing a VA Form 10182 (Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement)) in June 2023, requesting direct review of the evidence considered by the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ).  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.201, 20.202(b)(1).

Under the direct review option, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of issuance of the AOJ decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  The Board cannot consider evidence submitted after that decision was promulgated.

That said, for the reasons set forth below, the Board is remanding the Veteran's claim to the AOJ for correction of a pre-decisional error.  The AOJ will consider any additional evidence that has been submitted when the claim is readjudicated.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Entitlement to VR&E benefits is remanded.

The provisions of Chapter 31, Title 38, United States Code, are intended to enable veterans with service-connected disabilities to achieve maximum independence in daily living and, to the maximum extent feasible, to become employable and to obtain and maintain suitable employment.  38 C.F.R. § 21.1.  For a veteran with 20 percent disability, basic entitlement to Chapter 31 benefits requires that the veteran be found by VA to be in need of rehabilitation because of an employment handicap. 38 C.F.R. § 21.40(b).  An employment handicap means an impairment, resulting in substantial part from a service-connected disability rated at 20 percent or more, of a veteran's ability to prepare for, obtain, or retain employment consistent with such veteran's abilities, aptitudes, and interests.  38 U.S.C. § 3101(7); 38 C.F.R. § 21.35(g).

The determination as to whether an employment handicap exists has been specifically delegated by regulation to the discretion of a VA counseling psychologist (CP) or vocational rehabilitation counselor (VRC).  38 C.F.R. §§ 21.50(b), 21.51.  An employment handicap will be found to exist when the individual has a vocational impairment; the individual has not overcome the effects of the impairment of employability through employment in, or qualifying for employment in, an occupation consistent with his abilities, aptitudes, and interests; and his service-connected disabilities have contributed in substantial part to the overall vocational impairment.  38 U.S.C. § 3102; 38 C.F.R. § 21.51.

Here, the Veteran applied for VR&E benefits in October 2022.  He indicated that he was interested in receiving additional education to obtain a logistics job with a government agency.  See October 2022 VA Form 28-1902w (Rehabilitation Needs Inventory (RNI)).   According to his RNI, he had been employed with a VA Medical Center since April 2011.  From April 2011 to January 2020, he was a supply manager earning approximately $2,500 per month.  According to the Veteran, he was then transferred to a purchasing agent position after he attacked his manager.  

The VRC denied the claim after performing an evaluation in November 2022 and determining that the Veteran did not have an employment handicap or serious employment handicap.  See November 2022 VA Form 28-1902b (Counseling Record-Narrative Report); November 2022 VR-58 (Decision Letter).  In this regard, the VRC remarked that the Veteran's service-connected disabilities did have an identifiable, measurable, and/or observable effect on the Veteran's ability to prepare for, obtain, and retain employment.  Specifically, the VRC found the Veteran's disabilities would impact his ability to deal with unpleasant or angry people; work in a cramped space or awkward position; spend time bending or twisting his body; spend time climbing ladders, scaffolds, or poles; spend time kneeling, crouching, stooping, or crawling; spend time, sitting, standing, walking, or running; and impact his work schedule.  The VRC ultimately concluded, however, that the Veteran had overcome the effects of his vocational impairment, finding, in part, that he was currently employed with VA and was not currently in jeopardy of losing his job.  The VRC stated that the employment was stable and continuous, and that the Veteran had access to work accommodations.  As for a serious employment handicap, because an employment handicap is a threshold requirement of having a serious employment handicap, the VRC assessed that the Veteran did not have a serious employment handicap.

On review, the Board finds that the November 2022 evaluation is inadequate for decision-making purposes.  In that regard, the VRC did not reconcile his findings with other evidence of record which indicated that the Veteran had not overcome the effects of his vocational impairment.

The Veteran reported in his RNI, for instance, that he attacked his prior manager and was reassigned to another position.  Additionally, he noted difficulties with co-workers who feared that they were going to be attacked, and indicated that his management team did not talk to him due to the previous episode.  He also noted that he took a significant number of mental health days.  The VRC did not expressly address the significance of these issues, particularly as it related to finding that his job was stable and not in jeopardy.

Furthermore, the Veteran underwent a VA posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) examination in June 2020 and the examiner found that the Veteran's disability caused total social and occupational impairment.  The Veteran presented with depressed mood; anxiety; suspiciousness; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently; chronic sleep impairment; flattened affect; disturbances of motivation and mood; difficulty establishing and maintaining effective relationships; difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a work like setting; and persistent delusions or hallucinations.  

Given the deficiencies in the November 2022 VR&E evaluation, the AOJ should have sought another opinion, or clarification of the existing opinion, before adjudicating the Veteran's claim.  The failure to do so constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error that must be corrected.

This matter is REMANDED for the following action:

Arrange for the Veteran to be afforded an appropriate evaluation to ascertain the limitations caused by his service-connected (and non-service-connected) disabilities and their effect on his ability to obtain or maintain employment consistent with his interests, aptitudes, and abilities.  The assessment should be conducted by a VRC.

Following review of the record, the VRC is requested to determine whether the Veteran has an employment handicap under 38 C.F.R. § 21.51 and/or a serious employment handicap under 38 C.F.R. § 21.52.

The VRC should also opine as to:

a.	Whether the Veteran has an impairment of the ability to prepare for, obtain, or keep employment in an occupation consistent with his abilities, aptitudes, and interests; and if so:

b.	Whether the effects of that impairment have been overcome through qualifying for, and/or obtaining and maintaining suitable employment, in an occupation consistent with his abilities, aptitudes, and interests; and if so:

c.	Whether the Veteran's service-connected disabilities contribute in substantial part to (i.e., have an identifiable, measurable, or observable causative effect on) his overall vocational impairment.

In doing so, the VRC must consider the Veteran's lay statements, any relevant VA or private medical records, the reports of the June 2020 VA PTSD examination, and VR&E documents (including counseling records and narrative reports).

A thorough rationale should be provided, with specificity in supporting statements and consideration of all of the relevant evidence of record. 

 

 

DAVID A. BRENNINGMEYER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	R. Kettler, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.