Citation Nr: A25034205
Decision Date: 04/14/25	Archive Date: 04/14/25

DOCKET NO. 240729-461022
DATE: April 14, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the Army from June 2006 to October 2009.  The Veteran is noted to have service in Southwest Asia.  

This matter is before the Board of Veteran's Appeals (Board) on appeal from a July 2024 rating decision from the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) that denied service connection for obstructive sleep apnea.  In the July 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal, the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the issuance of the July 2024 AOJ decision on appeal (July 9, 2024). 38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence of record after that date cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  However, because the Board is remanding the claim of entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

The Veteran filed his claim at issue in this case in November 2023, asserting that his OSA was related to military service to include in service exposures, as well as related to his service-connected posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD).  

Turning to the evidence of record, the Board reflects that the AOJ found Veteran has been diagnosed with OSA in 2024, and that he had toxic exposures as a result of his service in Kuwait and Iraq (Southwest Asia).  The Board is bound by these favorable findings.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).  Although not favorably found by the AOJ, the Board further reflects that the Veteran is currently service connected for PTSD, chronic sinusitis and allergic rhinitis.

In February 2024, the AOJ ordered a VA sleep apnea examination.  It appears that the Veteran initially underwent an at-home sleep study in March 2024, which did not contain enough data for the examiner to review; the Veteran underwent another sleep study in May 2024, which resulted in his diagnosis of OSA.  The May 2024 VA examiner opined that the Veteran's OSA was less likely than not proximately due to the Veteran's PTSD, because OSA and PTSD were not medically related, as OSA is a separate disease entity and not relate to PTSD.  The examiner noted that this conclusion was based on a "thorough review of the medical literature," which "failed to demonstrate a relationship. A nexus has not been established."  Notably, the Board finds that the rationale for provided opinion is circular and is otherwise conclusory in nature.  See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 302-04 (2008) (holding that it is the factually accurate, fully articulated, sound reasoning for the conclusion that contributes to the probative value of a medical opinion); Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 124 (2007) ("[A]medical opinion... must support its conclusion with an analysis that the Board can consider and weigh against contrary opinions").

Moreover, that examiner did not address secondary aggravation.  See Atencio v. O'Rourke, 30 Vet. App. 74, 90 (2018) (holding that, in claims involving service connection on a secondary basis, VA medical opinions must provide separate findings and rationales regarding both causation and aggravation); El-Amin v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 136, 140 (2013) (a medical opinion is inadequate when it fails to adequately address the question of aggravation).  Thus, the Board must find that this opinion is not adequate.  

The AOJ subsequently sought an addendum opinion to address the Veteran's TERA exposures; notably this July 2024 examiner is different from the previous examiner.  The July 2024 examiner noted the ILER report of the Veteran's conceded TERAs and service in Southwest Asia, and then indicated that the Veteran was an infantryman for 3 years, was diagnosed with OSA in 2024, and had a body mass index (BMI) over 30 (i.e., he was obese), with a history of smoking, alcohol and marijuana use, and chronic sinus issues.  The examiner noted that, according to the Mayo Clinic, risk factors for OSA were: being male, being overweight, smoking, use of alcohol, or having chronic sinus issues.  The examiner noted that OSA was an airway disease only and that anything that can obstruct or relax the airway can cause OSA symptoms.  As such, the examiner concluded that the Veteran's OSA was not caused by his service in Southwest Asia, to include TERA exposures therein and after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic combined effects of all TERAs of the Veteran.  

The Board finds this opinion to be inadequate because it is conclusory, as it does not explain why the Veteran's TERA exposures are not the cause of the Veteran's OSA.  In fact, although noting the ILER, the examiner does not otherwise discuss the Veteran's exposures.  See Nieves-Rodriguez, supra; Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 124 (2007) (holding a medical opinion must contain clear conclusions with supporting data, and a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two); see also January 10, 2024 Individual Longitudinal Exposure Record (noting the Veteran's exposures).  

Furthermore, the examiner notably does not address secondary service connection at all.  Specifically, this examiner did not address either secondary causation or aggravation due to the Veteran's service-connected PTSD.  Additionally, the examiner appears to raise at least 3 other potentially relevant theories of entitlement in this case-secondary service connection to both the Veteran's chronic sinusitis and allergic rhinitis, as well as obesity as an intermediate step to service-connected disabilities-in light of the noted risk factors in that opinion.  The July 2024 examiner-nor any other examiner-has addressed those raised theories of entitlement, and the AOJ did not otherwise develop and adjudicate those raised theories of entitlement prior to the decision on appeal in this case.  Accordingly, there are pre-decisional errors regarding the secondary service connection claim to PTSD, as discussed above, but also pre-decisional duty to assist errors by the AOJ in failing to address all raised theories of entitlement.  See Atencio, supra; Robinson v. Peake, 21 Vet. App. 545, 552 (2008), aff'd sub nom. Robinson v. Shinseki, 557 F.3d 1355 (Fed. Cir. 2009) (recognizing VA's duty to consider all issues raised either by the claimant or by the evidence of record).  

A remand on that basis is necessary to rectify these pre-decisional errors.  See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007); Kowalski v. Nicholson, 19 Vet. App. 171, 179 (2005) (a VA examination must be based on an accurate factual premise).

The matters are REMANDED for the following actions:

Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination to determine whether the Veteran's OSA is related to service or a service-connected disability.  The claims folder must be made available to and be reviewed by the examiner.  All tests deemed necessary should be conducted and the results reported in detail.

During the examination, the examiner should elicit a thorough medical history regarding onset of OSA symptomatology, including any symptoms during service (if applicable) and the medical course of those symptoms until diagnosis in 2024.  

After review of the claims file and examination of the Veteran, the examiner must opine whether the Veteran's OSA began in service, within one year of discharge therefrom, or is otherwise the result of military service, to include any and all toxic exposure risk activities (TERAs) therein.  In providing this opinion, the examiner is asked to consider total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran.

?

In addressing the above, the examiner should discuss any and all lay statements regarding onset of symptomatology as well as any statements regarding continuity of symptomatology since onset and/or since discharge from service.

If a direct relationship to service cannot be made, the examiner must then opine whether the Veteran's OSA is (a) caused by, or (b) aggravated (i.e., worsened) by the Veteran's service-connected disabilities, to particularly include his PTSD, chronic sinusitis and allergic rhinitis.  In so discussing, the examiner must consider any medications taken for any service-connected disabilities, as well as whether the Veteran's smoking or use of alcohol is used to self-medicate his PTSD, what effect, if any the use of such substances has on the Veteran's OSA, or whether such use is the cause of his OSA.

Finally, if the examiner cannot find a direct secondary relationship, the examiner must then consider whether the Veteran's service-connected disabilities have caused his obesity and thus, in turn, caused or aggravated his OSA. In this regard, the examiner should opine as to: (a) whether the Veteran's service-connected disabilities-PTSD, chronic sinusitis, allergic rhinitis, bronchitis, tinnitus, bilateral hip, and left knee disabilities-have caused or aggravated (i.e., worsened) his obesity. If so, then (b) whether the Veteran's obesity has either caused, substantially contributed to, or otherwise aggravated the Veteran's OSA. And, if so, finally (c) whether the Veteran's OSA would not have occurred if-but-for his obesity due to his service-connected disabilities.

A complete rationale should be provided for all opinions and conclusions expressed. The examiner is reminded that a complete opinion with supporting rationale for all raised theories of entitlement is required, including but not limited to secondary causation and secondary aggravation. 

 

MARTIN B. PETERS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	J. Woodruff

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.