Citation Nr: A25034022
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 231019-386193
DATE: April 11, 2025

ORDER

1. Entitlement to an initial 40 percent rating for left lower extremity (LLE) lumbar radiculopathy is granted.

2. Entitlement to an initial 40 percent rating for right lower extremity (RLE) lumbar radiculopathy is granted.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran's LLE lumbar radiculopathy has manifested signs and symptoms that more nearly approximate moderately severe incomplete paralysis of the sciatic nerve, but not complete paralysis of the sciatic nerve or marked muscular atrophy.

2. The Veteran's RLE lumbar radiculopathy has manifested signs and symptoms that more nearly approximate moderately severe incomplete paralysis of the sciatic nerve, but not complete paralysis of the sciatic nerve or marked muscular atrophy.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for an initial 40 percent rating for LLE lumbar radiculopathy have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1-4.7, 4.40, 4.45, 4.59, 4.71a, Diagnostic Code (DC) 8520.

2. The criteria for an initial 40 percent rating for RLE lumbar radiculopathy have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1-4.7, 4.40, 4.45, 4.59, 4.71a, DC 8520.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Navy from September 2005 to January 2011.

The case comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a September 2023 rating decision by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In October 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 10182 Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), requesting Direct Review of the evidence considered by the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ). Under this appeal lane, the Board may only consider evidence of record at the time of the issuance of the October 2023 rating decision. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

1. An initial rating in excess of 10 percent disabling for LLE lumbar radiculopathy.

2. An initial rating in excess of 10 percent disabling for RLE lumbar radiculopathy.

?

General Legal Criteria

Disability ratings are determined by applying the criteria set forth in the VA Schedule of Rating Disabilities (Rating Schedule) and are intended to represent the average impairment of earning capacity resulting from disability. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1. Separate diagnostic codes identify the various disabilities.

Disabilities must be reviewed in relation to their history. 38 C.F.R. § 4.1. Other applicable general policy considerations are: interpreting reports of examination in light of the whole recorded history, reconciling the various reports into a consistent picture so that the current rating many accurately reflect the elements of disability; resolving any reasonable doubt regarding the degree of disability in favor of the claimant; where there is a questions as to which of two evaluations apply, assigning a higher of the two where the disability pictures more nearly approximates the criteria for the next higher rating; and, evaluating functional impairment on the basis of lack of usefulness, and the effects of the disability upon the person's ordinary activity. See 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.2, 4.3, 4.7, 4.10; see also Schafrath v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 589 (1991).

A claimant may experience multiple distinct degrees of disability that might result in different levels of compensation from the time the increased rating claim was filed until a final decision is made. Thus, separate ratings can be assigned for separate periods of time based on the facts found - a practice known as "staged" ratings. Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505, 509-10 (2007); Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119, 127 (1999).

Additionally, the evaluation of the same disability under several Diagnostic Codes, known as pyramiding, must be avoided. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.14. Separate ratings may be assigned for distinct disabilities resulting from the same injury only where the symptomatology for one condition is not duplicative or overlapping with the symptomatology of the other condition. See Esteban v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 259, 261-62 (1994).

Specific Legal Criteria

The Veteran seeks increased ratings for both left and right lower extremity radiculopathy, which are rated under DC 8520.

Sciatic nerve neurological manifestations are rated under Diagnostic Code 8520, 8620, or 8720 as, respectively, paralysis, neuritis or neuralgia of the sciatic nerve.  Complete paralysis of the sciatic nerve, which is rated as 80 percent disabling, contemplates foot dangling and dropping, no active movement possible of muscles below the knee, and flexion of the knee weakened or (very rarely) lost.  Incomplete paralysis of the sciatic nerve warrants a 60 percent evaluation if it is severe with marked muscular dystrophy, a 40 percent evaluation if it is moderately severe, a 20 percent evaluation if it is moderate or a 10 percent evaluation if it is mild.    

Neuritis, cranial or peripheral, characterized by loss of reflexes, muscle atrophy, sensory disturbances, and constant pain, at times excruciating, is to be rated on the scale provided for injury of the nerve involved, with a maximum equal to severe, incomplete, paralysis. See nerve involved for diagnostic code number and rating. The maximum rating which may be assigned for neuritis not characterized by organic changes referred to in this section will be that for moderate, or with sciatic nerve involvement, for moderately severe, incomplete paralysis.  38 C.F.R. § 4.123.

The Board acknowledges that the terms "mild," "moderate," and "severe" are not defined in the Schedule.  Rather than applying a mechanical formula, the Board must evaluate all of the evidence to the end that its decisions are "equitable and just."  38 C.F.R. § 4.6.  The use of terminology such as "moderate" or "severe" by VA examiners and others, although an element of evidence to be considered by the Board, is not dispositive of an issue.  All evidence must be evaluated in arriving at a decision regarding an increased rating.  38 C.F.R. §§ 4.2, 4.6.

The Board does note, for reference and illustrative purposes only, that the definitions for "mild" includes not very severe.  WEBSTER'S II NEW COLLEGE DICTIONARY at 694 (1995).  The Board also notes that a synonym for "mild" is "slight" and definitions for "slight" includes small in size, degree, or amount.  Id. at 1038.  The definitions for "moderate" includes of average or medium quantity, quality, or extent.  Id. at 704.  Finally, definitions for "severe" includes extremely intense.  Id. at 1012.  It is also noted that the term "moderately severe" includes impairment that is considered more than "moderate" but not to the extent as to be considered "severe."

Analysis

Medical records from October 2020 describe the Veteran as experiencing tingling in both legs. In January 2021, it was noted the Veteran experienced burning and tingling in both legs.  A March 2021 spine center note described intermittent bilateral entire leg numbness that resolves with changing position; pain intensity on average: moderate to severe; associated symptoms as tingling and numbness; and pain aggravating factors: prolonged positioning. A July 2021 primary care note provided that at times, his legs feel heavy and weak as if about to fall off; after which, he immediately stops what he is doing and sits down. 

During an August 2021 acupuncture consult, the Veteran stated he has constant radicular pain in both legs that occasionally extends to his feet. He graded the pain as a constant 5 out of 10, describing episodes of severe pain that exceeds 10 out of 10. He is unable to run due to pain. For treatment, he soaks in a hot tub or Epsom salt bath every night. He also uses a TENS unit, prescribed muscle relaxer and lidocaine patches with mild relief.  The Veteran stated the pain disrupts sleep, but that he wakes up due to other conditions.

Records include a March 2022 orthopedic surgery consultation and VA back examination. The VA examiner noted leg numbness and periodic right foot numbness mainly if the Veteran sits too long.

Medical records from June 2022 include a pain note providing the Veteran was experiencing numbness in the legs. He had a TENS unit and a variety of other tools to help him, including some stretches. At that time, the Veteran had not experienced surgery on his back. However, he noted the pain had gotten significantly worse.

During a July 2022 VA examination, the examiner noted that since onset, the Veteran experiences the following: intermittent sharp shooting pain, numbness, and tingling sensation that radiates from the low back region to the left and right lower extremities since 2008. The right leg is greater than the left. The examiner also noted the Veteran has mild intermittent pain bilaterally, mild paresthesias and/or dysesthesias bilaterally, mild numbness bilaterally, and mild incomplete paralysis bilaterally for the sciatic nerve.

An October 2022 medical note provided the Veteran was experiencing pain in the back right side that was greater than on the left side. Additionally, the Veteran noticed more leg symptoms over the last two years. The Veteran described the symptoms as the right being greater than the left, and going down lateral/posterior thigh and to the calf at times. His symptoms were worse with walking and better with sitting, but not always.

Medical records provide the Veteran was prescribed Ibuprofen, lidocaine, and methocarbamol. Records from January 2023 provide the Veteran was prescribed Ibuprofen and methocarbamol for pain, but he had not found much relief. Previously, he was prescribed Gabapentin for back pain was helpful and he asked for a renewal.

Despite the fact that the July 2022 VA examiner generally characterized the Veteran's symptoms as mild or moderate, the Board finds that the lay and medical evidence shows that the Veteran's bilateral lower extremity radiculopathy had manifested signs and symptoms that more nearly approximate moderately severe incomplete paralysis of the sciatic nerve, but not complete paralysis of the sciatic nerve or marked muscular atrophy.

In this regard, while the examiners have characterized the Veteran's symptoms as mild or moderate, one of the medical opinions account for the ameliorative effects of medication, namely Gabapentin, Ibuprofen, and lidocaine. Indeed, in assigning a disability rating, VA may not consider the ameliorative effects of medication where, as here, such effects are not explicitly contemplated by the rating criteria.  See Jones v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 56 (2012).  

Finally, having considered not only the ameliorative effects of his medication and the functional impairment associated with his symptoms, the evidence does not show symptomatology consistent with complete paralysis, e.g., the foot dangles and drops, no active movement possible of muscles below the knee, or lost or weakened knee flexion.  As the medical evidence also shows no marked muscular atrophy, 60 and 80 percent ratings are not warranted.  Indeed, the maximum rating that may be assigned for neuritis not characterized by organic changes referred to in this section will be that for moderately severe, incomplete paralysis.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.123.  

Under these circumstances, absent muscular atrophy or complete paralysis, an initial 40 percent rating, but not higher, for left and right lower extremity lumbar radiculopathy is warranted.

 

 

S. CHARLES NEILL

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Becton, Sidonie

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.