Citation Nr: A25034919
Decision Date: 04/16/25	Archive Date: 04/16/25

DOCKET NO. 230618-355656
DATE: April 16, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) as secondary to posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), degenerative disc disease and arthritis of the lumbar spine, and degenerative arthritis of the left knee, with obesity as an intermediate step, is granted. 

FINDING OF FACT

Resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, his OSA is proximately due to his service-connected PTSD, degenerative disc disease and arthritis of the lumbar spine, and degenerative arthritis of the left knee, with obesity as an intermediate step. 

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for service connection for OSA as secondary to PTSD, degenerative disc disease and arthritis of the lumbar spine, and degenerative arthritis of the left knee, with obesity as an intermediate step, have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303. 

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Marine Corps from February 1984 to June 1988. 

This matter comes before the Board on a May 2023 rating decision. In the June 2023 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the May 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

Entitlement to service connection for OSA as secondary to PTSD, degenerative disc disease and arthritis of the lumbar spine, and degenerative arthritis of the left knee, with obesity as an intermediate step, is granted. 

Service connection may be granted for disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303. The three-element test for service connection requires evidence of: (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury, which is the "nexus" element. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

"Secondary service connection will be granted if a disability is... due to or the result of a service-connected disease or injury or aggravated by a service-connected disease or injury." Harvey v. Shulkin, 30 Vet. App. 10, 15 (2018); see 38 C.F.R. § 3.310; Spicer v. McDonough, 61 F.4th 1360, 1363 (Fed. Cir. 2023) (secondary service connection requires "but-for causation," which is "broader than proximate causation"). For secondary aggravation, compensation is "due for any incremental increase in disability - any additional impairment of earning capacity - in nonservice-connected disabilities resulting from service-connected conditions, above the degree of disability existing before the increase - regardless of its permanence." Ward v. Wilkie, 31 Vet. App. 233, 239 (2019). 

Although obesity is not a disability "for which compensation may be awarded," it "can constitute an 'intermediate step' in demonstrating service connection on a secondary basis for another condition." Walsh v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 300, 302 (2020). 

Here, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination in November 2021. The VA examiner concluded the Veteran's OSA less likely than not had its onset during service or was otherwise related to military service. The examiner acknowledged reports of the Veteran snoring as far back as 1986, but reasoned that not everyone who snores has OSA, and the Veteran's OSA was mostly likely due to his obesity noted in 2020. 

A second November 2021 VA examination concluded it was at least as likely as not that the Veteran's OSA had its onset in service or was otherwise related to active service. The second VA examiner reasoned a positive sleep study diagnosed the Veteran with OSA, the lay statements submitted by fellow service members established symptoms in-service, and the Veteran's wife's statement established continuity of symptomatology after service. The Board notes this examination was not addressed in the subsequent January 2022 rating decision, which did cite the examination raising obesity as an intermediate step. 

In May 2022, when the Veteran appealed the January 2022 rating decision, he submitted VA Form 21-4138 Statement in Support of Claim, asserting the pain from his service-connected back and knee disabilities prevented him from exercising and his service-connected mental health disorder caused him to lack motivation to exercise and make "poor food choices." 

Concurrently, the Veteran submitted a private medical opinion in which the examiner concluded it was at least as likely as not that the Veteran's OSA was due to his PTSD, degenerative disc disease and arthritis of the lumbar spine, and degenerative arthritis of the left knee, with obesity as an intermediate step. The examiner documented the Veteran's weight gain and noted the Veteran's weight gain developed after his mental health stressors and musculoskeletal disability symptomatology. The examiner found that, due to the pain caused by his back and left knee disabilities, the Veteran "was unable to be as active as he was before...and subsequently began to progressively gain weight." The examiner concluded it was at least as likely as not that the Veteran would not have developed OSA if not for his weight gain. 

This examination was conducted by a licensed physician assistant, who used reliable principles and methods of fact-gathering, observation, and analysis to conclude it was at least as likely as not that the Veteran's OSA was due to his PTSD, degenerative disc disease and arthritis of the lumbar spine, and degenerative arthritis of the left knee, with obesity as an intermediate step. As such, the Board finds this opinion probative. 

In September 2022, the Veteran was afforded another VA examination. The VA examiner continued a diagnosis of OSA, and concluded the Veteran's OSA was less likely than not due to or the result of his PTSD as "a causative relationship does not exist" between OSA and PTSD. This opinion is insufficient as it did not address whether the Veteran's PTSD aggravated his OSA. As such, the Board affords this opinion no weight or probative value. 

In February 2023, the Veteran submitted another private medical opinion in which the examiner concluded it was at least as likely as not that the Veteran's OSA was due to his PTSD, degenerative disc disease and arthritis of the lumbar spine, and degenerative arthritis of the left knee, with obesity as an intermediate step. The examiner reasoned it was "well documented that PTSD predisposes an individual to weight gain," and that the Veteran's back and left knee disabilities caused him physical pain which led him to lead "a more sedentary lifestyle" which contributed to his weight gain. 

This examination was conducted by a licensed physician, who used reliable principles and methods of fact-gathering, observation, and analysis to conclude it was at least as likely as not that the Veteran's OSA was due to his PTSD, degenerative disc disease and arthritis of the lumbar spine, and degenerative arthritis of the left knee, with obesity as an intermediate step. As such, the Board finds this opinion probative. 

At a minimum, the evidence is in equipoise as to the question of entitlement to service connection for OSA. See?38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); see also Gilbert v. Derwinski,?1?Vet. App.?49, 55 (1990) ("[T]he 'benefit of the doubt' standard is similar to the rule deeply embedded in?sandlot baseball?folklore that 'the tie goes to the runner'.... [I]f... the play is close, i.e., 'there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence,' the veteran prevails by operation of [statute]."). As such, all elements for service connection have been met. Therefore, entitlement to service connection for OSA as secondary to PTSD, degenerative disc disease and arthritis of the lumbar spine, and degenerative arthritis of the left knee, with obesity as an intermediate step, is granted.  

 

ANTHONY C. SCIRÉ, JR

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Mills, D.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.