Citation Nr: A25034366
Decision Date: 04/14/25	Archive Date: 04/14/25

DOCKET NO. 240715-457366
DATE: April 14, 2025

ORDER

The reduction in the disability rating for service-connected chronic urticaria, from 30 percent to 10 percent disabling, was not proper; reinstatement of a 30 percent rating from August 17, 2023 is granted.

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 30 percent for chronic urticaria is denied.

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent for palpable cyst on top of right foot is denied.

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 70 percent for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is denied.

Entitlement to a total disability rating based upon individual unemployability (TDIU) is granted.

Entitlement to special monthly compensation (SMC) under 38 U.S.C. § 1114(s)(1) is granted.

REMANDED

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 20 percent for a cervical strain is remanded.

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent for degenerative arthritis of the thoracolumbar spine is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The reduction in the rating for chronic urticaria, from 30 percent to 10 percent disabling from August 17, 2023, was not based on improvement in the Veteran's ability to function under the ordinary conditions of life and work.

2. The Veteran's chronic urticaria did not require third-line treatment for control due to ineffectiveness with first- and second-line treatments.

3. The Veteran's palpable cyst on top of right foot was manifested by pain but was not shown to more nearly approximate "moderately severe" or "severe" disability.

4. The Veteran's PTSD was not productive of total occupational and social impairment.

5. During the appeal period, the Veteran met the schedular criteria for a TDIU, and her service-connected PTSD rendered her unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation.

6. During the appeal period, the Veteran had a single disability rated as 100 percent disabling (PTSD by virtue of the TDIU award) with additional separate and distinct service-connected disabilities independently ratable at 60 percent or more.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The reduction in the rating for chronic urticaria from 30 percent to 10 percent disabling from August 17, 2023 was not proper; the criteria for reinstatement of the 30 percent rating were met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107 (2012); 38 C.F.R. § 3.344 (2022).

2. The criteria for a rating in excess of 30 percent for chronic urticaria were not met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107 (2012); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.159, 4.118, Diagnostic Code (DC) 7825 (2022).

3. The criteria for a rating in excess of 10 percent for palpable cyst on top of right foot were not met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107 (2012); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.159, 4.71a, DC 7819-5284 (2022).

4. The criteria for a rating in excess of 70 percent for PTSD were not met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107 (2012); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.159, 4.130, DC 9411 (2022).

5. During the appeal period, the criteria for a TDIU were met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107 (2012); 38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a) (2022).

6. During the appeal period, the criteria for SMC under 38 U.S.C. § 1114(s) were met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1114(s), 5107 (2012); 38 C.F.R. § 3.350(i) (2022).

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served honorably in the United States Army from November 2017 to August 2022.  She was awarded the Army Commendation Medal and the Army Service Ribbon, among other decorations and awards.

These matters come before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a November 2023 rating decision and an April 2024 Higher-Level Review (HLR) decision issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ).  The November 2023 rating decision adjudicated the evaluations for each of the disabilities listed above, while the April 2024 HLR decision continued the 10 percent rating assigned for chronic urticaria (the April 2024 HLR decision also reflects that a duty to assist error was identified with respect to the TDIU matter).

In July 2024, the Veteran filed a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal, electing the Direct Review docket.  She indicated that she was appealing both the November 2023 and April 2024 AOJ decisions.  The Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the initial November 2023 rating decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

The Board acknowledges that the period for the Veteran to request a docket switch under the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA) has not yet elapsed with respect to the April 2024 HLR decision.  See 38 C.F.R. § 20.202(c)(2); Williams v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 305 (2024) (in general, the Board may not decide an appeal before the deadline for requesting an AMA docket switch has elapsed). However, in this case, the Board will construe the Veteran's motion that her case be advanced on the docket as a waiver of this right.  Notably, her October 2024 motion reflects her desire that her appeal "be reviewed as soon as possible."  (The motion was denied by the Board in November 2024, but the Board's decision herein renders the motion moot with respect to the issues on appeal.)

Pursuant to the Veterans Claims Assistance Act (VCAA), VA has duties to notify and assist claimants in substantiating a claim for VA benefits.  38 U.S.C. §§ 5102, 5103, 5103A, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.159.  As to the issues decided herein, neither the Veteran nor her representative have asserted that VA erred with respect to its duties to notify or assist.  See Scott v. McDonald, 789 F.3d 1375, 1381 (Fed. Cir. 2015) (holding that "the Board's obligation to read filings in a liberal manner does not require the Board . . . to search the record and address procedural arguments when the veteran fails to raise them before the Board."); Dickens v. McDonald, 814 F.3d 1359, 1361 (Fed. Cir. 2016) (applying Scott to a duty to assist argument).

Increased Rating Claims

Disability evaluations are determined by the application of VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities (Rating Schedule).  38 C.F.R. Part 4.  The percentage ratings contained in the Rating Schedule represent, as far as can be practicably determined, the average impairment in earning capacity resulting from diseases and injuries incurred or aggravated during military service and the residual conditions in civil occupations.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1.

In evaluating the severity of a particular disability, it is essential to consider its history.  38 C.F.R. § 4.1.  Where there is a question as to which of two evaluations shall be applied, the higher rating will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that evaluation; otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7.  Separate ratings can be assigned for separate periods based on the facts found-a practice known as "staged" ratings.  See Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119, 126 (1999).

1. Whether the reduction in the rating assigned for chronic urticaria, from 30 percent to 10 percent disabling from August 17, 2023, was proper

2. Entitlement to a rating in excess of 30 percent for chronic urticaria

The Veteran's notice of disagreement reflects that she seeks an increased rating for chronic urticaria during the period under review.  Because the November 2023 rating decision on appeal reduced her rating for this disorder-from 30 percent to 10 percent disabling, effective August 17, 2023-her appeal requires the Board to also address whether the reduction was proper.

As an initial matter, the provisions of 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(e) allow for the reduction in evaluation of a service-connected disability when warranted by the evidence, but only after following certain procedural guidelines.  However, where the rating reduction does not result in reduction in the overall compensation amount for the veteran, the due process protections of 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(e) do not apply.  See Stelzel v. Mansfield, 508 F.3d 1345, 1349 (Fed. Cir. 2007); Tatum v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 139, 143 (2010); VAOPGCPREC 71-91.  As the reduction at issue in this case did not result in a reduction of the Veteran's overall compensation, notice under 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(e) was not required.  The Veteran does not contend, and the evidence does not reflect, any failure in compliance with the procedural requirements for rating reductions.

In cases where a rating has been in effect for five years or more, the rating agency must make reasonably certain that the improvement will be maintained under the conditions of ordinary life even if material improvement in the physical or mental condition is clearly reflected.  Kitchens v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 320, 324 (1995).  Moreover, a rating that has been in effect for five years or more may not be reduced on the basis of only one examination in cases where the disability is the result of a disease subject to periodic or episodic improvement.  38 C.F.R. § 3.344(a).  The five-year period is calculated from the effective date of the rating to the effective date of the reduction.  Brown v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 413, 419 (1993).  These requirements, however, do not apply to ratings that have not continued for long periods at the same level (e.g., less than five years) or to disabilities which have not become stabilized and are likely to improve.  In such cases, reexaminations disclosing improvement, physical or mental, in these disabilities will warrant a rating reduction.  38 C.F.R. § 3.344(c).

In this case, the Veteran's initial 30 percent rating for chronic urticaria was awarded in a September 2022 rating decision and made effective from August 28, 2022.  The reduction to a 10 percent rating was made effective from August 17, 2023.  Thus, the 30 percent rating was in effect for less than five years and the provisions of 38 C.F.R. § 3.344 pertaining to stabilization of disability evaluations do not apply; reexamination disclosing improvement will warrant a rating reduction.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.344(c).

Notwithstanding the above, a rating reduction is not proper unless the veteran's disability shows actual improvement in his or her ability to function under the ordinary conditions of life and work.  See Faust v. West, 13 Vet. App. 342, 349 (2000).  Regulations impose a clear requirement that VA rating reductions be based upon a review of the entire history of the veteran's disability.  38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.13; Brown v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 413, 420 (1993).  The examination reports reflecting such change must be based upon thorough examinations.  Brown, 5 Vet. App. at 421.  The evidence must reflect an actual change in the veteran's condition and not merely a difference in the thoroughness of the examination or in the use of descriptive terms.  38 C.F.R. § 4.13.

Significantly, in any rating reduction case, VA has the burden of establishing that the disability has improved.  A rating reduction case focuses on the propriety of the reduction and is not the same as an increased rating issue.  See Peyton v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 282, 286 (1991).  In considering the propriety of a reduction, the Board must focus on the evidence available to the AOJ at the time the reduction was effectuated, although post-reduction medical evidence may be considered in the context of evaluating whether the condition had demonstrated actual improvement.  Dofflemyer v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 277, 281-282 (1992).

Here, the Veteran's chronic urticaria symptoms are rated under 38 C.F.R. § 4.118, DC 7825, which defines chronic urticaria as continuous urticaria at least twice per week, off treatment, for a period of six weeks or more.  A 10 percent rating is warranted for chronic urticaria that requires first-line treatment (antihistamines) for control.  A 30 percent rating is assigned for chronic urticaria requiring second-line treatment (e.g., corticosteroids, sympathomimetics, leukotriene inhibitors, neutrophil inhibitors, thyroid hormone) for control.  A maximum 60 percent rating is warranted for chronic refractory urticaria that requires third-line treatment (e.g., plasmapheresis, immunotherapy, immunosuppressives) for control due to ineffectiveness with first- and second-line treatments.  Id.

The Board notes that the rating criteria for skin disabilities was amended effective August 2018.  Because the Veteran's claim was received after that date, her symptoms are to be evaluated under the amended criteria only.

The Veteran was assigned an initial 30 percent rating based on the results of a February 2022 VA Compensation and Pension (C&P) skin diseases examination.  That examination report reflects diagnoses of chronic urticaria and bromhidrosis (bromhidrosis was noted to be quiescent) necessitating first-line treatment (antihistamines) and second-line treatment in the form of the Veteran having to carry an epi pen.  No other second-line treatments were identified, and no third-line treatments were identified, either.

After filing the instant claim in November 2022, the Veteran received another VA C&P skin diseases examination in August 2023.  That examination report reflects her report of flare-ups of urticaria occurring once every two months, characterized by dry, flaky, red skin affecting less than five percent of total body area (the Veteran noted that she was having a flare-up on the day of the examination).  The examiner indicated that these symptoms necessitated first-line treatment (benzoyl peroxide 5%) but did not require second- or third-line treatment.  The Veteran reported using over-the-counter Aveeno and oatmeal baths to treat her symptoms.  She did not report needing an epi pen to control her symptoms.

In addition to these examination reports, the Board has reviewed the Veteran's VA treatment records from during the appeal period.  These records do not reflect treatment for her urticaria.  The Veteran's lay statements do not include specific assertions regarding her symptoms or treatment history (apart from what is documented in the C&P reports).

Based on the above evidence, the Board first finds that the reduction from 30 percent to 10 percent was not proper.  The basis for the reduction, as noted above, was the August 2023 VA C&P examination, which appeared to show that the Veteran did not require second- or third-line treatments for her chronic urticaria.  The November 2023 rating decision which effectuated the rating reduction reflects that the AOJ essentially analyzed the issue of the reduction in the same manner as it would analyze a claim for an increased rating (and indeed the same decision adjudicated the claim for an increased rating, which is also on appeal here).  Specifically, the AOJ did not address whether there was "an actual improvement in the Veteran's ability to function under the ordinary conditions of life and work."  See Faust, 13 Vet. App. at 349.  

More specifically, the basis for the reduction appears to simply be the fact that the Veteran did not report needing to carry an epi pen as a second-line treatment for her chronic urticaria.  The August 2023 C&P examination report did not actually indicate an improvement in symptoms.  The evidence does not otherwise reflect that there was any improvement in the Veteran's ability to function under the ordinary conditions of life and work at the time of the rating reduction.

The circumstances under which a disability rating may be reduced are specifically limited and carefully circumscribed by regulations promulgated by VA.  Dofflemeyer, 2 Vet. App. at 280.  Again, the burden of proof is on VA to establish that a reduction is warranted.  The Court has stated that both decisions by the AOJ and by the Board that do not apply the provisions of 38 C.F.R. § 3.344, when applicable, are void ab initio and will be set aside as not in accordance with the law.  Kitchens, 7 Vet. App. 320.  Where a rating reduction was made without observance of law, the reduction must be vacated, and the prior rating reinstated.  Schafrath v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 589, 595 (1991).  As the AOJ did not consider whether the evidence made it reasonably certain that the improvement would be maintained under the ordinary conditions of life, such an error warrants reinstatement of the rating in effect prior to the reduction.  Stern v. McDonough, 34 Vet. App. 51 (2021).

For these reasons, the AOJ's failure to properly apply the provisions of 38 C.F.R. § 3.344 renders the reduction from 30 percent to 10 percent disabling for the Veteran's chronic urticaria, effective August 17, 2023, void ab initio.  The previously assigned 30 percent rating must be reinstated.

The Board now turns to whether an increased rating is warranted.  After careful review, the Board finds the criteria for a rating in excess of 30 percent were not warranted at any time during the appeal period.  The pertinent evidence demonstrates that the Veteran did not require third-line treatment for her symptoms.  Rather, the relevant evidence reflects that she required antihistamine treatment and carried an epi pen, which was identified by the first VA examiner as a second-line treatment.  The Veteran has not alleged, and the evidence does not reflect, that she was prescribed plasmapheresis, immunotherapy, immunosuppressives, or any other third-line treatments for her urticaria.  The findings noted in the C&P examination reports of record regarding the lack of need for third-line treatment have not been rebutted by any competent authority, to include lay statements from the Veteran.

The Board acknowledges that the Veteran's urticaria flare-ups caused irritating symptoms such as swelling, itching, pus bumps, numbness, burning, soreness, and body odor (as shown in her C&P examination reports).  However, urticaria is rated based on the level of treatment required.  The Veteran has not alleged, and the relevant evidence of record does not show, that her symptoms required third-line treatment during the appeal period.  The Board has considered whether any other DCs related to disabilities of the skin would provide for a higher disability rating.  However, the evidence does not reflect that the Veteran's symptoms would warrant a higher rating under a different DC.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.118.  

The Board is aware that, in Jones v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 56, 63 (2012), the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) held that "the Board may not deny entitlement to a higher rating on the basis of relief provided by medication when those effects are not specifically contemplated by the rating criteria."  In a recent decision, Ingram v. Collins, No. 23-1798, LEXIS 327 (Mar. 12, 2025), the Court extended that holding, stating that, with regard to the DCs for rating musculoskeletal conditions and other DCs that do not reference medication, "the Board must discount beneficial medication effects when assigning an evaluation."  Because DC 7825 explicitly discusses medication in rating the Veteran's disability, Jones and Ingram are inapplicable.

Neither the Veteran nor her representative have raised any other issues, nor have any other issues been reasonably raised by the record.  See Doucette v. Shulkin, 28 Vet. App. 366, 369-70 (2017) (confirming that the Board is not required to address issues unless they are specifically raised by the record).  The Board finds that the rating reduction in this case was improper, and the prior 30 percent rating must therefore be reinstated, effective August 17, 2023.  However, entitlement to a rating in excess of 30 percent is denied.

3. Entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent for palpable cyst on top of right foot

The Veteran seeks an increased rating for her palpable cyst on top of right foot.  Her symptoms are rated as 10 percent disabling under DC 5284.  

DC 5284 governs "other" foot injuries.  Under DC 5284, a 10 percent rating is warranted for "moderate" foot injuries.  A 20 percent rating is warranted for "moderately severe" foot injuries.  A 30 percent rating is warranted for "severe" foot injuries.  A note instructs that with actual loss of use of the foot, the disability should be rated at the maximum 40 percent.  38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, DC 5284. 

The words "moderate," "moderately severe," and "severe" as used in DC 5284 are not defined in the VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities.  Rather than applying a mechanical formula, the Board must evaluate all of the evidence, to the end that its decisions are "equitable and just."  38 C.F.R. § 4.6.  The Merriam-Webster dictionary defines "moderate" as "tending toward the mean or average amount or dimension."  "Severe" is defined as "very painful or harmful" or "of a great degree."  Merriam-Webster Dictionary, https://www.merriam-webster.com/medical (last accessed March 28, 2025).

Disabilities evaluated on the basis of limitation of motion require VA to apply the provisions of 38 C.F.R. § 4.40, 4.45, pertaining to functional impairment.  In applying these regulations VA should obtain examinations in which the examiner determines whether the disability is manifested by weakened movement, excess fatigability, incoordination, pain, or flare-ups.  These determinations are, if feasible, to be expressed in terms of the degree of additional range-of-motion loss due to any weakened movement, excess fatigability, incoordination, flare-ups, or pain.  Sharp v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 26, 33 (2017).  The examiner should also determine the point, if any, at which such factors cause functional impairment.  Moreover, the joints involved should be tested for pain on both active and passive motion, in weight bearing and non-weight bearing and, if possible, with the range of the opposite undamaged joint.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.59; see also Correia v. McDonald, 28 Vet. App. 158 (2016); Mitchell v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 32, 43-4 (2011); DeLuca v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 202 (1995).

This appeal period began with the Veteran's October 25, 2022 Intent to File a Claim.  In August 2023, the Veteran was provided a VA C&P foot conditions examination.  The examination report reflects her report of having three cysts on the top of her right foot.  She stated that the cysts were not painful; rather "pain to her overall foot" was noted.  The Veteran further reported that the cysts had multiplied and gotten bigger.  She denied any treatment for this condition.  She denied flare-ups.  No history of surgical procedures or foot-related diagnoses were noted by the examiner.  As for the Veteran's current symptoms, the examiner determined that they were "mild."  The foot condition was not shown to chronically compromise weight-bearing, nor did it require arch supports, custom orthotic inserts, or shoe modifications.  Pain was noted on physical examination.  The examiner noted that procured evidence (including statements from the Veteran) did not suggest pain, fatigability, weakness, lack of endurance, or incoordination which significantly limited functional ability during flare-ups or after repeated use over time.  No other functional loss was noted.  The examiner noted that an August 2023 right foot X-ray was negative.

The Board has also reviewed the Veteran's VA treatment records from during the appeal period.  These records do not reflect treatment for her right foot disorder.  The Veteran's lay statements do not include specific assertions regarding her symptoms or treatment history (apart from what is documented in the C&P report).

The Board finds that the relevant evidence does not establish more than a "moderate" foot injury.  The C&P report of record reflects that the Veteran's reported symptoms, namely pain, were not shown to be productive of the type or nature of functional impairment necessary for a finding of a "moderately severe" or "severe" foot injury.  Indeed, the Veteran's symptoms were not found to result in specific functional impairment.  Notwithstanding, the C&P report reflects the examiner's expert conclusion that the injury was no more than mildly disabling.  

The AOJ in this case found that painful motion in the Veteran's right foot warranted the assignment of a compensable rating pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 4.59.  Under 38 C.F.R. § 4.59, it is the intention of the rating schedule to recognize actually painful, unstable, or malaligned joints, due to healed injury, as entitled to at least the minimum compensable rating for the joint.  Section 4.59 is not limited to disabilities involving arthritis.  See Burton v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 1 (2011) (holding that section 4.59 applies to all forms of painful motion of joints, and not just to arthritis).  Because the Veteran's right foot symptomatology included painful motion, the Board agrees that she is entitled to at least the minimum compensable rating of 10 percent.

The assignment of a higher rating is not warranted, however.  As the relevant examination report and treatment records do not indicate signs or symptoms of "moderately severe" (between average and very painful or harmful) or "severe" (very painful or harmful) foot injury, her right foot disorder cannot be said to more nearly approximate a level of disability warranting a rating in excess of 10 percent under DC 5284.

The Board has considered the Veteran's credible reports of pain in her right foot.  She is competent to report these symptoms, and the AOJ took them into consideration in assigning a compensable rating, as is reflected by the September 2022 rating decision granting service connection.  However, the Veteran has not specifically alleged, nor does the record reflect, that her symptoms exceeded, in terms of overall severity, the estimate provided by the VA examiner of record.  Moreover, she has not specifically asserted being told by a medical professional that her symptoms overall are "moderately severe" or worse.  The August 2023 C&P examiner's findings are highly persuasive as they reflect an expert evaluation as to the Veteran's overall symptomatology.  The Veteran has not put forth competent evidence rebutting the examiner's findings in this regard.

The Board notes that the criteria provided in DC 5284 and the accompanying DCs for the feet are not based on limitation of motion.  Instead, the Veteran's disability are rated based on the overall severity of her impairment.  As such, the examination requirements laid out by the Court in Correia do not apply to the instant appeal.  See Correia, 28 Vet. App. at 169-70.  With respect to the Sharp case, as noted above, the Veteran denied flare-ups and thus the issues raised in that case are inapplicable.  See Sharp, 29 Vet. App. at 34-36.

The evidence of record does not establish symptomatology warranting separate or higher ratings under alterative DCs.  The August 2023 C&P report shows that the Veteran denied that her cysts were painful in and of themselves.  There is no indication that the cysts are unstable in the sense contemplated by the DCs pertaining to scars.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.118, DC 7804, Note (1) (providing that an unstable scar is one where, for any reason, there is frequent loss of covering of skin over the scar).  The relevant lay and medical evidence does not identify any additional signs or symptoms involving the toes, feet, or ankles that would warrant separate or increased ratings under alternative DCs.

The August 2023 C&P report reflects that the Veteran denied using medications to treat her right foot disorder.  As such, the recent Court decision in Ingram requiring the Board to "discount beneficial medication effects when assigning an evaluation" is inapplicable.  See Ingram, No. 23-1798.

Neither the Veteran nor her representative have raised any other issues, nor have any other issues been reasonably raised by the record.  See Doucette, 28 Vet. App. at 369-70.  The Board finds that the relevant evidence does not warrant a rating in excess of 10 percent for the Veteran's right foot disorder.  

4. Entitlement to a rating in excess of 70 percent for PTSD

The Veteran seeks an increased rating for her PTSD.  Her symptoms are rated as 70 percent disabling under 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, DC 9411.  However, all psychiatric disorders are evaluated under a General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders.  

Under the General Rating Formula, a 70 percent rating is warranted for occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately, and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful situations (including work or a worklike setting); and inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.  Id.

A maximum 100 percent rating is warranted when the disorder results in total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of mental and personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; and memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name.  Id.

The symptoms listed in the rating schedule are not intended to constitute an exhaustive list, but rather serve as examples of the type and degree of the symptoms, or their effects, that would justify a particular rating.  See Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436 (2002).  Nevertheless, all ratings in the general rating formula are associated with objectively observable symptomatology, and in Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 117 (Fed. Cir. 2013), the Federal Circuit stated that "a veteran may only qualify for a given disability rating under § 4.130 by demonstrating the particular symptoms associated with that percentage, or others of similar severity, frequency, and duration."

The Federal Circuit further noted that "§ 4.130 requires not only the presence of certain symptoms but also that those symptoms have caused occupational and social impairment in most of the referenced areas."  Id.  Thus, "[a]lthough the veteran's symptomatology is the primary consideration, the regulation also requires an ultimate factual conclusion as to the veteran's level of impairment in 'most areas.'"  Id. at 118.  As such, the Board will consider both the Veteran's specific symptomatology as well as the occupational and social impairment described in the general rating formula to determine whether an increased evaluation is warranted.

The Board notes that, because the General Rating Formula explicitly references medication in rating mental disorders (specifically under the 10 percent rating criteria, which contemplates "symptoms controlled by continuous medication," see 38 C.F.R. § 4.130), the holdings of Jones, supra and Ingram, supra, which provide that the Board must discount beneficial medication effects when assigning an evaluation, are inapplicable.

This appeal period began with the Veteran's October 25, 2022 Intent to File a Claim.  She was afforded a VA C&P examination in April 2023.  The report reflects the examiner's conclusion that the Veteran's symptoms were productive of occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas.  The Veteran reported that she was single with two children.  She described having "strained" relationships with friends and family.  She reported that she would "spazz out" on her friends and "go off on manic episodes."  She reported that she would imagine unreal situations of people talking about her.  The Veteran reported that she had quit her last job due to an altercation with a co-worker.  She was currently in school full time; she reported having anxiety around students and being on campus.  The Veteran denied receiving mental health treatment.  She denied suicidal or homicidal ideation.  She reported that she experienced panic attacks more than once per week.  The examiner noted specific symptoms of depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness; panic attacks more than once a week; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately, and effectively; chronic sleep impairment; mild memory loss; impaired judgment; disturbances of motivation and mood; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances; inability to establish and maintain effective relationships; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; and impaired impulse control, such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence.  The examiner observed that the Veteran was alert and fully oriented and was neat and clean in appearance.  Her thought processes appeared organized and logical; her speech was clear; and insight and judgment appeared intact.  The Veteran's eye contact was adequate, and she was polite and cooperative.  No other symptoms were noted.

The Veteran was afforded another VA C&P examination in August 2023.  The report reflects the examiner's conclusion that the Veteran's symptoms were productive of occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity.  The Veteran reported a tendency to isolate herself, stating that she did not trust others.  She reported that she would go to church occasionally.  The Veteran reported that she was unemployed, stating, "I cannot be around people."  She last worked in 2022, when she was discharged from active service.  She noted that she was still enrolled in college but was on break.  The Veteran reported that she was recently seen for a psychiatric consultation and was prescribed medication for insomnia, depression, and anxiety.  She reported problems with sleeping, stating that she did not feel safe in her house.  The Veteran reported a history of manic episodes, paranoia, and periods of depression with suicidal ideation.  The Veteran presented with symptoms of depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness; panic attacks; chronic sleep impairment; impairment of short- and long-term memory; impaired judgment; disturbances of motivation and mood; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances; inability to establish and maintain effective relationships; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; and impaired impulse control, such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence.  The Veteran was alert and fully oriented, neat, and clean.  Her thought processes were organized and logical, her speech was clear, her insight and judgment appeared intact.  Eye contact was adequate, and the Veteran was noted to be polite and cooperative.  

The Board has also reviewed the Veteran's VA treatment records from during the appeal period.  These records reflect mental health treatment beginning in 2023.  A September 2023 mental health consult note shows that the Veteran reported symptoms of anxiety and depression.  She was noted to be pleasant and in no distress.  An October 2023 mental health initial evaluation note indicates the Veteran's reports of social isolation.  She reported that she was still in business school but that she struggled with sleep disturbance and "up and down" moods.  She denied psychosis or mania.  The examiner noted that the Veteran was not a risk for homicidal or violent activity.

Based on a careful review of the record, the Board finds that an increased 100 percent rating is not warranted for the Veteran's PTSD.  The Veteran's symptoms, as described above, can fairly be said to have resulted in deficiencies in her ability to function with respect to work, family relations, judgment, thinking, and mood.  On the whole, however, the Board finds that the Veteran's symptoms were not shown to result in total occupational and social impairment.  The evidence of record does not indicate that the Veteran posed a persistent danger to herself or others; she did not demonstrate a history of violent confrontations or repeated attempts to harm herself.  VA examiners consistently determined that she was not at risk for suicidal or homicidal behaviors.  Furthermore, the Veteran's symptoms were not shown to more nearly approximate gross impairment of thought processes or communication, memory loss for names of close relatives, or other symptoms of similar type and degree.  

Rather, the C&P reports and outpatient treatment records reflect that the Veteran was consistently oriented to time and place and generally behaved appropriately and cooperatively on examination.  The relevant evidence does not show a history of psychosis or persistent hallucinations or delusions.  Additionally, despite the Veteran's reports of social isolation and interpersonal difficulties, she showed an ability to maintain functional relationships, including with her children.  She has also reported being able to occasionally attend church, which is a social activity.  The Veteran, by her own report, was also enrolled in school full-time throughout the appeal period, which reflects an ability to at least tolerate social environments.  (The Board acknowledges the Veteran's difficulties getting along with co-workers and fellow students.  Her ability to persevere with her education demonstrates that she is not "totally" impaired socially.)  Thus, despite her significant impairment, the Board finds that the relevant evidence does not establish "total" social and occupational impairment.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.130.

In sum, the Board finds that the most persuasive evidence of record shows that the overall impairment caused by the Veteran's PTSD more nearly approximated occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, including work, family relations, judgment, thinking, and mood.  Total occupational and social impairment has not been established.  Neither the Veteran nor her representative have raised any other pertinent issues, nor have any other issues been reasonably raised by the record.  See Doucette, 28 Vet. App. at 369-70.  The Board finds that the relevant evidence does not support a rating in excess of 70 percent for PTSD.

5. Entitlement to a TDIU

The Veteran did not file a formal application for TDIU during the period under review.  Notwithstanding, the Board finds that the issue of entitlement to a TDIU was raised by the record as part and parcel of her increased rating claims.  See Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447 (2009) (holding that the issue of entitlement to a TDIU is part and parcel of a claim for disability benefits when the issue of unemployability due to service-connected disability is raised by the record).  Furthermore, the Board finds that entitlement to a TDIU is warranted, based on functional impairment caused by the Veteran's service-connected PTSD, for the entire appeal period.

During the appeal period, which began with the Veteran's October 2022 Intent to File a Claim, the Veteran was service connected for PTSD (rated as 70 percent disabling); chronic urticaria (30 percent); cervical strain (20 percent); right knee strain and tendinopathy (10 percent); degenerative arthritis of the thoracolumbar spine (10 percent); benign paroxysmal positional vertigo (10 percent); asthma (10 percent); palpable cyst on top of right foot (10 percent); and multiple disabilities rated as noncompensable.  Her combined rating during this period was 90 percent, which meets the schedular criteria for TDIU.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a) (to qualify for TDIU, the evidence must show that a veteran is unable to secure and follow a substantially gainful occupation as a result of service-connected disability, and there is one disability ratable at 60 percent or more, or, if more than one disability, at least one disability ratable at 40 percent or more and a combined disability rating of 70 percent).  

The Board now turns to the question of whether these disabilities can be said to have rendered the Veteran unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation.  Id.  As to the economic element of the claim, the Veteran's C&P PTSD examination reports and VA outpatient records reflect that he last worked in 2022 when she was discharged from active service.  She reported that she was enrolled in business school thereafter and was a full-time student.  There is no evidence to suggest that the Veteran was employed at any point during the appeal period.  Accordingly, the Board finds that the economic component under 38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a) is satisfied.  See Ray v. Wilkie, 31 Vet. App. 58, 73 (2019) (when evaluating a TDIU application, the economic component of the claim refers to an occupation earning more than marginal income (outside of a protected environment) as determined by the U.S. Department of Commerce as the poverty threshold for one person).

As to the non-economic element, the Board notes that, when evaluating a TDIU application, attention should be given to the veteran's history, education, skills, and training; whether the veteran has the physical ability to perform the types of activities required by the occupation at issue; and whether the veteran has the mental ability to perform the activities required by the occupation at issue.  See Ray, 31 Vet. App. at 73.  With these considerations in mind, the Board finds that the non-economic element is also satisfied.

Following her medical retirement from the Army, the Veteran received multiple C&P PTSD examinations, which collectively reflect severe impairment.  Observed symptoms which would impact her ability to function in a workplace included regular panic attacks; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately, and effectively; impaired judgment; disturbances of motivation and mood; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances, "including work or a work-like setting"; inability to establish and maintain effective relationships; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; and impaired impulse control, such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence.  The Veteran reported that she was unable to be in social situations for extended periods, describing a feeling of paranoia and difficulty trusting others.  She sometimes reported that she was unable to be around people at all.  She reported that the only job she held since being discharged from the Army was as a bartender; this lasted only three weeks.

In light of the above evidence, the Board finds that the Veteran was likely unable to sustain gainful employment due to functional impairment caused by her service-connected PTSD.  As is explained above, the Veteran was shown to have some social ability given her church and school attendance and her relationships with her children.  She has not demonstrated sufficient abilities in occupational settings to indicate that substantially gainful employment is feasible.  Instead, the VA C&P PTSD examination reports of record uniformly reflect symptoms that would be highly detrimental in the workplace.  Accordingly, the Board finds that the criteria for a TDIU were reasonably met.

In sum, the Board finds that the relevant evidence demonstrates that the Veteran was unemployed throughout the appeal period, and that her service-connected PTSD likely rendered her unable to secure and follow substantially gainful employment.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a); Ray, 31 Vet. App. at 73.  Entitlement to a TDIU is granted for the period under review.

6. Entitlement to SMC pursuant to 38 U.S.C. § 1114(s)

SMC benefits "are to be accorded when a veteran becomes eligible, without need for a separate claim."  Bradley v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 280, 294 (2008) (citing Akles v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 118, 121 (1991)).  SMC pursuant to 38 U.S.C. § 1114(s) is payable if a claimant has a single permanent disability rated 100 percent disabling and has either (1) additional service-connected disability or disabilities independently ratable at 60 percent or more, or (2) is permanently housebound by reason of service-connected disability or disabilities.  Pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 3.350(i), the additional service-connected disability or disabilities ratable at 60 percent or more must be separate and distinct from the 100 percent service-connected disability and involve different anatomical segments or bodily systems.

By virtue of this decision, the Veteran now has a single service-connected disability rated as total (PTSD by virtue of the TDIU award), with additional separate and distinct conditions rated at 60 percent or more.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.25 (Combined ratings table).  Accordingly, entitlement to SMC pursuant to 38 U.S.C. § 1114(s) is granted.

REASONS FOR REMAND

7. Entitlement to a rating in excess of 20 percent for a cervical strain

8. Entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent for degenerative arthritis of the thoracolumbar spine

The Veteran was afforded VA C&P examinations for her cervical and thoracolumbar spine disabilities in August 2023.  Notably, the reports from these examinations show that she took medication (specifically naproxen and ibuprofen) for her symptoms.  

In the Jones case discussed above, the Court held that "the Board may not deny entitlement to a higher rating on the basis of relief provided by medication when those effects are not specifically contemplated by the rating criteria."  Jones, 26 Vet. App. at 63.  In its recent decision in Ingram, the Court explained that Jones applies to the Board's review of ratings under the DCs for rating musculoskeletal disabilities.  The Court further held that, with regard to DCs that do not reference medication, "the Board must discount beneficial medication effects when assigning an evaluation."  Ingram, No. 23-1798 at *2.

In light of Ingram, the Board finds that the August 2023 C&P examinations were inadequate, as the provider who completed the examinations did not discuss the beneficial effects of medication used to treat the Veteran's disabilities.  Remand is required to correct these pre-decisional errors.  Specifically, updated examinations must be provided that address these issues.  See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 312 (2007) (when VA undertakes to provide a VA examination or obtain a VA opinion, it must ensure that the examination or opinion is adequate).

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Schedule the Veteran for examinations with an appropriate clinician/s as to the current severity of the Veteran's cervical and thoracolumbar spine disabilities.  To the extent possible, the clinician/s should respond to the following:

(a) Test the Veteran's active motion, passive motion, and pain with weight-bearing and without weight-bearing, and with comparison to the opposite joint.  

(b) Elicit information regarding the severity, frequency, and duration of any flare-ups, and the degree of functional loss during flare-ups.  The clinician/s are asked to describe whether pain significantly limits functional ability during flares, and if so, the clinician/s must estimate range of motion during flares.  IF THE EXAMINATION DOES NOT TAKE PLACE DURING A FLARE, THE CLINICIAN/S MUST GLEAN INFORMATION REGARDING THE FLARES' SEVERITY, FREQUENCY, DURATION, AND FUNCTIONAL LOSS MANIFESTATIONS FROM THE VETERAN, MEDICAL RECORDS, AND OTHER AVAILABLE SOURCES.  EFFORTS TO OBTAIN SUCH INFORMATION MUST BE DOCUMENTED.  If there is no pain and/or no limitation of function, such facts must be noted in the report.

(c) Opine as to whether the Veteran's cervical and/or thoracolumbar spine disabilities result in functional loss consistent with ankylosis, particularly during flare-ups.

(d) To the extent possible, include estimates of range of motion of the cervical and thoracolumbar spines in the above circumstances when discounting the beneficial effects of medication used to treat the Veteran's disabilities.

(e) To the extent possible, identify any symptoms and functional impairments due to the Veteran's cervical and thoracolumbar spine disabilities and discuss the effects of these disabilities on occupational functioning and activities of daily living.

* The clinician/s are advised that the Veteran is competent to report symptoms, treatment, events, and injuries, and that her assertions must be taken into account, along with the other evidence of record, in formulating the requested medical opinions.

 

 

A. S. CARACCIOLO

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	T. Minot, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.