Citation Nr: A25034722
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 240423-434606
DATE: April 15, 2025

REMANDED

A total disability based on individual unemployability (TDIU).

?

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from September 1999 to September 2002.

The case is on appeal from an April 2024 rating decision.

In December 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR), and requested review of a November 2023 decision.  In April 2024, the RO issued the HLR decision on appeal, which considered the evidence of record at the time of the prior November 2023 decision.  

In the April 2024 notice of disagreement (NOD) (VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the November 2023 RO decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review.  See 38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  If evidence was submitted during the period after the RO issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision.  See 38 C.F.R.§§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  However, because the Board is remanding this claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the RO in the adjudication of those claims.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

A TDIU.

At the outset, the relevant rating review period begins on October 26, 2022, the date of claim, plus a one year look back prior to that date; and ends on November 21, 2023, the date of the rating decision that was later subject to Higher Level Review.  

The Board finds that the claim must be remanded to correct a duty to assist error that occurred prior to the rating decision on appeal.  Specifically, the Board finds that the multiple VA opinions as to the Veteran's ability to function in an occupational environment and his functional limitations are incomplete, contradict each other, and provide a confusing picture of the Veteran's ability to obtain and retain substantially gainful employment.  Also, contradictory evidence, including a private opinion on TDIU and VA vocational records, is part of that has not been reviewed for the purposes of TDIU.  Moreover, to the extent that the RO did not obtain a single opinion addressing the collective impact of his service-connected disabilities on the Veteran's employability, the Board acknowledges that such an opinion is not required.  See Geib v. Shinseki, 733 F.3d 1350, 1354 (Fed. Cir 2013).  However, given that the Veteran bases his claim for TDIU on the combined effects of his service-connected disabilities, the Board finds such an opinion would be helpful to the adjudication of the claim for TDIU.  Such opinion was not obtained prior to the rating decision on appeal.  Moreover, record shows that during the period on appeal some service-connected disabilities, including PTSD and headaches, were increased and reduced in severity that impact whether a TDIU is warranted and have not been addressed.  As such a remand is warranted to corrected the deficiencies stated above.

The claim is REMANDED for the following action:

Forward the Veteran's claims file to an appropriate medical professional obtain an opinion commenting on the aggregate effect of the Veteran's service-connected disabilities on his employability.  The examiner should review the claims file and a copy of this remand.

The examiner must provide an assessment of the functional impairment resulting from this condition, as well as his other service-connected conditions, based on the Veteran's statements, the physical examinations, and the treatment records.

Also, the examiner is asked to provide a full description of the combined effects the service-connected disabilities have on the Veteran's ability to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation when considering his educational background and vocational experience, but not his age or non-service connected disabilities.

The examiner should review the Veteran's lay reports, private opinion, VA vocational reports, treatment records, and examination reports for the service-connected disabilities during the period on appeal.

A rationale should be provided for the opinions expressed.

 

 

RYAN T. KESSEL

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Nevarez-Myrick, Nancy

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.