Citation Nr: A25034213
Decision Date: 04/14/25	Archive Date: 04/14/25

DOCKET NO. 210706-170502
DATE: April 14, 2025

ORDER

A 30 percent rating, and no higher, for chronic sinusitis is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

Chronic sinusitis has been shown to be manifested by no more sinus pain and tenderness; sinus headaches; seven or more non-incapacitating episodes of sinusitis in the past 12 months; chronic nasal congestion and drainage; difficulty breathing through nasal passages; purulent discharge; nausea; and no incapacitating episodes requiring prolonged antibiotics treatment in the past 12 months.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for a 30 percent rating for chronic sinusitis have been met.  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.7, 4.97, Diagnostic Code 6513.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran had active service from October 1992 to July 2000. 

In August 2020, the Agency of Original Jurisdiction denied a rating in excess of 10 percent for sinusitis.  In December 2020, the Agency of Original Jurisdiction denied a rating in excess of 10 percent for sinusitis.  In July 2021, the Veteran submitted a Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), VA Form 10182, and elected the Evidence Submission docket.  Therefore, the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the August 2020 Agency of Original Jurisdiction decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran with, or within 90 days from receipt of, the VA Form 10182. 38 C.F.R. § 20.303.  If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the Agency of Original Jurisdiction issued the decision on appeal and prior to the date the Board received the VA Form 10182, or (2) more than 90 days following the date the Board received the VA Form 10182, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.303, 20.801. 

Chronic Sinusitis

The Veteran asserts that a rating in excess of 10 percent for sinusitis is warranted.

Chronic sinusitis, including maxillary sinusitis, is to be rated under the General Rating Formula for Sinusitis.  Sinusitis detected by X ray study only warrants a noncompensable rating.  A 10 percent rating requires sinusitis with one or two incapacitating episodes per year of sinusitis requiring prolonged (lasting four to six weeks) antibiotic treatment or three to six non-incapacitating episodes per year of sinusitis characterized by headaches, pain, and purulent discharge or crusting.  A 30 percent rating requires sinusitis with three or more incapacitating episodes per year of sinusitis requiring prolonged (lasting four to six weeks) antibiotic treatment or more than six non-incapacitating episodes per year of sinusitis characterized by headaches, pain, and purulent discharge or crusting.  A 50 percent rating requires sinusitis following radical surgery with chronic osteomyelitis or near constant sinusitis characterized by headaches, pain and tenderness of affected sinus, and purulent discharge or crusting after repeated surgeries.  38 C.F.R. § 4.97, Diagnostic Code 6513.

Where there is a question as to which of two ratings shall be applied, the higher rating will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating.  Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7.

A December 2002 paranasal sinus computerized tomography (CT) study from Palms West Hospital revealed findings consistent with postoperative changes in the bilateral ethmoid and maxillary sinuses and no evidence of sinusitis. 

The report of a November 2003 examination conducted for VA states that the Veteran complained of constant mucus drainage, a constant sore throat with postnasal drainage, dizziness, shortness of breath, and headaches.  She indicated that when she "gets a sinus infection, she is incapacitated" and "this happens at least once a month where she is irritable and drowsy."  The Veteran's history of chronic sinusitis and several sinus surgeries was noted.  The Veteran was diagnosed with chronic sinusitis.  

The report of an September 2017 VA sinus examination states that the Veteran's multiple surgeries resulted in empty nose syndrome.  The examiner commented that the chronic sinusitis was manifested by headaches; pain of affected sinus; tenderness of affected sinus; and purulent discharge; no non-incapacitating episodes of sinusitis in the past 12 months, and no incapacitating episodes requiring prolonged antibiotics treatment in the past 12 months.  The examiner noted that the Veteran has had repeated sinus related surgical procedures performed.  The Veteran was diagnosed with maxillary sinusitis.  The examiner noted that the diagnosed sinusitis did not impact the Veteran's ability to work.

An August 2020 treatment record by N. Tritle, M.D., states that the Veteran was diagnosed with chronic sinusitis.  The Veteran presented with postnasal drainage and constant clearing of her throat.  She reported having constant discomfort in her nasal passages, right greater than left, and frequent chunky drainage that comes down her throat.   

An October 2020 treatment record by Dr. Tritle that a CT scan revealed findings of "a deviated septum with an S bend obstructing both sides of the nose, left greater than the right, a subtotal resection of the inferior turbinates bilaterally, and confirms normal appearing middle turbinates with maybe a tiny little band of scar tissue in the right middle meatus, and clear maxillary, ethmoid and sphenoid sinuses"  The Veteran reported that she still feels like there is a chronic obstruction and possible infection. However, the doctor noted that "her culture was negative."

A July 2021 written statement from the Veteran conveys that the service-connected sinusitis caused pain and pressure in her face and head, nausea, vomiting, depression, anxiety, and swollen eyes and lips in the morning.  The Veteran noted that she had to do multiple sinus irrigations to clear out mucus from her sinuses.  The empty nose syndrome caused dryness and interrupted her sleep. 

Clinical documentation in July 2021 from Dr. Tritle  states the Veteran was seen for chronic sinus problems and reported nasal congestion.  Dr. Tritle noted that "the Veteran had a persistent scar tissue problem in the right middle meatus and obvious trimming of the inferior turbinates."  The doctor noted that "a CT scan was conducted to further evaluate the Veteran's anatomy and found there to be some abnormal bone in the septum, a persistent deviation of the septum, and ongoing chronic sinusitis, especially in the right maxillary sinus area."  In May 2021, the Veteran underwent revision surgery.  Following the revision surgery, the doctor commented that "the Veteran has done pretty well" and "the Veteran has healed well from removal of the necrotic bone."  The doctor found the Veteran exhibited signs and symptoms of empty nose syndrome.  In a more humid environment, the Veteran had seen some improvement in her symptoms.  However, in a dry climate, her symptoms worsened including headache, nasal congestion, and dry mucus production. 

The report of a July 2021 VA sinus examination states that the Veteran experienced chronic congestion, nasal drainage, difficulty breathing through nasal passages, constant sinus pain, and nausea.  The Veteran was noted to have undergone radical (open sinus) and endoscopic sinus surgery.  The examiner noted that the Veteran did not experience chronic osteomyelitis following the surgery.  The nurse practitioner commented that the chronic sinusitis was manifested by seven or more non-incapacitating episodes of sinusitis in the past 12 months and no incapacitating episodes requiring prolonged antibiotics treatment in the past 12 months.  An October 2020 CT scan revealed chronic nasal bone fracture deformity, patent sinonasal drainage pathways, widely patent ostiomeatal complexes, and mild mucosal thickening. The examiner stated that "the CT scan in 2020 found abnormal bone in septum, a persistent deviation of the septum and ongoing chronic sinusitis, more so in the right maxillary sinus."  The Veteran was diagnosed with maxillary sinusitis.  The diagnosed sinusitis was found to impact the Veteran's ability to work.

Chronic sinusitis has been shown to be manifested by no more sinus pain and tenderness; sinus headaches; seven or more non-incapacitating episodes of sinusitis in the past 12 months; chronic nasal congestion and drainage; difficulty breathing through nasal passages; purulent discharge; nausea; and no incapacitating episodes requiring prolonged antibiotics treatment in the past 12 months.  The Board finds that such symptoms most closely approximate the criteria for a 30 percent rating under Diagnostic Code 6513.  The Veteran underwent radical sinus surgery.  However, she did not experience chronic osteomyelitis following surgery.  In the absence of findings consistent with radical surgery with chronic osteomyelitis or near constant sinusitis characterized by headaches, pain and tenderness of affected sinus, and purulent discharge or crusting after repeated surgeries, the Board finds that the service-connected sinusitis symptoms most closely approximate the criteria for a 30 percent rating under Diagnostic Code 6513.  Therefore, the Board concludes that a 30 percent rating, and no higher, for chronic sinusitis is warranted. 

 

J. T. HUTCHESON

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Kotroco, Emily

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.