Citation Nr: A25034385
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 240912-472369
DATE: April 15, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for Meniere's disease, as secondary to service-connected disabilities, is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from September 1987 to March 1988.    

This case is being reviewed according to the appellate process set forth under the Veterans Appeals Improvement and Modernization Act of 2017 (AMA).  This law creates a new framework for Veterans dissatisfied with a VA decision on their claim to seek review.  This decision has been written consistent with the new AMA framework.

This matter is before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal of a September 6, 2024 rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA).  On September 12, 2024, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Notice of Disagreement (Notice of Disagreement) opting into AMA and selecting the Direct Review lane.  As explained in the VA Form 10182, "direct review" means that the Board's decision must be based upon the evidence of record at the time of the prior decision, with no evidence submission or hearing request.  

The Board is aware that on the Veteran's September 12, 2024, VA Form 10182, a disagreement with a May 2024 rating decision was noted.  However, a review of the claims file reflects that the May 2024 rating decision issued by the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) was one in which a higher-level adjudicator found that there was a duty to assist error in the development of the issue and the claim was being returned for correction.  As such, the May 2024 rating decision resulted in having the adjudication of the issue remain pending not final.  

The Board will consider the September 2024 VA Form 10182 as one in which the Veteran is disagreeing with the later, final rating decision dated September 6, 2024, that denied service connection for the issue on appeal.  

Further, the Board notes that in its November 2024 Appellate Brief, the Veteran's representative asserted that the Veteran's condition was due to migraines.  The Board acknowledges the contention and notes that the correspondence raises a new theory of entitlement.  However, this theory was not before VA prior to the issuance of the September 2024 rating decision.  The Board does not have authority to consider or remand this issue for development of this new theory.

Under the AMA, remands are limited to correction of (1) duty to assist errors occurring prior to the date of the AOJ decision on appeal, and (2) AOJ errors in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty, if correction of such error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the appellant's claim.  38 C.F.R. ยง 20.802(a). The AOJ did not fail in its duty to assist the Veteran prior to the September 2024 rating decision as the Veteran had not alleged prior to that decision that his Meniere's disease was secondary to his migraines, nor does the evidence indicate as such.  Therefore, the Board finds that there has been no duty to assist error and no basis to consider the contention.

Service Connection Claim

The Veteran contends that his Meniere's disease is related to tinnitus and hearing loss conditions.  See August 2023 correspondence.  The Board notes that the Veteran is service-connected for both bilateral hearing loss and for tinnitus disabilities.   

The Veteran was afforded a VA ear conditions examination in January 2024.  Diagnoses of Meniere's syndrome or endolymphatic hydrops, benign paroxysmal positional vertigo and tinnitus were provided.   The Veteran reported that he was exposed to exploding grenades during training.  He noted experiencing loss of balance and buzzing in his ears.  He stated that he could not climb or balance on ladders due to a risk of falling.  He had difficulty communicating with others and had social isolated himself due to hearing loss.  Dizziness caused nausea which kept him from eating and doing activities when it was occurring.  

The January 2024 VA examiner opined that the claimed condition was less likely than not incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event or illness.  The VA examiner noted that the Veteran's entrance examination showed no findings related to the claimed condition.  It was noted that tinnitus could be a symptom of Meniere's Disease, but there was no scientific evidence that tinnitus could result in the development of Meniere's Disease.  The cause of Meniere's disease was unknown, but it was believed to be due to constricted blood vessels in the ear.  There was no evidence that exposure to loud noise contributed to the development of Meniere's disease.  

In this case, the following pre-decisional duty to assist error is evident, and thus, a remand is required.  While the VA examiner conducted an evaluation of the Veteran's claimed condition, the record remains unclear as to whether the diagnosed Meniere's disease was caused by or aggravated by the Veteran's service-connected hearing loss.  In addition, although the VA examiner opined that the Veteran's Meniere's disease was not caused by tinnitus, the examiner did not explicitly address whether the diagnosed Meniere's disease condition was aggravated by the service-connected disability.  See El-Amin v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 136, 140-41 (2013).  Therefore, a more thorough opinion is needed.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Return the Veteran's claims folder to the examiner who conducted the January 2024 VA ear conditions examination, if available, for an addendum opinion.  If the original examiner is not available, the file should be reviewed by another examiner of similar qualifications to obtain the opinion.  The need for a new examination is left to the discretion of the examiner. 

Based on the review of the record, the VA examiner should address the following:

a. Is it at least as likely as not (at least an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence) that the diagnosed Meniere's disease was caused by the Veteran's service-connected hearing loss and/or service-connected tinnitus disabilities?

b. Is it at least as likely as not (at least an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence) that the diagnosed Meniere's disease was aggravated by the Veteran's service-connected hearing loss and/or service-connected tinnitus disabilities?   If aggravation is found, the examiner should provide the baseline manifestations of the Veteran's Meniere's disease prior to aggravation by the Veteran's service-connected hearing loss and/or service-connected tinnitus.

A complete rationale must be provided for all opinions expressed and conclusions reached. 

 

 

Timothy Cothrel

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Evans, A-L

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.1303.