Citation Nr: A25034763
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 241011-481210
DATE: April 15, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea (OSA), to include as secondary to service-connected disabilities, is remanded.

Entitlement to an initial compensable rating for bilateral hand psoriatic arthritis is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served in the Navy from October 1997 to October 2001. This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from rating decisions issued in June 2024 and October 2024 by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) under the modernized appeals system known as the Appeals Modernization Act.

In the October 2024 VA Forms 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the June 2024 and October 2024 AOJ decisions on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. However, because the Board is remanding the claims of service connection for OSA and an initial compensable rating for bilateral hand psoriatic arthritis, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

The Board notes that pursuant to Williams v. McDonough, 37 Vet. App. 305 (U.S. 2024), due to the possibility of a docket switch, the Board cannot adjudicate an appeal until after one year from the date the AOJ mailed the decision on appeal, or 60 days from the date the Board received the VA Form 10182, whichever is later. However, as the service connection claim and increased rating claim are being remanded for additional development, there is no prejudice to the Veteran.

Unlike in the legacy system, the reasons for remand by the Board in the modernized review system are limited to correction of (1) duty to assist errors occurring prior to the date of the AOJ decision on appeal (i.e., pre-decisional duty to assist errors); and (2) AOJ errors in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty, if correction of such error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the appellant's claim. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802 (a).

1. Entitlement to service connection for OSA, to include as secondary to service-connected disabilities, is remanded.

In the June 2024 VA Form 21-526EZ, the Veteran contends that his OSA is secondary to his service-connected arthritis and tinnitus. Specifically, he contends that the inflammation caused by his service-connected arthritis and tinnitus has disrupted his daily sleep cycle.

The AOJ favorably found that he has a September 2024 OSA diagnosis and that he is currently service connected for tinnitus, a right elbow disability with psoriatic arthritis, bilateral knee psoriatic arthritis, and bilateral hand psoriatic arthritis.

Upon examination in September 2024, the VA examiner concluded that the Veteran's OSA was not caused by his service-connected tinnitus, right elbow disability, bilateral knee psoriatic arthritis, and bilateral hand psoriatic arthritis. The VA examiner did not provide an aggravation opinion.

Upon review, the Board finds that remand is warranted for an addendum VA medical opinion. In this regard, the VA examiner did not address whether the Veteran's service-connected tinnitus, right elbow disability, bilateral knee psoriatic arthritis, and bilateral hand psoriatic arthritis have aggravated his OSA. See El-Amin v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 136, 140 (2013) (a medical opinion is inadequate when it fails to adequately address the question of aggravation).

Additionally, the VA examiner did not address the Veteran's contention in the June 2024 VA Form 21-526EZ that the inflammation caused by his service-connected arthritis and tinnitus has disrupted his daily sleep cycle. Miller v Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 249, 257-262 (2020).

Based on the evidence of record, the Board finds an addendum VA medical opinion is necessary to properly determine entitlement to service connection. Relying on the September 2024 VA medical opinion constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error. Accordingly, remand is warranted for correction of such error.

2. Entitlement to an initial compensable rating for bilateral hand psoriatic arthritis is remanded.

The Veteran generally contends entitlement to an initial compensable rating for his bilateral hand psoriatic arthritis.

The Veteran is currently in receipt of a noncompensable rating pursuant to Diagnostic Code 5009. Note (2) to this diagnostic code provides that with the types of arthritis, diagnostic codes 5004 through 5009, rate the acute phase under diagnostic code 5002; rate any chronic residuals under diagnostic code 5003.

While the Veteran was afforded a November 2023 Skin Diseases VA examination and a February 2024 Hand and Fingers VA examination, the Veteran has not been afforded a VA examination specific to his bilateral hand psoriatic arthritis.

Upon review, the Board finds that remand is warranted for a bilateral hand psoriatic arthritis VA examination. In this regard, the VA examinations of record do not provide sufficient information to determine whether an increased rating is warranted. Specifically, the VA examinations do not indicate whether the Veteran's bilateral hand psoriatic arthritis is in the acute phase or has chronic residuals. Thus, the Board cannot determine the appropriate diagnostic code to rate the Veteran's disability. Further, as the VA examinations do not provide information concerning whether the Veteran's disability is manifested by exacerbations or whether the Veteran's disability involves 2 or more major or minor joints, the Board cannot determine whether an increased rating is warranted under Diagnostic Code 5002 or 5003.

Based on the evidence of record, the Board finds a VA examination is necessary to properly determine entitlement to an initial compensable rating. Not obtaining a VA examination specific to the Veteran's bilateral hand psoriatic arthritis constitutes a pre-decisional duty to assist error. Accordingly, remand is warranted for correction of such error.

The matters are REMANDED for the following actions:

1. Obtain a medical opinion concerning the nature and etiology of the Veteran's OSA. 

Following a review of the record, the clinician is asked to respond to the following:

Whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the OSA was caused by or aggravated by the Veteran's service-connected tinnitus, right elbow disability, bilateral knee psoriatic arthritis, and bilateral hand psoriatic arthritis?

The VA clinician is asked to address and discuss the Veteran's lay statements of record.

A full and complete rationale for all opinions expressed must be provided.

2. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination to determine the current severity of his bilateral hand psoriatic arthritis. The examiner should provide a full description of the disability and report all signs and symptoms necessary for evaluating the Veteran's disability under the rating criteria.

 

 

S. Sorathia 

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Metoyer, D'Audra I.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.