Citation Nr: A25034284
Decision Date: 04/14/25	Archive Date: 04/14/25

DOCKET NO. 241220-501013
DATE: April 14, 2025

ORDER

The reduction of the disability rating for tonic clonic seizures from 100 percent to 20 percent based on clear and unmistakable error (CUE) in the July 2021 rating decision was not proper; and the 100 percent rating is restored.

The discontinuance of special monthly compensation (SMC) based on housebound status based on CUE in the July 2021 rating decision was not proper; and SMC based on housebound status is restored. 

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent, prior to May 20, 2023, for traumatic brain injury (TBI) is denied.

Entitlement to an increased rating of 100 percent, but no higher, from May 20, 2023, for TBI is granted.

REMANDED

Entitlement to SMC based on aid and attendance is remanded. 

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. In the July 2021 rating decision, the Regional Office (RO) granted an increased evaluation of 100 percent for seizures and SMC based on housebound status, effective July 9, 2021. 

2. In the November 2023 rating decision, the RO reduced the disability rating for seizures from 100 percent to 20 percent, as well as discontinued SMC based on housebound status, based on a finding of CUE in the July 2021 rating decision.

3. The RO's finding of CUE was not valid, as the evidence of record at that time does not show any error of fact or law that would manifestly change the outcome of the July 2021 decision such that reasonable minds cannot differ as to whether, effective July 9, 2021, the maximum schedular rating for seizures and SMC based on housebound status was warranted.

4. Prior to May 20, 2023, the Veteran's TBI facets did not manifest to a severity level of "2" or higher.

5. From May 20, 2023, the Veteran's TBI facets manifested to a severity level of "Total."

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The reduction of the disability rating for tonic clonic seizures from 100 percent to 20 percent based on CUE in the July 2021 rating decision was not proper. 

2. The discontinuance of SMC based on housebound status based on CUE in the July 2021 rating decision was not proper. 38 U.S.C. § 1155, 5103, 5103A, 5107, 5109A, 5112; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.14, 4.71a

3. The criteria for entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent, prior to May 20, 2023, for TBI have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § § 3.102, 4.1-4.14, 4.124a, Diagnostic Code (DC) 8045.

4. The criteria for entitlement to an increased rating of 100 percent, but no higher, from May 20, 2023, for TBI have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § § 3.102, 4.1-4.14, 4.124a, DC 8045.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

This appeal has been advanced on the Board's docket pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 20.900(c). 38 U.S.C. § 7101(a)(2).

The Veteran served on active duty in the Navy from January 1966 to January 1968. 

In July 2024, the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ/Regional Office (RO)) issued a decision denying the Veteran's claims on appeal. In the December 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) (NOD), the Veteran requested the Direct Review. The Board notes that the evidentiary window based on the Veteran's selection is limited to the evidence of record as of the date the AOJ issued notice of the applicable decision. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim[s], considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

As an initial matter, the Board notes that according to the Veteran's December 2024 NOD, he specifically asserts entitlement to a SMC based on aid and attendance, as part and parcel of his increased rating claim for TBI. Based on the Veteran's assertions, it can be reasonably inferred that the Veteran's purpose in filing his NOD is to also raise the issue of SMC due to the need of aid and attendance of another person under 38 U.S.C. § 1114(l). Thus, the claim is characterized as shown on the title page to include that of entitlement to SMC based on aid and attendance. 

1. The reduction of the disability rating for tonic clonic seizures from 100 percent to 20 percent was not proper in light of the CUE in the July 15, 2021, rating decision; and the 100 percent rating is restored.

2. The discontinuance of SMC based on housebound status was not proper in light of CUE in the July 15, 2021, rating decision; and SMC is restored. 

The Veteran asserts that the RO erred in finding that a rating reduction for seizures and discontinuance for SMC was warranted based on CUE.

Pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(e), a reduction in evaluation of a service-connected disability when warranted by the evidence is allowed, but only after following certain procedural guidelines. If a reduction in evaluation would result in a reduction or discontinuance of payments currently being made, the RO must issue a rating action proposing the reduction and setting forth all material facts and reasons for the reduction. The veteran must then be given 60 days to submit additional evidence and to request a predetermination hearing. Then a rating action will be taken to effectuate the reduction. 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(e). The effective date of the reduction will be the last day of the month in which a 60-day period from the date of notice to the veteran of the final action expires. 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(e), (i)(2)(i).

As provided in the statutes and regulations, VA shall accept final and binding prior determinations as correct in the absence of clear and unmistakable error (CUE). 38 U.S.C. § 5109A; 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(a). Where evidence establishes such error, the prior decision will be reversed or amended. Id. For the purposes of authorizing benefits, a rating or other adjudicative decision that constitutes a reversal or revision of a prior decision on the grounds of CUE has the same effect as if the decision had been made on the date of the prior decision. Id. A review to determine whether clear and unmistakable error exists in a case may be instituted by VA on VA's own motion or upon request of the claimant. Id. A request for revision of a decision of VA based on clear and unmistakable error may be made at any time after that decision is made. Id. 

A finding of clear and unmistakable error requires that: (1) either the correct facts, as known at the time, were not before the adjudicator, or the statutory or regulatory provisions existing at the time were incorrectly applied; (2) the error is undebatable and of the sort which, had it not occurred, would have manifestly changed the resulting decision; and (3) a determination that there was clear and unmistakable error based on the record and law that existed at the time of the prior adjudication in question. Damrel v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 242 (1994).

The Court has held that allegations that previous adjudications had improperly weighed and evaluated the evidence can never rise to the stringent definition of clear and unmistakable error. Baldwin v. West, 13 Vet. App. 1, 5 (1999); Damrel, 6 Vet. App. at 246.

Evaluation of the propriety of the rating decision issued in July 2021 requires consideration of two separate standards, the standard relating to CUE and the standard governing reduction/discontinuance of benefits. If CUE was not present in the July 2021 rating decision that assigned a 100 percent disability rating for seizures and SMC based on housebound status, then there is no basis for the reduction. If CUE was present in the July 2021 rating decision, then proper procedures, if applicable, governing reduction/discontinuance must be observed because the remedy used to correct the error was reduction/discontinuance. The Board will analyze both questions.

The Board notes that the RO found CUE in the July 2021 rating decision for failure to assign the correct evaluation for seizures under Diagnostic Code (DC) 8910, from July 9, 2021, and thus also, incorrectly finding the Veteran met the criteria for SMC based on housebound status.

During the relevant time period, the Veteran's seizures were rating under DC 8910 for grand mal epilepsy. Grand mal epilepsy is rated as major seizures. Under the General Rating Formula for Major Epileptic Seizures (General Rating Formula), a 10 percent rating is warranted for a confirmed diagnosis of epilepsy with a history of seizures. A 20 percent rating is warranted when at least one major seizure occurred in the last two years; or at least two minor seizures occurred in the last six months. A 40 percent rating is warranted where at least one major seizure occurred in the last six months or occurred two times in the last year; or there was an average of at least five to eight minor seizures weekly. A 60 percent rating is warranted where there is an average of at least one major seizure in four months over the last year; or nine to ten minor seizures occurred per week. An 80 percent rating is warranted where there is at least one major seizure in three months over the last year; or more than ten minor seizures weekly. The maximum rating of 100 percent is warranted where there is an average of at least one major seizure per month over the last year.

A major seizure is characterized by the generalized tonic-clonic convulsion with unconsciousness. 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, DC 8911, Note (1). A minor seizure consists of brief interruption of consciousness or conscious control associated with staring or rhythmic blinking of the eyes, nodding of the head, sudden jerking movements of the arms, trunk, or head, or sudden loss of postural control. 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8911, Note (2). Grand mal epilepsy is rated as a major seizure.

Competent, consistent lay testimony emphasizing convulsive and immediate post-convulsive characteristics may be accepted to establish the frequency of seizures or epileptic attacks. The frequency of seizures should be ascertained under the ordinary conditions of life (while not hospitalized). 38 C.F.R. § 4.121.

SMC is payable if the Veteran has a single service-connected disability rated as 100 percent and, (1) has additional service-connected disability or disabilities independently ratable at 60 percent, separate and distinct from the 100 percent service-connected disability and involving different anatomical segments or bodily systems, or (2) is permanently housebound due to service-connected disability or disabilities. 38?U.S.C. §?1114(s); 38?C.F.R. §?3.350(i). 

A review of the record shows that the basis for the assignment of the increased 100 percent rating was due to a July 2021 VA seizure examination that revealed the Veteran has major seizures at least once in the past year with an average frequency of at least 1 per month over the past year. This evidence resulted in the grant of the maximum schedular rating under DC 8910, effective July 9, 2021 (date of VA examination showing worsening). This further led to a grant of SMC based on housebound status, effective July 9, 2021, as, from that date, the Veteran met the criteria of having a single service-connected disability rated at 100 percent, with additional service-connected disability or disabilities independently ratable at 60 percent, separate and distinct from the totally disabling service-connected disability and involving different anatomical segments or bodily systems.

Based on review of the record, the Board finds that CUE was not shown in the July 2021 rating decision that assigned a 100 percent evaluation for seizures, effective July 9, 2021, and granted SMC based on housebound status. 

Here, the Board finds that the RO reviewed and considered the pertinent evidence at the time of the rating decision, applied the relevant law at that time, and found that the overall evidentiary record shows the severity of the disability had worsened to the maximum schedular level under DC 8910 as of July 9, 2021. In addition to this finding, the RO also found the evidence now supported a grant of SMC based on housebound status due to the Veteran meeting the schedular requirements as of July 9, 2021. While the Board acknowledges the RO later found this evidence to be of discrepancy solely due to an April 2023 VA medical opinion noting a conflict within the evidence regarding the frequency of seizures, however, this evidence was not provided until almost 2 years after the July 2021 rating decision, and thus cannot be used as a basis for CUE as it was not part of the record during the July 2021 rating decision. Essentially, the July 2021 rating decision was reasonably supported by the evidence then of record, was consistent with existing legal authority, and did not contain undebatable error that would have manifestly changed the outcome during that time. 

Ultimately, the RO's action in assigning the maximum 100 percent rating from July 9, 2021, and granting SMC based on housebound status from July 9, 2021, was not CUE. As CUE was not present in the July 2021 rating decision, then there is no basis for the reduction of the Veteran's disability rating for seizures from 100 percent to 20 percent and no basis for discontinuance of SMC based on housebound status. Thus, restoration of the 100 percent disability rating for seizures under DC 8910 and SMC based on housebound status, from July 9, 2021, is warranted. To this extent, the claims are granted. 

Increased Rating

Disability ratings are determined by applying the criteria set forth in the schedule of ratings. The percentage ratings are based on the average impairment of earning capacity, and individual disabilities are assigned separate diagnostic codes. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1. When a question arises as to which of two ratings apply under a single diagnostic code, the higher evaluation is assigned if the disability more closely approximates the criteria for the higher rating. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7.  

While the Veteran's entire history is reviewed when making a disability determination, where service connection has already been established and increase in the disability rating is at issue, it is the present level of the disability that is of primary concern. Francisco v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 55 (1994). However, staged ratings are appropriate for an increase rating claim when the factual findings show distinct time periods where the service-connected disability exhibits symptoms that would warrant different ratings. Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119 (1999); Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007).

Additionally, if the positive evidence supporting a claim and the negative evidence indicating a denial of the claim is relatively equal, the Veteran is entitled to the benefit of the doubt. See 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102, 4.3. Accordingly, any reasonable doubt regarding the degree of disability will be resolved in favor of the Veteran. Id.

1. Entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent, prior to November 6, 2023, and in excess of 70 percent thereafter, for TBI.

The Veteran contends that higher ratings are warranted for his TBI throughout the entire appeal period.

For the relevant periods on appeal, the Veteran's TBI has been assigned a 10 percent rating, prior to November 6, 3023, and a 70 percent rating thereafter, under the appropriate DC 8045, under which residuals of TBI are rated.  

Under DC 8045, there are three main areas of dysfunction listed that may result from TBI and have profound effects on functioning: cognitive (which is common in varying degrees after TBI), emotional/behavioral, and physical. Each of these areas of dysfunction may require evaluation.

Cognitive impairment is defined as decreased memory, concentration, attention, and executive functions of the brain. Executive functions are goal setting, speed of information processing, planning, organizing, prioritizing, self-monitoring, problem solving, judgment, decision making, spontaneity, and flexibility in changing actions when they are not productive. Not all of these brain functions may be affected in a given individual with cognitive impairment, and some functions may be affected more severely than others. In a given individual, symptoms may fluctuate in severity from day to day.

Cognitive impairment should be evaluated under the table titled "Evaluation of Cognitive Impairment and Other Residuals of TBI Not Otherwise Classified." 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, Diagnostic Code 8045. Subjective symptoms that are residuals of a TBI, whether or not they are part of cognitive impairment, should be evaluated under the subjective symptoms facet in the same table, with the exception of any residual with a distinct diagnosis that may be evaluated under another diagnostic code, such as migraine headache or Meniere's disease, even if that diagnosis is based on subjective symptoms. Id. 

Emotional/behavioral dysfunction should be evaluated under 38 C.F.R. § 4.130 (Schedule of ratings--mental disorders) when there is a diagnosis of a mental disorder. When there is no diagnosis of a mental disorder, such symptoms should also be evaluated under the table titled "Evaluation of Cognitive Impairment and Other Residuals of TBI Not Otherwise Classified." 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, DC 8045.

Physical (including neurological) dysfunction should be evaluated based on the following list, under an appropriate Diagnostic Code: motor and sensory dysfunction, including pain of the extremities and face; visual impairment; hearing loss and tinnitus; loss of sense of smell and taste; seizures; gait, coordination, and balance problems; speech and other communication difficulties, including aphasia and related disorders, and dysarthria; neurogenic bladder; neurogenic bowel; cranial nerve dysfunctions; autonomic nerve dysfunctions; and endocrine dysfunctions. 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, DC 8045. Other residuals reported on an examination should be evaluated under the most appropriate diagnostic code. Each condition should be evaluated separately, as long as the same signs and symptoms are not used to support more than one rating and combine the ratings for each separately rated condition under 38 C.F.R. § 4.25. The rating assigned based on the "Evaluation of Cognitive Impairment and Other Residuals of TBI Not Otherwise Classified" table will be considered the rating for a single condition for purposes of combining with other disability ratings. 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, DC 8045.

The table titled "Evaluation of Cognitive Impairment and Other Residuals of TBI Not Otherwise Classified" contains 10 important facets of TBI related to cognitive impairment and subjective symptoms. It provides criteria for levels of impairment for each facet, as appropriate, ranging from 0 to 3, and a 5th level, the highest level of impairment, labeled "total." However, not every facet has every level of severity. The consciousness facet, for example, does not provide for an impairment level other than total," since any level of impaired consciousness would be totally disabling. A 100 percent rating should be assigned if "total" is the level of evaluation for one or more facets. If no facet is evaluated as "total," the overall percentage rating based on the level of the highest facet should be assigned as follows: 0 = 0 percent; 1 = 10 percent; 2 = 40 percent; and 3 = 70 percent. For example, a 70 percent rating should be assigned if 3 is the highest level of evaluation for any facet. 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, DC 8045.

The rating assigned is based upon the highest level of severity for any facet of cognitive impairment and other residuals of traumatic brain injury not otherwise classified as determined on examination. Only one rating is assigned for all the applicable facets. A higher rating is not warranted unless a higher level of severity for a facet is established on examination. Physical and/or emotional/behavioral disabilities found on examination that are determined to be residuals of traumatic brain injury are evaluated separately.

Medical treatment records from August 2017 reflect contradictory evidence as to the Veteran's symptoms, such as experiencing issues with headaches, worsened memory, and difficulties with concentration, along with notations of normal judgment, normal concentration, intact memory, intact orientation, and well-organized though process. 

In October 2017, the Veteran underwent a VA examination, where he was not diagnosed with TBI, with no complaints of impairment of memory, attention, concentration, or executive functions. He had normal judgment, appropriate social interaction, was always oriented to person, time, place, and situation, had normal motor activity, normal visual spatial orientation, normal consciousness, and had no subjective symptoms or neurobehavioral effects. The examiner concluded the Veteran's TBI did not impact his ability to work.

In July 2021, the Veteran underwent a VA examination, where he was diagnosed with TBI, with current symptoms of memory issues, likely representative of mild/early dementia. Upon examination, the examiner noted subjective complaints of memory issues, including forgetting dates and names, but most likely representative of mild dementia unrelated to MVA/seizure disorder, normal judgment, routinely appropriate social interaction, full orientation, normal motor activity, normal visual-spatial orientation, and normal consciousness, with no noted subjective symptoms and intact expressive and receptive communication (both written and spoken). The examiner documented the Veteran has seizures attributable to TBI, and concluded his TBI impacted his ability to work. 

In May 2023, the Veteran underwent a VA examination, where he was diagnosed with TBI, with current symptoms of changes in memory and seizure history. Upon examination, the examiner noted subjective complaints of memory loss with objective evidence of testing of severe impairment of memory, attention, and concentration; moderately impaired judgment; occasionally inappropriate social interaction; consistently disoriented to place, time, and person; mildly decreased motor activity with moderate slowing due to apraxia; moderately severely impaired visual-spatial orientation; with additional subjective complaints of fatigability, headaches, dizziness, and tinnitus. The examiner noted the Veteran has neurobehavioral effects of irritability, impulsivity, lack of motivation, and lack of cooperation that frequently interfere with workplace interaction, social interaction, or both, but do not preclude them. His additional symptoms included an inability to communicate when speaking (conveying what is on his mind) and intermittent difficulty in writing. However, he had normal consciousness. The examiner concluded that the Veteran's TBI impacts his ability to work.

In November 2023, the Veteran underwent a VA examination, where he was diagnosed with TBI, with current symptoms of worsening memory loss. Upon examination, the examiner noted subjective complaints of memory loss with objective evidence on testing of moderate impairment of memory, attention, and concentration; moderately impaired judgment; often disoriented to time and place; mostly normal motor activity, but mildly slowed at time due to apraxia; moderately impaired visual-spatial orientation; and additional subjective complaints of loss of balance, dizziness, tinnitus, vertigo, and severe headaches. His neurobehavioral symptoms were identified as moodiness, irritability, impulsivity, and unpredictability at times. During the examination, the Veteran was unable to communicate (described as sometimes when texting, being often confused when re-reading his own text messages, and difficulty convey what is on his mind when speaking, forgetting what he wants to say and looking to his wife for assistance). However, he has appropriate social interaction and normal consciousness. The examiner concluded that his TBI impacts his ability to work.

A March 2024 lay statement of record notated the Veteran is very forgetful due to his TBI, to include not being able to remember to turn off the stove or remember to attend his medical appointments or take his medications.

In considering the evidence of record, the Board finds that the Veteran is entitled to an increased 100 percent rating from May 20, 2023.  

In reaching this finding, the Board notes that the most persuasive evidence of record indicates that the Veteran's residuals of TBI manifested in a facet evaluation of "total," from May 20, 2023, for one or more facets. Under the provisions of DC 8045, this equates to a 100 percent rating for residuals of TBI, from May 20, 2023. 

However, prior to this date, the Board notes that the persuasive evidence of record does not indicate that the Veteran's residuals of TBI manifest in a facet evaluation of "2" or higher; and thus, under DC 8045, this equates to a 10 percent rating for TBI. As described, prior to this date, the evidence shows TBI symptoms of a lesser degree. Indeed, the October 2017 and July 2021 VA examinations both reveal no memory impairments attributed to the TBI or impairments in cognition, orientation, motor activity, social interaction, or communication to support a higher disability rating for this time period. Although the Veteran's August 2017 medical treatment records suggest difficulties with memory and concentration, the later VA examinations both clarify the nature of his symptomatology, which, based on objective assessments, revealed no impairments in these areas. Thus, a higher rating is not warranted prior to May 20, 2023.

The Board notes that the lay assertions of the Veteran have been considered. See Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 470 (1994). To the extent that the Veteran has argued that a higher rating during the appeal period than what is assigned herein for his TBI is warranted, these assertions are outweighed by more probative evidence provided by the examination of a qualified medical professional. See Jones v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 134, 137-138 (1994). As such, his lay statements do not provide any basis upon which to assign any higher ratings.

As such, the Board concludes that the persuasive evidence of record is against the claim for increase prior to May 20, 2023, and the benefit-of-the-doubt rule does not apply. See Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021). Therefore, to this extent only, the appeal is denied. 

Nevertheless, the Board also concludes that the persuasive evidence of record is in favor of the claim for a maximum rating, from May 20, 2023, for TBI. Therefore, to this extent only, the appeal is granted.

The Board notes that from May 20, 2023, the Veteran is in receipt of the maximum schedular rating under DC 8045, and a higher rating from this time period is not permitted. 

REASONS FOR REMAND

Entitlement to SMC based on aid and attendance is remanded.

After review of the record, the Board finds that a remand is needed to correct a duty to assist error, when the AOJ failed to provide the Veteran with a VA medical examination and/or opinion assessing the Veteran's claimed SMC based on aid and attendance.

The Board acknowledges the Veteran's service-connected disabilities result in impairment and functional limitations; however, the record is unclear whether one, or all of them, have a severity level so severe as to render the Veteran bedridden or so helpless as to be in need of regular aid and assistance. Given the "low threshold" standard for determining when a VA medical examination/opinion is necessary, the Board finds that the requirements have been met. McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 81-82 (2006).

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Provide the Veteran with a VA medical examination and medical opinion by an examiner with appropriate expertise to ascertain whether the Veteran is entitled to SMC based on aid and attendance.

Following complete review of the record, the examiner must address the following:

Opine whether the Veteran's service-connected disability or disabilities render him bedridden or helpless as to be in need of regular aid and assistance.

The rationale for all opinions must be provided and must reflect consideration of the Veteran's lay statements. 

 

DELYVONNE M. WHITEHEAD

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Carter, B.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.