Citation Nr: A25034232
Decision Date: 04/14/25	Archive Date: 04/14/25

DOCKET NO. 231119-393741
DATE: April 14, 2025

ORDER

Service connection for otitis media is denied.

Service connection for a chronic right wrist disability is granted.

An initial disability rating in excess of 10 percent for a left wrist disability is denied.

An initial disability rating in excess of 10 percent for left hip painful motion is denied.

An initial compensable disability rating for left hip limitation of extension is denied.

An initial compensable disability rating for left hip limitation of flexion is denied.

An initial disability rating in excess of 10 percent for left knee painful motion is denied.

An initial disability rating in excess of 10 percent for right knee painful motion is denied.

An initial compensable disability rating percent for right knee limitation of flexion is denied.

An initial disability rating of 30 percent for irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) is granted.

An initial disability rating of 40 percent for temporomandibular disorder (TMD) is granted.

An initial compensable disability rating for right ear eustachian tube dysfunction is denied.

An initial compensable rating for erectile dysfunction is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran is not shown to have a current diagnosis of otitis media.

2. Resolving reasonable doubt in favor of the Veteran, his chronic right wrist disability was incurred during active service.

3. The Veteran's left wrist disability does not result in ankylosis.

4. The Veteran's left hip disability results in painful motion but does not result in limitation of adduction, limitation of rotation, flexion limited to 45 degrees, or extension limited to 5 degrees.

5. The Veteran's left knee disability results in painful motion, but is not manifested by compensable limitation of flexion, extension limited to 15 degrees or more, ankylosis, recurrent subluxation or lateral instability, dislocated or symptomatic post-removal semilunar cartilage, malunion of tibia or fibula, or genu recurvatum.

6. The Veteran's right knee disability results in painful motion, but is not manifested by compensable limitation of flexion, extension limited to 15 degrees or more, ankylosis, recurrent subluxation or lateral instability, dislocated or symptomatic post-removal semilunar cartilage, malunion of tibia or fibula, or genu recurvatum.

7. The evidence of record shows that the Veteran's IBS results in alternating diarrhea and constipation with more or less constant abdominal distress.

8. The evidence of record shows that the Veteran's TMD results in an interincisal range of 0 to 10 millimeters that does not require dietary restrictions to mechanically altered foods.

9. The Veteran's right ear eustachian tube dysfunction does not result in dizziness or occasional staggering.

10. The Veteran's erectile dysfunction is already assigned a noncompensable disability rating, the maximum rating authorized under Diagnostic Code 7522.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria are not met to establish service connection for otitis media. 38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.304.

2. The criteria are met to establish service connection for a chronic right wrist disability. 38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.304, 3.307, 3.309.

3. The criteria are not met to establish an initial disability rating in excess of 10 percent for a left wrist disability. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5215.

4. The criteria are not met to establish an initial disability rating in excess of 10 percent for left hip painful motion. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5253.

5. The criteria are not met to establish an initial compensable disability rating for left hip limitation of extension. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5251.

6. The criteria are not met to establish an initial compensable disability rating for left hip limitation of flexion. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5252.

7. The criteria are not met to establish a disability rating in excess of 10 percent disability rating for left knee painful motion. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5261.

8. The criteria are not met to establish a disability rating in excess of 10 percent disability rating for right knee painful motion. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Codes 5261.

9. The criteria are not met to establish a compensable disability for a right knee limitation of flexion. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Code 5260.

10. The criteria are met to establish an initial disability rating of 30 percent for IBS. 38 C.F.R. § 4.114, Diagnostic Code 7319.

11. The criteria are met to establish an initial disability rating of 40 percent for TMD. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.150b, Diagnostic Code 9905.

12. The criteria are not met to establish an initial compensable disability rating for right ear eustachian tube dysfunction. 38 C.F.R. § 4.87, Diagnostic Code 6204.

13. The criteria are not met to establish an initial compensable disability rating for erectile dysfunction. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.115b, Diagnostic Code 7522.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran had active service from Jun 2017 to October 2023, to include service in Southwest Asia. The Veteran was awarded the Combat Action Badge.

The rating decision on appeal was issued in November 2023 and constitutes an initial decision; by law, the modernized review system, governed by the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.

In a November 2023 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. By law, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the November 2023 Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted after the AOJ rating decision on appeal, then, by law, the Board was not permitted to consider that evidence in this decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

Service Connection

Legal Criteria

Service connection is warranted for a disability due to a disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service. 38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.

To substantiate a claim of service connection there must be competent evidence showing: (1) the existence of a claimed disability; (2) incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury in active service; and (3) a causal relationship between the present claimed disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during active service. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

Certain chronic diseases may be presumed to be service connected if manifested as chronic in service or to a compensable degree within a specified period after active service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1112, 1113, 1137; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307, 3.309(a).

For chronic diseases listed in 38 C.F.R. § 3.309(a), service connection may be established by showing continuity of symptoms. See Walker v. Shinseki, 718 F.3d 1331 (Fed. Cir. 2013).

Otitis Media

Factual Background

The Veteran asserted that he had otitis media due to his active service.

The Veteran's service treatment records (STRs) show that at his June 2016 entrance physical, he had a normal examination of his ears. He treated for otitis media from May 2021 to October 2021. At his July 2023 separation physical, he had a normal examination of his ears with no current otitis media noted.

The Veteran's post-service medical records do not show any complaints, treatment, or diagnosis of otitis media.

In July 2023, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination. After reviewing the claims file, interviewing the Veteran, and conducting an examination, the examiner reported that the Veteran did not have a current diagnosis of otitis media and that the Veteran's otitis media during his active service had resolved.

Analysis

The record as a whole does not support the conclusion that the Veteran has a current diagnosis of otitis media.

While the Veteran asserts that he has otitis media, the diagnosis of this condition requires clinical testing and medical expertise and cannot simply be diagnosed by lay observation alone; and the Veteran is not considered competent (meaning medically qualified by training or experience) to diagnose such a disability. See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372 (Fed. Cir. 2007). However, the Veteran's reports of ear symptoms did trigger VA's duty to assist in obtaining an examination and medical opinion. The VA examiner concluded that the Veteran's otitis media had resolved and that he did not have a current diagnosis of otitis media.

In the absence of proof of a current disability, there can be no valid claim for service connection. Brammer v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 223, 225 (1992). Admittedly, the requirement that a current disability be present is satisfied "when a claimant has a disability at the time a claim for VA disability compensation is filed or during the pendency of that claim...even though the disability resolves prior to the Secretary's adjudication of the claim." McClain v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 319 (2007). Here, however, the Veteran has not shown the presence of otitis media.

Accordingly, the criteria are not met to establish service connection for otitis media, and the claim must be denied.

Right Wrist Disability

Factual Background

The Veteran asserted that he had a right wrist disability due to his active service.

The Veteran's STRs show that in a July 2023 Separation Health Assessment, he reported that he injured his wrists during multiple Airborne training events and from typing at a computer during his active service.

In July 2023, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination. He reported that he began having right wrist pain in 2020. While the examiner provided a negative opinion and found that the Veteran did not have a right wrist disability, the examiner based the opinion on absence of a diagnosis.

Analysis

After a complete review of the entire record, while the Veteran's STRs do not include reports of or treatment for a right wrist disability, the Board finds no reason to doubt the Veteran's credibility regarding the onset and persistence of his observable right wrist symptoms. The Veteran provided competent and credible reports about the onset and persistence of his objectively observable right wrist symptoms, and the Board assigns significant probative value to his statements and testimony. As such, an in-service injury to the Veteran's right wrist, notably injuries sustained during Airborne training, is demonstrated.

The weight of the evidence establishes that the Veteran's right wrist symptoms began during his active service, and the Board therefore finds that the Veteran's right wrist disability was incurred during his active service. In reaching this conclusion, the reports of the Veteran regarding this condition in service that continued to the present are found to be competent, credible, and highly probative.

The VA examiner provided a negative opinion. However, the VA examiner based the opinion on the lack of medical evidence showing a diagnosis of this condition. The examiner did not address the Veteran's lay statements of continuous symptoms beginning during his active service and continuing to the present. Accordingly, the opinion of the VA examiner regarding the Veteran's right wrist disability is given little probative value.

As such, the evidence for and against the Veteran's claim that his right wrist disability began during his active service and persisted since his active service is at the very least evenly balanced. In these circumstances, the regulations dictate that any reasonable doubt is to be resolved in the Veteran's favor.

Accordingly, the criteria are met to establish service connection for a chronic right wrist disability, and the claim is granted.

Increased Rating

Legal Criteria - General

Disability ratings are determined by applying a schedule of ratings that is based on average impairment of earning capacity. Separate diagnostic codes identify the various disabilities. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R., Part 4. Each disability must be viewed in relation to its history and the limitation of activity imposed by the disabling condition should be emphasized. 38 C.F.R. § 4.1. Examination reports are to be interpreted in light of the whole recorded history, and each disability must be considered from the point of view of the appellant working or seeking work. 38 C.F.R. § 4.2. Where there is a question as to which of two disability evaluations shall be applied, the higher evaluation is to be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating. Otherwise, the lower disability rating is to be assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7. Reasonable doubt regarding degree of disability is to be resolved in favor of the claimant. 38 C.F.R. § 4.3.

Left Wrist Disability

Legal Criteria - Wrist Disability

With respect to disabilities of the wrists, 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Codes 5214 and 5215 set forth relevant provisions. Upper extremity ratings depend on whether the disabled extremity is the major or minor extremity. The Veteran is right handed, and therefore his left wrist is considered his minor extremity.

The Veteran's left wrist disability was evaluated under Diagnostic Code 5215 for wrist limitation of motion. A 10 percent disability rating, the maximum rating, is assigned for dorsiflexion less than 15 degrees or palmar flexion limited in line with the forearm.

Normal ranges of motion of the wrist are dorsiflexion to 70 degrees and palmar flexion to 80 degrees. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71, Plate I.

Diagnostic Code 5214 evaluates ankylosis of the wrist. However, the medical record does not document this condition as being present. Therefore, this Diagnostic Code is not applicable and will not be discussed further.

Factual Background

The Veteran filed a service connection claim prior to his separation from active service. The November 2023 rating decision granted service connection for a left wrist disability and assigned an initial 10 percent disability rating effective October 25, 2023, the day after the Veteran's separation from active service. The Veteran asserted that he was entitled to a higher disability rating.

The Veteran's medical records do not document left wrist ankylosis.

In July 2023, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination. He reported left wrist pain, stiffness, limited range of motion, and difficulty lifting heavy objects. He reported having flare-ups and functional loss with heavy lifting. On examination, he demonstrated left wrist dorsiflexion to 60 degrees and palmar flexion to 60 degrees. The examiner indicated there was pain on examination. Repetitive use testing resulted in an additional 5 percent limitation with dorsiflexion and palmar flexion due to pain. The examiner indicated that pain limited functional ability with repetitive use resulting in dorsiflexion limited to 50 degrees and palmar flexion limited to 50 degrees. The examiner indicated that pain limited functional ability during flare-ups resulting in dorsiflexion limited to 45 degrees and palmar flexion limited to 45 degrees. The examiner indicated that there was no muscle atrophy. The examiner indicated that the Veteran did not have ankylosis.

Analysis

The July 2023 VA examiner indicated that the Veteran did not have left wrist ankylosis. The Veteran's medical records do not document findings suggesting left wrist ankylosis. Moreover, the Veteran did not assert symptoms that would suggest the presence of ankylosis or functional ankylosis.

The Veteran is receiving the maximum disability rating allowed based on range of motion. The only higher disability rating available is for ankylosis of the wrist. However, the evidence does not show ankylosis or functional ankylosis.

The Board has considered whether a higher disability evaluation may be warranted on the basis of functional loss due to weakness, fatigability, incoordination, or pain on movement of a joint under 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.40 and 4.45. See DeLuca v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 202 (1995). However, when a musculoskeletal disability is already evaluated at the highest disability rating available based upon limitation of motion, further DeLuca analysis is foreclosed - that is, those factors are not applicable. Johnston v. Brown, 10 Vet. App. 80 (1997).

Accordingly, the criteria to establish an initial disability rating in excess of 10 percent for a left wrist disability are not met, and the claim is denied.

Left Hip Disability

Legal Criteria - Hip Disabilities

With respect to disabilities of the hip, 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Codes 5250 through 5255 set forth relevant provisions.

Diagnostic Code 5251 evaluates limitation of extension. A 10 percent disability rating is assigned for extension limited to 5 degrees.

Diagnostic Code 5252 evaluates limitation of flexion. A 10 percent disability rating is assigned for flexion limited to 45 degrees. A 20 percent disability rating is assigned for flexion limited to 30 degrees. A 30 percent disability rating is assigned for flexion limited to 20 degrees. A 40 percent disability rating is assigned for flexion limited to 10 degrees.

Diagnostic Code 5253 evaluates an impairment of the thigh. A 10 percent disability rating is assigned for limitation of rotation to 15 degrees or limitation of adduction resulting in an inability to cross legs. A 20 percent disability rating is assigned for loss of abduction beyond 10 degrees.

Diagnostic Code 5250 evaluates ankylosis of the hip, Diagnostic Code 5254 evaluates hip flail joint, Diagnostic Code 5245 evaluates hip replacement, and Diagnostic Code 5255 evaluates impairment of the femur. The medical record does not document these conditions. Therefore, these Diagnostic Codes are not applicable and will not be discussed further.

Hip flexion is measured from 0 degrees to 125 degrees; abduction is measured from 0 degrees to 45 degrees. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Plate II. 

Factual Background

The Veteran filed a service connection claim prior to his separation from active service. The November 2023 rating decision granted service connection for a left hip disability and assigned an initial 10 percent disability rating for painful motion, an initial noncompensable disability rating for left hip limitation of extension, and an initial noncompensable disability rating for left hip limitation of flexion, all effective October 25, 2023, the day after the Veteran's separation from active service. The Veteran asserted that he was entitled to higher disability ratings.

The Veteran's medical records show do not show findings consistent with disability ratings in excess of those assigned.

In July 2023, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination. He reported left hip pain, stiffness, limited range of motion, and difficulty with heavy lifting, standing more than two hours, walking more than two miles, jogging, or climbing more than three flights of stairs. He reported having flare-ups and functional loss with standing, walking, or running for long periods. On examination, he demonstrated left hip flexion to 90 degrees, extension to 20 degrees, abduction to 35 degrees, adduction to 20 degrees, external rotation to 40 degrees, and internal rotation to 30 degrees. The examiner indicated that there was pain noted on examination. The examiner indicated that the Veteran was able to cross his legs. The examiner indicated that there was evidence of pain with weight bearing. Repetitive use testing resulted in an additional five percent limitation with flexion, extension, abduction, adduction, external rotation, and internal rotation. The examiner indicated that pain significantly limited functional ability with repeated use over a period of time and resulted in flexion limited to 70 degrees, extension limited to 10 degrees, abduction limited to 25 degrees, adduction limited to 10 degrees, external rotation limited to 30 degrees, and internal rotation limited to 20 degrees. The examiner indicated that pain significantly limited functional ability during flare-ups and resulted in flexion limited to 60 degrees, extension limited to 10 degrees, abduction limited to 20 degrees, adduction limited to 10 degrees, external rotation limited to 25 degrees, and internal rotation limited to 15 degrees. The examiner indicated there was no muscle atrophy. The examiner indicated that the Veteran did not have left hip ankylosis, flail hip, an impairment of the left femur, or left hip surgery.

Analysis

In recognition of his left hip pain, the Veteran was assigned a 10 percent disability rating under Diagnostic Code 5253. However, a higher disability rating is not warranted as the evidence does not show that the Veteran had limitation of abduction with motion lost beyond 10 degrees at the July 2023 VA examination. As such, a disability rating in excess of 10 percent is not warranted.

Regarding the Veteran's left hip limitation of extension, a compensable rating is not warranted as the Veteran demonstrated left hip extension limited to, at most, 10 degrees at the July 2023 VA examination, which is in excess of a noncompensable rating assigned for extension limited to 5 degrees. As such, a compensable disability rating for a left hip limitation of extension is not warranted.

Regarding the Veteran's left hip limitation of flexion, a compensable rating from is not warranted as the Veteran demonstrated left hip flexion limited to, at most, 60 degrees at the July 2023 VA examination, which is in excess of a compensable rating assigned for flexion limited to 45 degrees. As such, a compensable disability rating for a left hip limitation of flexion is not warranted.

The Board has considered whether a higher disability evaluation may be warranted on the basis of functional loss due to weakness, fatigability, incoordination, or pain on movement of a joint under 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.40 and 4.45. See also DeLuca, 8 Vet. App. 202. The VA examiner did not indicate that repetitive use testing resulted in any additional functional loss or limitation of motion consistent with findings in excess of compensable ratings. Accordingly, higher disability ratings based on functional loss due to pain is not warranted because the current disability ratings already take the Veteran's current levels of pain into account. While the Veteran reported experiencing left hip pain (and the Board does not doubt the credibility of these competent statements), pain alone is not sufficient to warrant a higher disability rating, unless it results in additional loss of function. Mitchell v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 32, 36-38 (2011). Here, the medical evidence does not document any functional limitation equivalent to ratings in excess of 10 percent due to pain from the Veteran's left hip disability. Furthermore, the Veteran was properly assigned a rating of 10 percent for his left hip disability in recognition of his hip pain. Higher disability ratings for the Veteran's left hip disability is not warranted.

The Board has no reason to question that the Veteran's left hip disability results in functional limitations. These limitations are contemplated by the criteria for the ratings that are assigned. The Board finds that the Veteran's left hip symptoms do not include any that are not adequately addressed by the schedular rating criteria.

Accordingly, the criteria are not met to establish an initial disability rating in excess of 10 percent for a left hip disability, an initial compensable disability rating for left hip limitation of extension, and an initial compensable disability rating for left hip limitation of flexion, and the claims are denied.?

Bilateral Knee Disabilities

Legal Criteria - Knee Disabilities

With respect to disabilities of the knees, 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Codes 5258 through 5263 set forth relevant provisions. The Veteran's bilateral knee disabilities have been assigned a 10 percent disability rating under Diagnostic Code 6260 for painful motion.

Diagnostic Code 5260 evaluates limitation of flexion. A noncompensable rating is assigned for flexion limited to 60 degrees. A 10 percent disability rating is assigned for flexion limited to 45 degrees. A 20 percent disability rating is assigned for flexion limited to 30 degrees. A 30 percent disability rating is assigned for flexion limited to 15 degrees.

Diagnostic Code 5261 evaluates limitation of extension. A noncompensable rating is assigned for extension limited to 5 degrees. A 10 percent disability rating is assigned for extension limited to 10 degrees. A 20 percent disability rating is assigned for extension limited to 15 degrees. A 30 percent disability rating is assigned for extension limited to 20 degrees. A 40 percent disability rating is assigned for extension limited to 30 degrees. A 50 percent disability rating is assigned for extension limited to 45 degrees.

Normal ranges of motion of the knee are extension to 0 degrees and flexion to 140 degrees. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71, Plate II.

Diagnostic Code 5256 evaluates ankylosis of a knee, Diagnostic Codes 5258 and 5259 evaluates semilunar cartilage, Diagnostic Code 5262 evaluates impairment of the tibia and fibula, and Diagnostic Code 5263 evaluates genu recurvatum. However, the medical record does not document any of these conditions as being present. Therefore, these Diagnostic Codes are not applicable and will not be discussed further.

Factual Background

The Veteran filed service connection claims prior to his separation from active service. The November 2023 rating decision granted service connection for a left knee disability and assigned an initial 10 percent disability rating for left knee painful motion, granted service connection for right knee disability and assigned an initial 10 percent disability rating for right knee painful motion, and assigned an initial noncompensable disability rating for right knee limitation of extension, and all effective October 25, 2023, the day after the Veteran's separation from active service. The Veteran asserted that he was entitled to higher disability ratings.

The Veteran's medical records show do not show findings consistent with disability ratings in excess of those assigned.

In July 2023, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination. He reported having bilateral knee pain, stiffness, limited range of motion, and difficulty with bending, standing more than two hours, walking more than two miles, or climbing more than three flights of stairs. He reported having flare-ups and functional loss with prolonged sitting and lifting weights. He denied having a history of instability, recurrent subluxation, or frequent effusion of the knee. On examination, he demonstrated left knee flexion to 90 degrees and normal extension to 0 degrees, and right knee flexion to 90 degrees and normal extension to 0 degrees, with bilateral knee pain noted on examination. The examiner indicated there was evidence of pain with weight bearing. Repetitive use testing resulted in an additional ten percent limitation with flexion bilaterally. The examiner indicated that pain significantly limited functional ability with repeated use over a period of time and resulted in flexion limited to 70 degrees bilaterally. The examiner indicated that pain significantly limited functional ability during flare-ups and resulted in flexion limited to 60 degrees bilaterally. The examiner indicated there was no muscle atrophy. The examiner indicated that the Veteran did not have knee ankylosis, instability, recurrent patellar dislocation, shin splints, stress fractures, chronic exertional compartment syndrome, any other tibial or fibular impairment, or a meniscal condition.

Analysis

Regarding the Veteran's bilateral knee limitation of extension, he was assigned 10 percent disability ratings under Diagnostic Code 5261 for his painful knee motion. A higher 20 percent disability rating for knee extension requires extension to be limited to 15 degrees, which has not been shown at any time. Accordingly, ratings in excess of 10 percent for knee limitation of extension under Diagnostic Code 5261 are not warranted.

Regarding the Veteran's right knee limitation of flexion, a compensable rating requires knee flexion limited to 45 degrees, which has not been shown at any time. Accordingly, separate compensable ratings for knee limitation of flexion under Diagnostic Code 5260 are not warranted.

The Board has considered whether a higher disability evaluation may be warranted on the basis of functional loss due to weakness, fatigability, incoordination, or pain on movement of a joint under 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.40 and 4.45. See also DeLuca, 8 Vet. App. 202. The VA examiner did not indicate that repetitive use testing resulted in any additional functional loss or limitation of motion in either knee consistent with findings in excess of compensable ratings. Accordingly, higher disability ratings based on functional loss due to pain is not warranted because the current disability ratings already take the Veteran's current levels of pain into account. While the Veteran reported experiencing bilateral knee pain (and the Board does not doubt the credibility of these competent statements), pain alone is not sufficient to warrant a higher disability rating, unless it results in additional loss of function. Mitchell, 25 Vet. App. 32, 36-38. Here, the medical evidence does not document any functional limitation equivalent to ratings in excess of 10 percent due to pain from the Veteran's bilateral knee disabilities. Furthermore, the Veteran was properly assigned ratings of 10 percent for his bilateral knee disabilities in recognition of his knee pain. Higher disability ratings for the Veteran's bilateral knee disabilities are not warranted.

The Board has no reason to question that the Veteran's bilateral knee disabilities result in functional limitations. These limitations are contemplated by the criteria for the ratings that are assigned. The Board finds that the Veteran's bilateral knee symptoms do not include any that are not adequately addressed by the schedular rating criteria.

Accordingly, the criteria to establish an initial disability rating in excess of 10 percent for left knee painful motion, an initial disability rating in excess of 10 percent for right knee painful motion, and an initial compensable disability rating for right knee limitation of flexion are not met, and the claims are denied.

Irritable Bowel Syndrome

Legal Criteria - IBS

The Veteran's IBS is rated under the previous version of Diagnostic Code 7319 for irritable colon syndrome, which was in effect at the time of the November 2023 rating decision. A noncompensable disability rating is assigned for mild symptoms that include disturbances of bowel function with occasional episodes of abdominal distress. A 10 percent disability rating is assigned for moderate symptoms that include frequent episodes of bowel disturbance with abdominal distress. A 30 percent disability rating, the maximum rating, is assigned for severe symptoms that include diarrhea or alternating diarrhea and constipation with more or less constant abdominal distress.

IBS was rated by analogy to irritable colon syndrome, under Diagnostic Code 7319. When rating an unlisted condition by analogy, VA need not find the condition is identical to one listed in the rating criteria to apply the associated criteria. See Webb v. McDonough, 71 F.4th 1377, 1380-81 (Fed. Cir. 2023) (when rating an unlisted condition by analogy, VA need not find the condition is identical to one listed in the rating criteria to apply the associated criteria).

The words "mild," "moderate," and "severe" as used in the various Diagnostic Codes are not defined in the VA Schedule for Rating Disabilities. Rather than applying a mechanical formula, the Board must evaluate all of the evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 4.6.

Factual Background

The Veteran filed a service connection claim prior to his separation from active service. The November 2023 rating decision granted service connection for IBS and assigned an initial noncompensable disability rating effective October 25, 2023, the day after the Veteran's separation from active service. The Veteran asserted that he was entitled to a higher disability rating.

The Veteran's STRs show that in a July 2023 Separation Health Assessment, he reported that he had constant diarrhea.

In July 2023, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination. He reported that his IBS symptoms began during his service in Southwest Asia and had stayed the same after his separation from active service. He reported having alternating diarrhea and constipation with abdominal cramping.

Analysis

After a complete review of the entire record, the Board finds that the weight of the evidence supports the assignment of a 30 percent disability rating.

The July 2023 VA examination showed that the Veteran's IBS resulted in alternating diarrhea and constipation and abdominal cramping. Based on these findings, the AOJ granted a noncompensable disability rating. However, the VA examiner did not consider the Veteran's lay statements of having constant diarrhea since his active service. Furthermore, the AOJ did not take into account the Veteran's abdominal cramping. However, when rating an unlisted condition by analogy, as in this case the Veteran's IBS under the previous version of the Diagnostic Code, the condition need not be identical to one listed in the rating criteria to apply the associated criteria. See Webb, 71 F.4th 1377, 1380-81. The general policy goal of disability ratings is to "represent as far as can practicably be determined the average impairment in earning capacity resulting from such diseases and injuries and their residual conditions in civil occupations." The key question here is not whether the Veteran's IBS cause symptoms exactly matching the disability rating criteria, but rather whether the impairment from his IBS is comparable to that contemplated by any of the ratings under the previous version of Diagnostic Code 7913.

Based on the credible reports of the Veteran regarding his constant diarrhea and the findings of the July 2023 VA examiner that the Veteran's IBS resulted in alternating diarrhea and constipation and abdominal cramping, the Board finds that the Veteran's IBS is consistent with a 30 percent disability rating, the maximum rating under the previous version of Diagnostic Code 7319.

Accordingly, the criteria are met to establish an initial disability rating of 30 percent for IBS, and the claim is granted.

Right Temporomandibular Disorder

Legal Criteria - TMD

Under Diagnostic Code 9905 for TMD, for TMD with a lateral excursion range of motion of 0 to 4 millimeters, a 10 percent disability rating is assigned. For TMD with an interincisal range of 30 to 34 millimeters of maximum unassisted vertical opening, a 10 percent disability rating is assigned for no dietary restrictions to mechanically altered foods, a 20 percent disability rating is assigned dietary restrictions to soft and semi-solid foods, and a 30 percent disability rating is assigned for dietary restrictions to full liquid and pureed foods. For TMD with an interincisal range of 21 to 29 millimeters of maximum unassisted vertical opening, a 20 percent disability rating is assigned for no dietary restrictions to mechanically altered foods, a 30 percent disability rating is assigned dietary restrictions to soft and semi-solid foods, and a 40 percent disability rating is assigned for dietary restrictions to full liquid and pureed foods. For TMD with an interincisal range of 11 to 20 millimeters of maximum unassisted vertical opening, a 30 percent disability rating is assigned for no dietary restrictions to mechanically altered foods and a 40 percent disability rating is assigned for dietary restrictions to all mechanically altered foods. For TMD with an interincisal range of 0 to 10 millimeters of maximum unassisted vertical opening, a 40 percent disability rating is assigned for no dietary restrictions to mechanically altered foods and a 50 percent disability rating is assigned for dietary restrictions to all mechanically altered foods.

Ratings for limited interincisal movement shall not be combined with ratings for limited lateral excursion.

For VA compensation purposes, the normal maximum unassisted range of vertical jaw opening is from 35 to 50 millimeters.

For VA compensation purposes, mechanically altered foods are defined as altered by blending, chopping, grinding, or mashing so that they are easy to chew and swallow. There are four levels of mechanically altered foods: full liquid, puree, soft, and semisolid foods. To warrant elevation based on mechanically altered foods, the use of texture modified diets must be recorded or verified by a physician.

Factual Background

The Veteran filed a service connection claim prior to his separation from active service. The November 2023 rating decision granted service connection for right TMD and assigned an initial noncompensable disability rating effective October 25, 2023, the day after the Veteran's separation from active service. The Veteran asserted that he was entitled to a higher disability rating.

In July 2023, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination. The examiner indicated that the Veteran's TMD resulted in right lateral excursion greater than 4 millimeters and interincisal distance of 0 to 10 millimeters during flare-ups. The examiner indicated that the Veteran did not require a mechanically altered food diet.

Analysis

After a complete review of the entire record, the Board finds that the weight of the evidence supports the assignment of a 40 percent disability rating.

The July 2023 VA examination showed that the Veteran's TMD resulted in interincisal distance of 0 to 10 millimeters during flare-ups but did not require a mechanically altered food diet, which is consistent with a 40 percent disability rating. As the Veteran did not require a mechanically altered food diet, a 50 percent disability rating is not warranted.

Accordingly, the criteria are met to establish an initial disability rating of 40 percent for TMD, and the claim is granted.

Right Ear Eustachian Tube Dysfunction

Legal Criteria - Eustachian Tube Dysfunction

The Veteran's right ear eustachian tube dysfunction is rated under Diagnostic Code 6204 for peripheral vestibular disorders. A 10 percent disability rating is assigned for occasional dizziness. A 30 percent disability rating is assigned for dizziness and occasional staggering. 

Factual Background

The Veteran filed a service connection claim prior to his separation from active service. The November 2023 rating decision granted service connection for right ear eustachian tube dysfunction and assigned an initial noncompensable disability rating effective October 25, 2023, the day after the Veteran's separation from active service. The Veteran asserted that he was entitled to a higher disability rating.

The Veteran's medical records show do not show findings consistent with a compensable rating.

In July 2023, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination. He reported that he experienced muffled hearing and ear pain. He reported that his condition had remained the same since his active service. The examiner indicated that the Veteran's right ear eustachian tube dysfunction resulted in muffled hearing, pain, and congestion. The examiner indicated that the Veteran did not have vertigo.

Analysis

After a complete review of the entire record, the Board finds that the weight of the evidence does not support the assignment of a compensable disability rating.

The July 2023 VA examination showed that the Veteran's right ear eustachian tube dysfunction did not result in dizziness or staggering, which would warrant a compensable disability rating.

The Board acknowledges that the Veteran's right ear eustachian tube dysfunction may be frustrating and cause some functional limitations. However, it is specifically based on the types and severity of this impairment for which the noncompensable disability rating is assigned.

Accordingly, the criteria are not met to establish an initial compensable disability rating for right ear eustachian tube dysfunction, and the claim is denied.

Erectile Dysfunction

Legal Criteria - Erectile Dysfunction

Under Diagnostic Code 7522 for erectile dysfunction, a noncompensable rating is assigned for erectile dysfunction, with or without penile deformity. While there is no compensable rating for this disability under Diagnostic Code 7522, the rating schedule instructs that a veteran should be evaluated for special monthly compensation (SMC) for loss of use of a creative organ under 38 C.F.R. § 1114(k). The Board notes that the Veteran is already in receipt of this benefit.

Factual Background and Analysis

The Veteran filed a service connection claim prior to his separation from active service. The November 2023 rating decision granted service connection for erectile dysfunction and assigned an initial noncompensable disability rating effective October 25, 2023, the day after the Veteran's separation from active service. The Veteran asserted that he was entitled to a compensable rating.

The Veteran's erectile dysfunction has been assigned the maximum schedular rating available under Diagnostic Code 7522, a noncompensable rating. Therefore, there is no legal basis for a higher schedular rating.

Accordingly, the criteria are not met to establish an initial compensable disability rating for erectile dysfunction, and the claim must be denied.

 

 

M. MILLS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	T. Berryman, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.