Citation Nr: A25034778
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 240827-468936
DATE: April 15, 2025

ORDER

The severance of service connection for other specified anxiety disorder was improper; restoration of service connection is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

The grant of service connection for other specified anxiety disorder was not clearly and unmistakably erroneous.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for restoration of service connection for other specified anxiety disorder have been met. 38 U.S.C. § 5112; 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(d).

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Navy from September 1998 to September 2002.

In the August 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Evidence Submission docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the April 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review in the August 2024 HLR decision, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or his representative with, or within 90 days from receipt of, the VA Form 10182. 38 C.F.R. § 20.303. If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review and prior to the date the Board received the VA Form 10182, or (2) more than 90 days following the date the Board received the VA Form 10182, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.303, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

The Board finds it necessary to properly characterize the issue on appeal. The August 2024 HLR rating decision on appeal characterized the issue as "service connection for other specified anxiety disorder." However, what the Veteran actually appealed was the AOJ's severance of service connection in an April 2024 rating decision. The Veteran requested HLR review of that severance, and the HLR decision on appeal mischaracterized the issue as one of service connection. The Board reiterates that the issue is properly characterized as an appeal of the propriety of the severance of service connection for anxiety disorder, and request for restoration thereof.

Severance of service connection for other specified anxiety disorder 

The Veteran contends that the severance of service connection for other specified anxiety disorder was improper, and that service connection should be restored. The Board agrees.

Service connection will be severed only where evidence establishes that it is clearly and unmistakably erroneous (CUE) (the burden of proof being on the Government). 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(d). 

Certain procedural requirements apply where service connection is to be severed, and if they are not followed, the severance of service connection is generally void ab initio. Specifically, a rating proposing severance must be prepared setting forth all material facts and reasons. The Veteran must be notified at his or her latest address of record of the contemplated action and the detailed reasons therefore, and must be given 60 days to present additional evidence to show that service connection should be maintained.?38?C.F.R. §?3.105?(d). The Veteran may also request a hearing within 30 days of receiving notice.?38?C.F.R. §?3.105?(i). Unless otherwise provided in 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(i), if additional evidence is not received within that period, final rating action will be taken and the award will be reduced or discontinued, if in order, effective the last day of the month in which a 60-day period from the date of notice to the beneficiary of the final rating action expires. 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(d). 

To establish that a grant of service connection was the product of CUE, VA must show that (1) either the correct facts as they were known at the time were not before the adjudicator, the adjudicator made an erroneous factual finding, or the statutory or regulatory provisions were incorrectly applied; (2) the alleged error was undebatable, not merely a disagreement as to how the facts were weighed or evaluated; and (3) the error manifestly changed the outcome of the prior decision. See Allen v. Nicholson, 21?Vet. App.?54, 58-59 (2007); Stallworth v. Nicholson, 20?Vet. App.?482, 487-88; cf. Bustos v. West, 179 F.3d 1378, 1380-81 (Fed. Cir. 1999); Damrel v. Brown, 6?Vet. App.?242, 245 (1994); Russell v. Principi, 3?Vet. App.?310, 313-14, 319 (1992) (en banc). A clear and unmistakable error is one about which reasonable minds could not differ. See, e.g., 38 C.F.R. § 20.1403(a). 

A change in diagnosis may be accepted as a basis for severance action if the examining physician or physicians or other proper medical authority certifies that, in the light of all accumulated evidence, the diagnosis on which service connection was predicated is clearly erroneous. This certification must be accompanied by a summary of the facts, findings, and reasons supporting the conclusion. 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(d).

In most respects, the CUE standard for severing service connection under 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(d) is equivalent to the CUE standard for reversing or revising a prior final decision under 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(a). See Baughman v. Derwinski, 1?Vet. App.?563, 566 (1991). Section 3.105(d) places at least as high a burden of proof on the VA when it seeks to sever service connection as § 3.105(a) places upon an appellant seeking to have an unfavorable previous determination overturned. See id. 

However, the determination is not limited to the law and the record that existed at the time of the original decision. VA may consider medical evidence and diagnoses that postdate the original award of service connection. Stallworth, 20 Vet. App. at 488. In that regard, VA must prove that it is "currently clearly and unmistakably erroneous for the claimant to be service connected." See McCauley v. McDonough, U.S. Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims, No. 23-1692 (May 20, 2024). Thus, there must be a showing that service connection could not be granted or maintained "under any theory" raised by the claimant or reasonably raised by the record. Id. 

As an initial matter, the Board finds that the AOJ followed the prescribed due process steps in severing service connection. The Veteran was initially notified of the proposed severance in August 2022. The Veteran was notified the same month at his latest address of record of the contemplated action and furnished detailed reasons therefor and was given 60 days for the presentation of additional evidence to show that service connection should be maintained. The notice letter also informed the Veteran that he had the opportunity for a predetermination hearing if such request was received by VA within 30 days of the date of the notice. The Veteran then received the same notification two months later, in October 2022. The Veteran submitted additional medical records in November 2022 and January 2023, which addressed his psychiatric symptoms, but did not address the issue of the claimed in-service incident. In March 2023, the AOJ requested additional information from the Veteran regarding a claimed in-service incident, without response. The AOJ then issued another proposed rating reduction in May 2023 containing the same due process notifications. The Veteran did not submit anything further related to his psychiatric disorder or request a hearing.

The AOJ then issued a rating decision in April 2024, which severed service connection for other specified anxiety disorder, effective July 1, 2024. This date was greater than the last day of the month after the expiration of a 60-day period from the date of the initial notice. Notice of this rating decision, plus his appeal rights, was sent to the Veteran under an April 2024 cover letter. Thus, all due process requirements were met in severing service connection. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.105(d). The Veteran's HLR request was submitted in May 2024, and adjudicated in August 2024, as discussed above. This appeal timely followed.

Having met due process requirements, the remaining question before the Board in this case is whether the grant of service connection for other specified anxiety disorder was clearly and unmistakably erroneous.

The Veteran submitted a claim in September 2021, seeking service connection for several conditions, including posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD). In December 2021, the AOJ granted service connection for other specified anxiety disorder (not PTSD). 

This December 2021 grant of service connection was based on a positive medical nexus opinion contained in an October 2021 VA examination. In that examination, a VA examiner diagnosed the Veteran with other specified anxiety disorder, and noted the Veteran reported symptoms of anxiety and nightmares associated with witnessing an in-service forklift accident, as well as avoidance of forklift/heavy equipment, sleep impairment, distrust of others, and social anxiety. The examiner specifically noted the "claimant appeared to be a reliable historian," and opined that the Veteran's reported in-service event of witnessing a forklift accident which caused injury to another servicemember had a nexus to the currently diagnosed anxiety disorder. Notably, although the Veteran had claimed PTSD, he was not diagnosed with PTSD by the VA examiner.

In July 2022, the AOJ contacted the Veteran and requested "details regarding the stressful event(s) that caused your post traumatic stress disorder." The AOJ stated that "the information we received does not meet the minimum level of detail needed" to attempt to verify the claimed stressful incident. It is unclear why VA sent this letter, as service connection had already been granted for an acquired psychiatric disorder (anxiety), and there was no indication at that point the Veteran continued to separately pursue a claim for PTSD.

In August 2022, the AOJ proposed to sever service connection for other specified anxiety disorder on the basis that the grant of service connection was CUE. Specifically, the AOJ stated that although the VA examination had provided a positive nexus opinion, the Veteran's reported in-service stressor had not been verified. The internal VA document noted that the examiner had not diagnosed PTSD, but rather anxiety disorder, had linked it to the claimed stressor incident, and then stated that "a conceded stressor is required to establish service connection," citing 38 C.F.R. § 3.304(f).

Generally, service connection for a disability requires evidence of: (1)?a current disability; (2)?in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by service-the "nexus" requirement. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166-67 (Fed. Cir. 2004). Establishing service connection for PTSD has unique requirements; the evidence must show: (1) a current diagnosis of PTSD; (2) credible supporting evidence that the claimed in-service stressor occurred; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the in-service stressor. 38 C.F.R. §3.304 (f)(1), 4.125(a). 

The Board finds that the AOJ erred in requiring the stressor verification process described in 38 C.F.R. § 3.304(f) and in basing severance on the lack of a verified stressor. The Veteran was not diagnosed with PTSD. While the AOJ was unable to verify any specific stressor incident in service, actual verification of the stressor event is not required to establish service connection for psychiatric disorders other than PTSD, if the evidence is otherwise at least in approximate balance that the disease is etiologically related to service. Here, there is probative medical evidence (the October 2021 VA examination) which relates the Veteran's reported military experiences to his current diagnosis of anxiety disorder. 

That October 2021 evaluation was provided by a competent psychologist, whose findings are consistent with the other evidence of record, to include the nature and circumstances of the Veteran's service and military occupational specialty. The evaluation constitutes probative medical evidence, as it was based on an in-person interview of the Veteran, whom the examiner found to be a reliable historian, and also took into consideration the Veteran's medical history. The Board finds that the October 2021 examiner's positive nexus opinion was supported by adequate rationale to support the findings. See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 308 (2008). The Board does not have a reason based on the evidentiary record before it to find that the Veteran's reported in-service incident lacks credibility or that the examiner clearly erred in accepting his version of events.

Another VA examination was obtained in March 2023. While the initial VA examiner had indicated the Veteran was a reliable historian, seemingly accepted as true his statements detailing in-service events, and concluded those events had a nexus to his current anxiety disorder, the March 2023 VA examiner suggested the Veteran was exaggerating his symptoms and called into question the credibility of his statements. 

The Board acknowledges that in rendering diagnoses, mental health providers must necessarily conduct some degree of credibility assessment. As previously noted, the initial VA examiner obviously found the Veteran to be sufficiently credible, and, in finding a nexus between his current condition and the claimed in-service event, implicitly concluded this incident was consistent with the circumstances of his service. The March 2023 VA examiner did not find the Veteran to be credible in terms of the severity of his symptoms, but did not specifically address whether the claimed in-service incidents likely occurred. That was left to the AOJ, which again attempted to obtain corroboration of the claimed incidents-as is required for PTSD claims. To that end, the AOJ sent a letter to the Veteran in March 2023 requesting more information about the "stressful events" to attempt to verify their occurrence. However, the Board reiterates that psychiatric diagnoses aside from PTSD do not require independent verification of the claimed stressor events. 

In the April 2024 severance, the AOJ stated that the grant of service connection for anxiety disorder was CUE, because the Veteran's claimed stressor had not been verified. But this severance action was based on the faulty premise that independent verification of the claimed "stressor" event(s) was required because the Veteran had claimed PTSD - even though service connection had been granted for an anxiety disorder and not PTSD. As the AOJ was unable to verify the claimed stressor involving witnessing a forklift accident and injury, it deemed severance to be warranted. 

But, again, actual verification of the stressor event is not required to establish service connection for disorders other than PTSD if the evidence is otherwise at least in approximate balance that it began in service. VA shall consider all information and lay and medical evidence of record in a case and when there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, VA shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

In this case, the Veteran was not ultimately diagnosed with PTSD by the October 2021 VA examiner, but with an anxiety disorder. As such, independent verification of the in-service event was not required. Rather, the AOJ instead was to weigh the evidence of record, to include the Veteran's lay statements and assess whether the statements were consistent with the circumstances of his service. The AOJ apparently concluded in the initial decision granting service connection that the evidence in support of service connection was at least in approximate balance. 

Upon review of the evidence of record, the Board finds that the severance cannot be upheld. The AOJ improperly applied the 38 C.F.R. § 3.304(f) requirements for corroborating a claim for PTSD, which was not required in this case involving a diagnosis of an anxiety disorder. The Veteran is competent to report incidents of which he has firsthand knowledge, and events he witnessed, as well as observable psychiatric symptoms. See Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 471 (1994). 

The Board acknowledges that the credibility of the Veteran's statements has been called into question. There is both positive evidence supporting the claim (i.e., supporting the grant of service connection) and negative evidence against the claim (i.e., supporting the severance of service connection). On this record, reasonable minds could disagree as to the ultimate determination-a determination which essentially amounts to no more than a disagreement as to how to weigh the facts. 

In the context of a severance case, a disagreement as to how to weigh the facts is legally insufficient to establish that the award of service connection was clearly erroneous. The appeal before the Board is not a claim of service connection to be evaluated as to whether the claim should be granted based upon a finding of an approximate balance of positive evidence; nor denied because the persuasive weight of the evidence would be against the claim. Rather, the standard to be employed for severance is whether there is "clear and unmistakable evidence" of an error. 

The Board cannot find that it is clear and unmistakable that the grant of service connection was error, or that the Veteran did NOT experience the in-service incident he has reported. Nor is it "undebatable" that he did NOT experience the onset or development of a psychiatric disorder as a result of such experience (i.e., a nexus). The initial VA examiner accepted the Veteran's lay statements and version of events as to what occurred during his active service period and diagnosed a psychiatric condition which that examiner concluded had onset as a result of-and was consistent with residuals of-the in-service event described.  

In summary, reasonable minds could differ as to the ultimate determination of whether the rating decision granting the benefits was erroneous. The Board reiterates that in the context of a severance case, a disagreement as to how to weigh the facts is legally insufficient to establish that the award of service connection was clearly erroneous. In that regard, the Board finds that VA has not met its burden of demonstrating CUE in the December 2021 rating decision granting service connection for other specified anxiety depressive disorder. 

Therefore, severance of service connection for other specified anxiety disorder was improper, and restoration of service connection is granted, effective to the date of severance-July 1, 2024.

 

 

JENNIFER HWA

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Medley, Amanda T.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.