Citation Nr: A25034064
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 240430-436209
DATE: April 11, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 30 percent for service-connected unspecified depressive disorder with anxious distress is denied.

FINDING OF FACT

Throughout the period on appeal, the Veteran's service-connected unspecified depressive disorder with anxious distress resulted in no more than occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks, although generally functioning satisfactorily, with routine behavior, self-care, and conversation normal.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 30 percent for service-connected unspecified depressive disorder with anxious distress have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § §§ 3.102, 4.130, Diagnostic Code 9435.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty from April 2008 to May 2016.

The rating decision on appeal was issued in April 2024; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.2400(a)(1). 

In November 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR), and requested review of a June 2023 rating decision.  In April 2024, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the HLR rating decision on appeal, which considered the evidence of record at the time of the prior decision. 

In the April 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Under the Legacy system, the Board decided the appropriate rating to be assigned up to the date of the Board decision.  The AMA statutes and regulations are silent as to when the rating period on appeal ends.  However, the intent of the AMA was to streamline VA's adjudicatory process to make the Board more of an appellate body.  See 83 Fed. Reg. 39,818 (Aug. 10, 2018).  Although not precedential in nature, a Memorandum Decision by the Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (the Court) addressed whether the rating period on appeal could end at the date of the AOJ decision on appeal rather at the time of the Board decision.  In Meuzelaar v. McDonough, 2024 U.S. App. Vet. Claims LEXIS 446 (March 28, 2024), the Court specifically noted "we cannot find any statute or regulation that supports such an interpretation of the AMA."  See Bethea v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 252, 254 (1992) (single judge memorandum decisions may be relied upon for any persuasiveness or reasoning they contain).  The Board finds this reasoning to be persuasive.  

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the June 2023 AOJ rating decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review, the Board did not consider it in its decision.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

The Veteran appeals the initial rating of 30 percent disabling for service-connected unspecified depressive disorder with anxious distress under Diagnostic Code 9435, effective as of May 22, 2023.  

The Veteran sought service connection for depressive disorder with anxious features in a May 22, 2023, claim.  A June 16, 2023, rating decision granted service connection at 30 percent disabling effective May 22, 2023.  Following a November 2023 Higher-Level Review request, an April 2024 rating decision continued the 30 percent rating and the Veteran perfected his appeal.  The Board finds that the AMA continuous pursuit rules apply and that the Veteran has continuously pursued the initial rating claim per AMA rules.  See 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.2500(c)(3), 3.2500(f), 3.2500(h).  Therefore, the period on appeal is from May 22, 2023, and ends with the June 16, 2023, rating decision on appeal.

Disability evaluations are determined by evaluating the extent to which a Veteran's service-connected disability adversely affects her ability to function under the ordinary conditions of daily life, including employment, by comparing her symptomatology with the criteria set forth in the Schedule for Rating Disabilities (Rating Schedule).  38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.10.

If two evaluations are potentially applicable, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that evaluation; otherwise, the lower evaluation will be assigned.  38 C.F.R. § 4.7.

Staged ratings are appropriate for any rating claim when the factual findings show distinct time periods during the appeal period where the service-connected disability exhibits symptoms that would warrant different ratings.  Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007).

All psychiatric disorders are evaluated under a general rating formula for mental disorders.  38 C.F.R. § 4.130.  Under the general rating formula, a 30 percent rating is assigned when there is occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks (although generally functioning satisfactorily, with routine behavior, self-care, and conversation normal), due to such symptoms as: depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks (weekly or less often), chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss (such as forgetting names, directions, recent events).

A 50 percent rating is warranted for occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to such symptoms as: flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty understanding complex commands; impairment of short- and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment, impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships. 

A 70 percent evaluation is warranted for occupational and social impairment, with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately, and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful situations (including work or a work-like setting); and inability to establish and maintain effective relationships.

Finally, a total schedular rating of 100 percent is warranted when the disorder results in total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of mental and personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name.

The symptoms listed in the rating schedule are not intended to constitute an exhaustive list, but rather serve as examples of the type and degree of the symptoms, or their effects, that would justify a particular rating.  See Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436 (2002).  Nevertheless, all ratings in the general rating formula are associated with objectively observable symptomatology, and "a veteran may only qualify for a given disability rating under § 4.130 by demonstrating the particular symptoms associated with that percentage, or others of similar severity, frequency, and duration."  Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 117 (Fed. Cir. 2013). 

Further, "§ 4.130 requires not only the presence of certain symptoms but also that those symptoms have caused occupational and social impairment in most of the referenced areas." Thus, "[a]lthough the veteran's symptomatology is the primary consideration, the regulation also requires an ultimate factual conclusion as to the veteran's level of impairment in 'most areas.'" Id. at 118.

When words are not specifically defined in a regulation, it is presumed that VA regulations employ words according to their ordinary dictionary readings at the time the regulations were promulgated. Moody v. Wilkie, 30 Vet. App. 329, 336 (2018).  In the context of medical definitions, the CAVC has found it appropriate to refer to definitions in the Merriam-Webster dictionary.  See, e.g., Holmes v. Wilkie, 33 Vet. App. 67, 71 (2020). Accordingly, the Board will employ the Merriam-Webster dictionary meanings when necessary. 

As such, the Board will consider both the Veteran's specific symptomatology as well as the occupational and social impairment associated with the rating code to determine whether an increased evaluation is warranted.

Turning to the evidence, the record reflects that the Veteran underwent mental health treatment in service.  However, following his discharge in 2016, he stated that he did not participate in any further mental health treatment.  There are no other complaints of or treatment for his depressive disorder other than the examinations and opinions discussed below.

The Veteran submitted a private medical opinion in May 2023 from a psychologist who diagnosed the Veteran with depressive disorder with anxious features.  The psychologist summarized the Veteran's mental health disorder as causing occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgement, thinking, or mood.  

At the time of the examination, the Veteran reported being irritable, self-isolating, and quick-tempered with his family, girlfriend, and the girlfriend's children.  He stated that his symptoms cause tension, fights, and other conflicts.  He also has difficulty with physical intimacy which causes frustration and distress.  The Veteran indicated that his gastrointestinal (GI) issues were unpredictable and caused anxiety, affecting his eating and shopping plans.  He also had difficulty completing tasks at home and his mood was adversely impacted.  The Veteran's hobbies of running, bowling, and bike riding, and socializing overall had become difficult as a result of his GI issues.  

The Veteran had a Bachelor's degree and was employed at the time of examination.  The clinician noted that the Veteran's GI symptoms impacted his ability to work, as he has to use the restroom unexpectedly.  The Veteran reported he could not enjoy himself, his work assignments, or his work travel. 

At the examination, the Veteran also discussed the following symptoms: anxiety, persistent depression, irritability, being agitated, short-tempered, self-isolating/withdrawal, neglecting self-care (may skip showering when not working), difficulty in staying asleep, having occasional nightmares, problems with focus, concentration, and information recall, and road rage.  The Veteran denied past or present suicidal or homicidal ideation.  

The clinician found that the Veteran exhibited the following symptoms: depressed mood, anxiety, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss, disturbance in motivation or mood, neglect of personal appearance and hygiene, intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living, difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, reduced activity, near-continuous panic or depression, inability to establish and maintain effective relationships, impaired abstract thinking, irritability, fatigue, relationship problems, poor self-esteem, guilt, social withdrawal, less interest in sex, and kinesiophobia.

The psychologist noted that the Veteran completed questionnaires as part of the assessment.  On Beck's Depression Inventory, the Veteran scored a 15, which placed him in the mild range for symptoms of depression.  On Beck's Anxiety Inventory, the Veteran scored a 7, which placed him in the minimal range for symptoms of anxiety.

The examiner made the following behavioral observations about the Veteran: he was casually dressed, polite, respectful, and cooperative; his speech was clear and coherent; he stayed on topic and answered the questions asked of him; he was oriented to person, place, time, and situation; and, his affect and mood were within normal limits.

Submitted on the same date as the private opinion was a McGill Pain Questionnaire which the Veteran had completed in reference to his scars, GERD, back, right ankle, and hernia.  Additionally, treatise evidence entitled "Chronic Pain Primer" was submitted.  The psychologist made no reference to either document in the private opinion, and the Board is unable to determine if the documents were relied upon in formulating an opinion.  However, the Board notes that these two documents were submitted in conjunction with the Veteran's claim for service connection of his mental health disorder, which was originally claimed as secondary to his other service-connected disabilities, and they support a theory of secondary service connection.  As service connection was granted, there is no prejudice to the Veteran in the examiners not considering these documents.

The Veteran was afforded a VA mental health examination in June 2023 and was diagnosed with unspecified depressive disorder with anxious distress.  The examiner summarized the Veteran's mental health disorder as causing occupational and social impairment due to mild or transient symptoms which decrease work efficiency and ability to perform occupational tasks only during periods of significant stress; or, symptoms controlled by medication.

At the time of the examination, the Veteran reported living with his girlfriend and her children and that he had an "okay" relationship with his girlfriend.  He described enjoying playing video games and bowling, and that they occasionally went to the beach.  

The Veteran had a Bachelor's degree in information security and was employed in IT at the time of examination, a position he had held for the past six years.  He described having a "little bit of [an] absence issue" due to acid reflux and/or having lengthy usage of the bathroom.

At the examination, the Veteran also discussed the following symptoms.  His GI issues caused social issues sometimes, a little anxiety, and being short-tempered.  GI issues have also caused relationship problems, as a lot of times he does not feel like having closeness and wants to be by himself.  The Veteran described similar experiences at work, he could be irritable and raise his voice.  He did not sleep well due to his acid reflux and back problems.  He had poor appetite and low energy.  The Veteran had anxiety about work production and how his peers thought of him.  He experienced problems at home due to wanting to be by himself, then guilt over not being there enough.  He had difficulties with intimacy.  The Veteran denied frequent crying spells, suicidal ideation, psychosis, or physically aggressive behavior.

The clinician found that the Veteran exhibited the following symptoms: depressed mood, anxiety, chronic sleep impairment, and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships.

The examiner made the following behavioral observations about the Veteran: he was appropriately dressed and groomed, and he interacted in a calm, polite manner. His mood/affect was dysphoric and restricted.  He did not appear unusually anxious.  His speech was normal and easily understood. There were no signs of psychosis or unusual behavior.  

Notably, the VA examiner reviewed the May 2023 private psychologist opinion.  The VA examiner opined that the level of impairment and symptom severity noted in the private opinion was not consistent with the face-valid testing completed at the time of that exam (Beck's Depression and Anxiety Inventories), which indicated mild depression and minimal anxiety.

The Veteran is service-connected for cholecystectomy residuals with gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) which has been separately rated.  The Board, therefore, considers the extent of occupational and social impairment related to the acquired psychiatric disorder.

The persuasive evidence is against a rating higher than 30 percent for the Veteran's mental health disability for any time during the appeal period.  The Veteran credibly reports symptomatology including depression, irritability, self-isolation, quick-temper, anxiety, skipping showers when not working, sleep impairment, nightmares, difficulty with concentration and recall, road rage, and difficulty with intimacy.

The Veteran describes disturbances of mood and motivation and as well as difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, which are examples listed as supporting a 50 percent rating.  He reports some memory difficulties, and concentration difficulties resulting in difficulty in completing tasks at home.  The private examiner described the Veteran's memory loss as mild in degree, and there is no lay or medical description of memory loss to the extent of retention of only highly learned material or forgetting to complete tasks.

The Veteran reports depression and anxiety which interferes with functioning, skipping showering when not working, road rage, interference with work, family relations, and mood as well as impairment involving adapting to stressful situations and establish and maintaining effective relationships.  There are all examples listed as supporting a 70 percent rating.  With respect to road rage as an example of impaired impulse control, the Board notes that the Veteran does not describe periods of violence.  

Within these examples, the Board must analyze the frequency, severity and duration of these symptoms and how they impact his occupational and social functioning.  Here, the record reflects a difference of medical opinion.  The probative value of a medical opinion is based, in part, on whether the examiner relied upon an accurate factual predicate.  Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 301 (2008); Reonal v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 458 (1993).  The Board is the ultimate fact finder on matters which do not require medical training.  See generally Kahana v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 428 (2011).

On a functional level, the private examiner assessment that the Veteran has an "inability" to establish and maintain effective relationships is not persuasive as there is clearly some ability.  The Veteran maintained personal relationships with his girlfriend and her children, and maintained employment throughout the appeal period.  He reported engaging in hobbies and going to the beach although having some limitation of activities primarily due to his GI symptoms.  The factual record persuasively shows an ability to establish and maintain effective relationships.

The private examiner identified neglect of personal appearance and hygiene as well as well as intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living.  The term "neglect" means give little attention to or respect to or disregard.  www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/neglect.  Here, the Veteran only mentions sometimes not taking showers when he is not working.  The frequency and severity of this dysfunction does not rise to the level of disregarding personal appearance and hygiene - or neglect overall.  The Board is also having difficulty in interpreting any statement of the Veteran as describing an intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living other than having difficult completing tasks at home.

The private examiner further assessed the Veteran has having impaired abstract thinking, but the mental status examination found that the Veteran's speech was clear and coherent, he stayed on topic and answered the questions asked of him, and was fully oriented.  There is a lack of factual support for this finding.

Finally, the private examiner assessed the Veteran as having near-continuous panic or depression.  Notably, the example for the 70 percent rating speaks to this symptom affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately, and effectively.  The term independent is defined as not requiring or relying on others (as for care or livelihood).  www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/independent.  The Veteran works in substantially gainful employment, and there is no report of him relying on others for his care in any significant way.  

Additionally, the June 2023 VA examiner reviewed the private report and specifically noted that the level of impairment and symptom severity noted in the private opinion was not consistent with the face-valid testing completed at the time of that exam (Beck's Depression and Anxiety Inventories), which indicated mild depression and minimal anxiety.  The Board finds this opinion to be persuasive particularly given that, at the June 2023 examination, discuss having a "little" anxiety which is not descriptive of near-continuous depression.  The private examiner opinion does not discuss the discrepancy involving the Beck's Depression and Anxiety Inventories.

As to the medical opinions of record, the private psychologist concluded that the Veteran's psychiatric symptoms were productive of occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgement, thinking, or mood while the VA examiner concluded that the Veteran's psychiatric symptoms were productive of mild or transient symptoms which decrease work efficiency and ability to perform occupational tasks only during periods of significant stress; or, symptoms controlled by medication.

For the reasons discussed above, the Board finds that the private psychologist opinion lacks factual support for some of the conclusions reached in the examination report.  The faulty factual basis reduces the overall probative value of this opinion.

On the other hand, the June 2023 VA examiner had benefit of review of reviewing the private psychologist opinion and the Beck's Depression and Anxiety Inventories as well as interviewing and conducting a mental status examination.  This examiner offered a rationale for the deficiencies in the private psychologist opinion which the Board finds persuasive, as discussed above.  The overall record reflects that the Veteran has no speech deficits, and has consistently worked in IT employment which demonstrates his ability to engage in abstract thinking, understanding of complex commands, and good judgement.  The Veteran denied suicidal and homicidal ideation.  Behaviorally, his thought processes, communication, and orientation to time and place were not impaired.  The Veteran's reports of anger and irritability do not rise to frequency and severity that more nearly approximates impaired impulse control or unprovoked irritability with periods of violence.  The record is silent for any violence committed or threatened by the Veteran during the appeal period.

While the Veteran is competent to report his symptoms and the Board finds that his lay statements are credible, he is not competent to determine the severity of his psychiatric disability, as it is medically complex and outside the scope of a lay person.  Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 (Fed. Cir. 2007).

In sum, the persuasive evidence establishes that the frequency, severity, and duration of the Veteran's psychiatric disorder is consistent with occupational and social impairment with occasional decrease in work efficiency and intermittent periods of inability to perform occupational tasks (although generally functioning satisfactorily, with routine behavior, self-care, and conversation normal).  The Veteran has not met, or more nearly approximated, the criteria for a rating in excess of 30 percent for any time during the appeal period.  To that extent, a rating in excess of 30 percent is denied.

 

T. MAINELLI

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	A. Estes

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.