Citation Nr: A25034889
Decision Date: 04/16/25	Archive Date: 04/16/25

DOCKET NO. 240824-468829
DATE: April 16, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for sinusitis is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Navy from September 1983 to February 1990.  He was thereafter a member of the United States Navy Reserve and the United States Air Force Reserve, during which he had periods of active duty for training and inactive duty training.  

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a March 2024 rating decision issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO), the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ), which, in pertinent part, readjudicated and denied a previously denied claim of service connection for chronic sinusitis.  

In September 2024, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), on which he identified the March 2024 rating decision denying service connection for sinusitis and elected the Direct review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2024 AOJ decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  

Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  However, because the Board is remanding the claim for service connection for sinusitis, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the re-adjudication of this claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

1. Entitlement to service connection for sinusitis.

The Veteran contends that he has chronic sinusitis which began on active duty.

Service connection may be granted for disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.  The three-element test for service connection requires evidence of: (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury.  Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166 -67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

The Veteran's initial claim for this disability was denied in a January 2018 rating decision, in part, because a January 2018 VA medical examination found no current sinusitis disability.   

While submitting his Supplemental claim in November 2023, the Veteran submitted a personal statement on which he claimed that he had experienced sinusitis since service which he treated with over the counter medications.  In addition, the Veteran submitted an excerpt of a June 1992 Annual Certificate of Physical Condition on which he reported that he had had a 5-day sinus infection for which he was prescribed medication.  The clinician noted sinus infection, resolved.  

The AOJ did not schedule the Veteran for a VA examination and denied the claim because the Veteran did not have a current disability.  This decision was based upon the x-ray findings from the January 2018 VA medical examination showing no sinus abnormality.   

After a review of the evidence of record, the Board finds that a VA examination was warranted after the Veteran filed his Supplemental claim in November 2023.  Having previously had documented cases of sinusitis, the Veteran is competent to report having experienced those same symptoms in the years between the denial of his claim in January 2018 and the filing of his Supplemental claim in November 2023.  There is a history of sinusitis while the Veteran was on active duty and the Veteran submitted additional evidence showing post-service treatment for sinusitis.  Given this, and the Veteran's statements that he has had symptoms which he believes to be indicative of sinusitis chronically since he was on active duty, the Board finds that there was at least an indication that the Veteran had symptoms of a disability which was associated with an in-service event, i.e. the in-service episode of sinusitis.  As such, a VA examination was necessary to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's claimed sinusitis.  38 C.F.R. § 3.159(d); see also McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006). 

As an examination was warranted as part of the duty to assist, and the AOJ did not schedule the Veteran for an examination and obtain a medical opinion, the Board finds that a duty to assist error occurred prior to the promulgation of the rating decision on appeal.  As such, the Board concludes that remand is warranted to correct this pre-decisional duty to assist error by the AOJ.  38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).  

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for a VA examination for purpose of ascertaining the nature and etiology of any sinusitis.  

After examining the Veteran and reviewing the record, the examiner should provide an opinion, with supporting rationale, as to the following:

Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran currently exhibits sinusitis?  If a diagnosis cannot be provided but the Veteran's condition manifests in symptoms that cause functional impairment in earning capacity, then the examiner should consider them a "disability" for the purpose of providing the requested opinion below.

If so, is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the identified disability had its onset during active duty or is otherwise causally related to an in-service disease or injury, to include the in-service episode of sinusitis or the Veteran's participation in a toxic exposure risk activity?    

In providing the requested opinion, consider the Veteran's description of the in-service injury and symptoms as well as post-service symptoms.  If there is any medical reason to accept or reject the proposition that the Veteran's reported symptoms in service and thereafter represented the onset of the current disability, this should be noted.  Stated another way, do the Veteran's reports about the symptoms align with how the currently diagnosed disability is known to develop or are the Veteran's reports generally inconsistent with medical knowledge or implausible?  The Board has not made a credibility determination pending the examiner's opinion.  

 

 

K. Conner

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Kleponis, Kevin

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.