Citation Nr: A25034528
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 240506-436686
DATE: April 15, 2025

REMANDED

Service connection for sleep apnea is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from September 1996 to September 2000. 

In January 2024, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR), and requested review of a January 2024 decision.  In April 2024, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the HLR decision on appeal, which considered the evidence of record at the time of the prior January 2024 decision.  

In the May 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the January 2024 AOJ decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of entitlement to service  connection for sleep apnea, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

1. Service connection for sleep apnea is remanded.

The issue of entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea is remanded to correct a duty to assist error that occurred prior to the January 2024 decision on appeal.

The Veteran seeks service connection for sleep apnea. Specifically, he contends sleep apnea is secondary to service-connected post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD).  See October 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ.

The January 2024 rating decision favorably found that participation in a toxic risk activity is conceded.  The Veteran served as a Mortarman, and toxic exposure is conceded.  The Veteran has been diagnosed with obstructive sleep apnea in August 2023.  The claimed primary disability, PTSD, is service-connected. The Board is bound by these favorable findings.

In December 2024, a VA examiner opined that the claimed condition is less likely than not caused by the exposure to toxins, fumes, and other substances after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran. The examiner explained that there is no medical or scientific evidence available that provides any indication of a relationship between the development of the condition at issue and the toxic exposure risk activities.

In addressing the Veteran's contention that his obstructive sleep apnea is secondary to service-connected PTSD, the December 2024 VA examiner opined that the claimed condition is less likely than not proximately due to the result of the Veteran's service-connected condition.  The examiner provided the rationale that PTSD and sleep apnea are not medically related.  Sleep apnea is a separate entity entirely from PTSD and unrelated to it.  A thorough review of medical literature fails to demonstrate a causal relationship.

The Board notes that while the December 2024 VA examiner explained that PTSD does not cause obstructive sleep apnea, the examiner did not attempt to address aggravation.  The failure to obtain an opinion that addresses aggravation, prior to the January 2024 rating decision on appeal is a pre-decisional duty to assist error that warrants a remand. El-Amin v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 136, 140 (2013); Atencio v. O'Rourke, 30 Vet. App. 74 (2018) (holding that causation and aggravation are independent concepts and should have separate findings and rationales).

Lastly, the Board notes that while the Veteran himself limited his claim to the theory of secondary service connection, the December 2024 VA examiner opined that the claimed condition is less likely than not incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness. The examiner provided the rationale that there is no medical record showing a diagnosis or treatment for obstructive sleep apnea while the Veteran was still in service. The Board finds this opinion inadequate as the examiner solely relies on the absence of records showing a diagnosis or treatment for sleep apnea in service. Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007) (once VA undertakes the effort to provide an examination, it must provide an adequate one or, at a minimum, notify the claimant why one will not or cannot be provided). Remand is required to correct this pre-decisional duty to assist error.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Forward the claims file to an appropriate VA clinician to obtain an addendum medical opinion regarding service connection for obstructive sleep apnea. An in-person examination is not required unless the clinician determines it is necessary. The clinician is asked to review all relevant evidence in the claims file. The clinician should then address the following:

(a.) Did sleep apnea have onset in service, or is sleep apnea otherwise etiologically related to the Veteran's period of service?

(b.) Whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea is due to, caused by, or aggravated by service-connected PTSD. 

A complete rationale should be provided for each opinion offered. 

 

 

Marcus N. Fulton

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Asare, Ama K.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.