Citation Nr: A25034116
Decision Date: 04/14/25	Archive Date: 04/14/25

DOCKET NO. 240822-465635
DATE: April 14, 2025

ORDER

Service connection for dermatitis is granted.

Service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and major depression, is denied.

Service connection for lower back pain is denied.

Service connection for tinnitus is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The evidence shows a current eczema disability; the symptoms of dermatitis had their onset during service, and they have been present since service separation. 

2. No psychiatric injury or disease, including symptoms, was manifested during service; the claimed stressors of a fellow service member's suicide and witnessing the firing of cruise missiles heading towards Afghanistan have not been corroborated by credible, independent evidence; the current psychiatric disability was manifested many years after service and is not related to service. 

3. Preexisting low back pain was "noted" at service entry; the preexisting low back pain did not increase in severity beyond its natural progression during service. 

4. The evidence shows a current disability of tinnitus; symptoms of tinnitus were not chronic in service, were not continuous since service, and did not manifest to a compensable degree within one year of service; the current tinnitus is not related to service. 

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. Resolving reasonable doubt in favor of the Veteran, the criteria for service connection for dermatitis, as directly incurred in service, have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

2. The criteria for service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include PTSD and major depression, have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 4.125.

3. Lower back pain preexisted active service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1153; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.304, 3.306.

4. The preexisting low back pain was not aggravated by service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1153, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.304, 3.306.

5. The criteria for service connection for tinnitus have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1112, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.307, 3.309. 

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran, who is the appellant, had active-duty service from October 1996 to October 2004.  

The instant case is on appeal to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from an August 2024 Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO) higher-level review rating decision. 

By way of procedural history, in May 2023 the Veteran filed a claim for service connection for dermatitis, PTSD, lower back pain, tinnitus, and other conditions.  An April 2024 rating decision denied, in relevant part, service connection for dermatitis, PTSD, lower back pain, and tinnitus.  The Veteran requested higher level review in April 2024, and an August 2024 higher-level review rating decision again denied service connection for dermatitis, PTSD, lower back pain, and tinnitus.  The Veteran filed a notice of disagreement in August 2024, and the January 2025 Informal Hearing Presentation requested the Board proceed with adjudication of the claims. 

In the August 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the April 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence.  38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Service Connection Legal Authority

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active military, naval, or air service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a).  Service connection may be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge, when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).

Service connection may be established on a direct basis when there is competent, credible evidence of: (1) a current disability; (2) a disease or injury in service, and; (3) a relationship or nexus between the current disability and any injury or disease during service.  Holton v. Shinseki, 557 F. 3d 1363, 1366 (Fed. Cir. 2009); Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163 (Fed. Cir. 2004); see also 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a), (d).

Service connection may be established on a presumptive basis for chronic diseases listed under 38 C.F.R. § 3.309(a) if chronic symptoms of the disease were shown in service; the disease was manifested to a compensable degree within a presumptive period, usually one year after service separation; or continuous symptoms of the disease were manifested since service.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1112, 1113; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303(b), 3.307, 3.309(a); see also Walker v. Shinseki, 708 F. 3d 1131 (Fed. Cir. 2013).  Tinnitus is considered by VA to be a "chronic" disease (an organic disease of the nervous system) under 38 C.F.R. § 3.309(a).  

Service connection for PTSD may be established when there is: 1) a current medical diagnosis of PTSD in accordance with 38 C.F.R. § 4.125(a); (2) combat status or credible supporting evidence that the claimed in-service stressor occurred; and (3) medical evidence of a causal nexus between diagnosed PTSD and the claimed in-service stressor.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303.

In this case, the Veteran did not have combat service and was not exposed to hostile military or terrorist activity; therefore, the presumptions afforded to combat veterans and veterans who allege fear of hostile military or terrorist activity are inapplicable in this case.  Any alleged in-service stressors must be independently verified, i.e., corroborated by objective credible supporting evidence.  See 38 U.S.C. § 1154(b).  

1. Service connection for dermatitis is granted.

The Veteran contends that he developed dermatitis in service, including on the neck and thigh, and he still has this skin disorder.  See May 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ; see also April 2024 VA Form 20-0996.

The August 2024 rating decision favorably found a qualifying disease had its onset during service as service treatment records indicated skin complaints in December 1999.  Under the AMA, the Board is bound by favorable findings made by the AOJ in the absence of evidence of clear and unmistakable error.  38?C.F.R. §?3.104(c).

The record shows the Veteran was treated in service in December 1999 for a rash on the waist and axilla/neck, which was assessed as eczema and xerosis.  See December 1999 service treatment records.  

Turning to the question of current diagnosis, after review of all the evidence of record, lay and medical, the Board finds that the evidence is in at least approximate balance on the question of whether there is a current dermatitis diagnosis.  With any claim for service connection (under any theory of entitlement), it is necessary for a current disability to be present.  See Brammer v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 223 (1992); see also McClain v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 319 (2007) (service connection may be warranted if there was a disability present at any point during the claim period, even if it is not currently present); Romanowsky v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 289 (2013) (when the record contains a recent diagnosis of disability immediately prior to a veteran filing a claim for benefits based on that disability, the report of diagnosis is relevant evidence that the Board must address in determining whether a current disability existed at the time the claim was filed or during its pendency). 

The Veteran filed the claim for service connection for dermatitis in May 2023.  In an August 2023 VA examination, the examiner determined there was not a current skin diagnosis.  See August 2023 Skin Diseases Disability Benefits Questionnaire (DBQ).  However, VA treatment records from December 2022, only five months prior to the claim, showed a diagnosis of nummular eczema on the left lower back and right thigh.  According to the National Eczema Association, nummular eczema, also known as nummular dermatitis, includes scattered circular, itchy, and possibly oozing patches on the skin that can return and tends to come back and appear in the same place on the body.  See Nummular Eczema, National Eczema Association, https://nationaleczema.org/types-of-eczema/nummular-eczema/ (last viewed April 10, 2025).  Given that nummular eczema is recurrent in nature and the Veteran was treated for the condition only five months prior to the claim, resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the nummular eczema was present during the claim period.     

After review of all the evidence of record, lay and medical, the Board finds that the evidence is in at least approximate balance on the question of whether the currently diagnosed dermatitis began during service, that is, had service onset to warrant direct service connection.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d); Horowitz v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 217, 222-23 (1993) (Board must discuss whether numerous lay statements in-service and post-service symptoms, when coupled with post-service diagnosis, result in an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence on the issue of service connection to trigger benefit of the doubt). 

Service treatment records show that the Veteran first sought treatment for skin symptoms in service.  In October 1996, the Veteran was treated for an itchy rash on the eyelids, and erythema was indicated.  In an annual physical during service in January 1999, the Veteran indicated that he had a skin condition, which was indicated as psoriasis.  In December 1999, the Veteran was treated for eczema and xerosis, with symptoms of a rash on the waist and axilla/neck.  A periodic health assessment in February 2001 did not include complaints, findings, or abnormalities of the skin.  The record did not contain a service separation examination.  However, post-service treatment records from November 2004, one month after separation, indicated complaints of an itchy rash on the upper eyelids and neck, including erythematous papules with scaling, and a rash on the inner thighs for two months.  The thigh symptoms were assessed as either fungal or eczema, and treatment  was prescription of both clotrimazole cream and hydrocortisone for the inner thighs and hydrocortisone for the neck.  Additional post-service VA treatment records from December 2022 indicated a diagnosis of nummular eczema on the left lower back and right thigh, and the Veteran reported previous use of hydrocortisone cream for symptoms.  

The Veteran's reported histories of onset of skin symptoms during service and since service are consistent with the evidence of record showing symptoms and treatment in service and within one month of separation from service, and the reported ongoing skin symptoms were consistent with post-service treatment record findings.  The Veteran is competent to report some symptoms of the skin condition that are capable of lay observation, such as the onset date of the eczema lesions, and its persistence since that date.  See McCartt v. West, 12 Vet. App. 164, 167-68 (1999) (implying that a veteran's allegations of skin disorder of boils, blotches, rash, soreness, and itching since service may be the type of condition lending itself to lay observation); Goss v. Brown, 9 Vet. App. 109, 113 (1996) (holding that a veteran's and other lay testimony of itching and peeling was competent evidence); Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007) (recognizing visible varicose veins as capable of lay observation).

For these reasons, and resolving reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Board finds that the current nummular eczema or nummular dermatitis began during service, that is, was directly incurred during service, as symptoms continued after service that later resulted in diagnosis; therefore, the criteria for direct service connection for dermatitis are met.  See 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

2. Service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include PTSD and major depression, is denied.

The Veteran contends that he developed PTSD from in service stressors, including a fellow service member's suicide and witnessing the firing of cruise missiles heading towards Afghanistan.  See May 2023 statement of Veteran.   

Based on the various diagnoses of the claimed symptoms, the Board has expanded the appeal for service connection for PTSD to include other diagnosed psychiatric disorders that include major depression.  See Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1, 4-5 (2009) (holding that a claimant without medical expertise cannot be expected to precisely delineate the diagnosis of a mental illness).

The August 2024 rating decision favorably found a diagnosed (current) disability as VA treatment records showed the Veteran was treated for mental health symptoms.  Under the AMA, the Board is bound by favorable findings made by the AOJ in the absence of evidence of clear and unmistakable error.  38?C.F.R. §?3.104(c).

The record shows a current diagnosis of recurrent major depression.  January 2024 VA treatment records indicated recurrent major depression when ruling out PTSD.  March 2023 VA treatment records indicated treatment for PTSD and insomnia.

After review of all the lay and medical evidence of record, the Board finds that the persuasive weight of the evidence is against finding that there was a verified stressor event or psychiatric injury or disease during service.  The service treatment records, which are complete, show no report, complaint, findings, diagnosis, or treatment for mental health problems.  Although the record did not contain a service separation examination, post-service VA treatment records from November 2004, one month after service, were negative for depression, anxiety, and hallucinations.  

Regarding the claimed in-service stressor events of seeing a fellow service member's body after suicide and witnessing the firing of cruise missiles heading towards Afghanistan, the RO attempted to elicit additional information from the Veteran about the dates of the incidents; however, the Veteran was unable to provide additional information on dates of the events.  See August 2023 statement of Veteran.  Thus, there is no independent corroborative evidence of either claimed stressor event. 

The earliest evidence of a psychiatric disability is shown in March 2023, approximately 19 years after service.  See December 2022 VA treatment records (indicating a negative PTSD screen, normal affect, and normal mood).  In March 2023 VA treatment records, the Veteran reported experiencing flashbacks/ recurrence, avoidance, hypervigilance, and negative self-beliefs since the late 1990s due to witnessing a shipmate die by suicide in 1997 and firing from the ship on Afghanistan.  He also reported current sleeping issues, nightmares, and anger.  The VA medical provider diagnosed PTSD and insomnia in March 2023, and in January 2024 updated the diagnosis to major depression, recurrent, and rule out PTSD.  

After weighing the evidence and finding there was no corroborated in-service stressor event, there remains no competent medical opinion evidence linking the current psychiatric disability, which was manifested 19 years after service separation, to the claimed but uncorroborated in-service stressor events.  The VA treatment records show that the current psychiatric disability was attributed by mental health providers to witnessing a shipmate die by suicide in 1997 and firing from the ship on Afghanistan; however, these claimed stressor events have not been sufficiently corroborated.  The medical opinions premised upon the occurrence of this claimed stressor rely on an inaccurate factual assumption that such claimed stressor events occurred during service.  This medical opinion based upon materially inaccurate factual assumptions is of no probative value.  See Reonal v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 458, 461 (1993) (holding that an opinion based upon an inaccurate factual premise has no probative value). 

The Veteran, as a lay person, is competent to report most psychiatric symptoms he has experienced at any given time, as well as to report a contemporaneous diagnosis by a medical provider, and to report a physical injury; however, under the facts of this case that include various potential psychological diagnoses, he is not competent to diagnose a psychiatric disability or render a competent opinion on the questions of causation because answers to such questions require expertise in the area of psychiatric disorders and falls outside the realm of common knowledge of a lay person.  See Young v. McDonald, 766 F.3d 1348, 1353 (Fed. Cir. 2014) (holding that "PTSD is not the type of medical condition that lay evidence... is competent and sufficient to identify").  The DSM-5 cautions that it was "not sufficient to simply check off the symptoms in the diagnostic criteria to make a mental disorder diagnosis."  Rather, clinical training is required "to recognize when the combination of predisposing, precipitating, perpetuating, and protective factors has resulted in a psychopathological condition in which physical signs and symptoms exceed normal ranges."  The "purpose of DSM-5 is to assist trained clinicians in the diagnosis" of various mental disorders.  Consequently, the Veteran's attribution of the current psychiatric disability to service is of no probative value.

Thus, the persuasive evidence shows no verified in-service stressor event, and shows no psychiatric symptoms until many years after service.  For these reasons, the appeal for service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include PTSD and major depression, must be denied.

3. Service connection for lower back pain is denied.

The Veteran contends that the preexisting lower back pain was aggravated by service.  See May 2023 VA Form 21-526EZ.

The August 2024 rating decision favorably found a current disability of back pain (VA treatment records).  Under the AMA, the Board is bound by favorable findings made by the AOJ in the absence of evidence of clear and unmistakable error.  38?C.F.R. §?3.104(c).

A veteran will be considered to have been in sound condition when examined, accepted, and enrolled for service, except as to defects, infirmities, or disorders noted at entrance into service, or where clear and unmistakable evidence demonstrates that an injury or disease existed prior thereto and was not aggravated by service.  38 U.S.C. § 1111.  Only such conditions as are recorded in examination reports are to be considered as noted.  38 C.F.R. § 3.304(b).

In this case, the evidence shows that preexisting and asymptomatic lower back pain was "noted" at entrance into service at an April 1996 examination.  As preexisting lower back pain was "noted" at service entrance in this case, the presumption of soundness of the lower back at entry into service that began in April 1996 does not attach.  38 U.S.C. § 1111.  Because preexisting lower back pain was noted at the time of entry into service, service connection for lower back pain disability may be granted only if it is shown that the preexisting lower back pain worsened in severity beyond its natural progression during service, i.e., was "aggravated by" service.  38 U.S.C. § 1153; 38 C.F.R. § 3.306.

A preexisting injury or disease will be considered to have been aggravated by active service where there is an increase in disability during such service, unless there is a specific finding that the increase in disability is due to the natural progress of the disease.  38 U.S.C. § 1153; 38 C.F.R. § 3.306; see Wagner v. Principi, 370 F.3d 1089, 1096 (Fed. Cir. 2004).  Clear and unmistakable evidence (obvious or manifest) is required to rebut the presumption of aggravation where the pre-service disability underwent an increase in severity during service. Aggravation may not be conceded where the disability underwent no increase in severity during service on the basis of all the evidence of record pertaining to the manifestations of the disability prior to, during, and subsequent to service.  38 C.F.R. § 3.306.

Of note is that the burdens and evidentiary standard to determine whether conditions noted at entrance into service were aggravated by service are different than the burdens and evidentiary standard to determine whether conditions not noted at entrance into service were aggravated.  If a preexisting condition noted at entrance into service is not shown to have as likely as not increased in severity during service, the analysis stops.  Only if such condition is shown by an as likely as not standard to have increased in severity during service does the analysis continue.  In such cases, the increase is presumed to have been due to service unless there is clear and unmistakable evidence that the increase during service was not beyond the natural progression of the condition.  Id.

On the question of aggravation, in this case, the persuasive weight of the lay and medical evidence shows that the preexisting lower back pain that was noted at service entrance did not increase in severity beyond a natural progression during service.  The Veteran had active service from October 1996 to October 2004.

The notation on the April 1996 service entrance examination indicated that prior to service the Veteran saw the chiropractor 20 times in 1993 for stiffness and pain in the lower back, and because the lower back was asymptomatic, no exercise program was prescribed.  There was mild decreased range of motion, then normal range of motion.  An x-ray indicated normal lumbar spine.  Other service treatment records were negative for reports of lower back injury, disease, or symptoms, including pain.  The service records are complete, and lower back pain symptoms are the type of symptoms that would have been reported during service, had such symptoms occurred.  

With regard to post-service lay and medical evidence as it bears on the question of whether there was worsening of lower back pain during service, post-service VA treatment records from November 2004, one month after service separation, indicated no musculoskeletal pain or weakness.  This evidence that is more contemporaneous to service than later histories showed no worsening of symptoms of lower back pain even soon after service, which is consistent with and reinforces the finding of no worsening of preexisting back disorder during service.  

In December 2022, 18 years after active service, VA treatment records indicated chronic lower back pain that had existed for only six months, and the Veteran was referred for a back brace.  At the time of seeking treatment 18 years after service for back symptoms that had just started over 17 years after service, the Veteran did not present a history of lower back pain in service or of worsening of back pain during service; rather, the Veteran reported only a six month history of back problems, reflecting recent onset or worsening of back problems over 17 years after service.  This history presented by the Veteran for treatment purposes is of high probative value because a person is expected to present an accurate medical history in order to receive good medical care and treatment.  

After filing a claim for VA compensation in May 2023, in June 2023, inconsistent with the history presented during treatment in December 2022, the Veteran began reporting that he hurt his back in service and had pain in service while working as a cook and that the pain was "catching up to him."  See June 2023 VA treatment records.  This history is inconsistent with the previous history the Veteran gave to the medical providers for treatment purposes, reporting only a six month history of back problems and not reporting any in-service back injury or symptoms.  A history of lower back pain symptoms dated back to service is the type of history that would have ordinarily been recorded during the normal course of treatment in order to receive efficacious medical care for the reported lower back pain.  See Fed. R. Evid. 803(7) (indicating that the absence of an entry in a record may be evidence against the existence of a fact if such a fact would ordinarily be recorded).

The Board has considered the Veteran's recent lay reports in June 2023 that he experienced lower back pain since service; however, these recent reported histories are inconsistent with and outweighed by other, more contemporaneous lay and medical evidence of record, including the Veteran's own prior medical histories presented during service and for treatment purposes after service.  The more contemporaneous lay and medical evidence, including the Veteran's medical histories made for treatment purposes, shows no such report of in-service lower back pain symptoms, disease, or injury other than the April 1996 service entrance examination, which notes preexisting lower back pain.  The absence of any in-service reports of low back injury or symptoms, complaints, findings, or treatment, or reference to treatment related to the lower back during active-duty service from October 1996 to October 2004, under the facts of this case, is one factor, among other factors considered by the Board, that tends to show that worsening did not occur during service but occurred many years after service in 2022.  

The Veteran specifically reported and sought treatment for other disorders during active-duty service, such as skin conditions, allergic rhinitis, bowel issues, and sore throat, without seeking treatment for problems with the lower back.  Given reports and treatment of other problems during active duty, the presence of aggravation of the pre-existing lower back pain would have likely been reported had it occurred.  The Veteran has not provided any explanation as to why lower back pain symptoms were not reported during service.

For these reasons, the Board finds that the persuasive weight of the evidence demonstrates that the preexisting lower back pain disability that was noted upon service entrance did not increase in severity during service, including beyond its normal progression (i.e., it was not aggravated by service) as defined by 38 U.S.C. § 1153 and 38 C.F.R. § 3.306.  For these reasons, the appeal for service connection for lower back pain must be denied.

4. Service connection for tinnitus is denied.

The Veteran contends that he developed tinnitus in service from exposure to loud noises.  See August 2023 Hearing Loss and Tinnitus DBQ.

The August 2024 rating decision favorably found a current disability of tinnitus (July 2023 VA examination), and the evidence showed a qualifying in-service noise event (military occupational specialty (MOS) of culinary specialist had a low probability of noise exposure in service).  Under the AMA, the Board is bound by favorable findings made by the AOJ in the absence of evidence of clear and unmistakable error.  38?C.F.R. §?3.104(c).

The persuasive weight of the lay and medical evidence in the record is against finding that the tinnitus manifested during service, manifested to a compensable degree within a year after active service, or exhibited continuity of symptoms since active service.  Service treatment records show no complaints of hearing problems or tinnitus.  See service treatment records April 1996 (indicating no complaints, findings, or abnormalities of hearing at enlistment examination) and February 2001 (indicating no complaints, findings, or abnormalities of hearing at periodic health assessment).  The service treatment records, which are complete, reflect that the Veteran was treated for other injuries and disorders during service for which he did seek treatment, including for the skin, allergic rhinitis, bowel issues, and sore throat, while simultaneously showing no complaints or symptoms of tinnitus.  In consideration of the other evidence included in the service treatment records showing complaints and treatment for various disorders it is likely that any history of injury, complaints, or symptoms of tinnitus would similarly have been mentioned during service and recorded in the service treatment records, had such symptoms occurred during service.  As a result, this absence of any in-service complaint, finding, or reference to treatment for tinnitus or related symptoms is one factor evidence that weighs against finding in-service tinnitus or chronic symptoms of tinnitus during service.

The absence of any in-service report of symptoms or complaint of tinnitus or related symptoms, under the specific facts of this case, is one factor, among other factors considered by the Board, including VA treatment records indicating yearly hearing tests beginning in December 2005 that do not include reports of tinnitus until September 2017, and a negative VA nexus opinion, that weigh against a finding of in-service tinnitus or chronic symptoms of tinnitus during service.  Kahana v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 428, 438 (2011) (stating that VA may use silence in the service treatment records as evidence contradictory to a veteran's assertions if the service treatment records appear to be complete and the injury, disease, or symptoms involved would ordinarily have been recorded had they occurred) (Lance, J., concurring); Buczynski v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 221, 224 (2011) (the absence of a notation in a record may only be considered if it is first shown both that the record is complete and also that the fact would have been recorded had it occurred); see also Fed. R. Evid. 803(7).

Similarly, post-service VA treatment records do not reflect any complaint or symptoms of tinnitus until December 2017, when the Veteran reported intermittent tinnitus lasting seconds, that was most noticeable in the quiet.  The Veteran had 10 prior post-service hearing conservation examinations for his employment from 2005 to 2016 wherein the hearing examination was silent for mention of tinnitus.  There is over a 13-year gap between service and the first appearance in the lay and medical evidence of the presence of tinnitus.  

While the Veteran is certainly competent to testify to in-service symptoms of tinnitus and post-service continuous symptoms of tinnitus because ringing in the ears is capable of lay observation, he did not begin reporting such histories until after he made the claim for compensation and was presenting a history at the August 2023 VA tinnitus compensation examination.  During the August 2023 VA examination, the Veteran reported to the examiner that the tinnitus began in active duty after exposure to loud noises over his military career and the bilateral, constant tinnitus did not progress since onset.  The more contemporaneous December 2017 report of intermittent tinnitus that lasted a few seconds, which was made for treatment purposes and does not include a history of tinnitus in service or since service, is inconsistent with, and of more probative value than, the Veteran's later report for compensation purposes in August 2023 that the tinnitus had been constant since service.  The December 2017 history is more contemporaneous, was made for treatment purposes, and is more consistent with the 10-year history of denial of hearing problems during annual employment hearing examinations from 2005 to 2016.  

There is over a 13-year gap between service and the first appearance in the lay and medical evidence of the presence of tinnitus, which weighs against findings of onset of tinnitus during service, chronic symptoms of tinnitus during service, tinnitus within one year of service, or continuous symptoms of tinnitus since service separation.  The Veteran did not provide any lay statements as to complaints or symptoms of tinnitus within one year after active service, or any subsequent histories indicating onset of tinnitus during service or within one year of service separation.  The more contemporaneous evidence of the tinnitus symptoms starting in 2017, as well as multiple employment examinations with no mention of tinnitus in or since service, weighs against a finding of continuity of symptomatology of tinnitus since service.  

The persuasive weight of the lay and medical evidence in the record is also against finding that the current tinnitus is related to credibly reported noise exposure during service.  On the question of nexus between the current tinnitus and noise exposure during service, a VA examiner provided a negative nexus opinion between the in-service acoustic trauma and the current tinnitus.  See August 2023 Hearing Loss and Tinnitus DBQ.  The rationale for the opinion is that, although the Veteran reported onset of tinnitus during active duty, there was no documentation for the development of tinnitus during service or within one year of separation from duty; tinnitus due to noise exposure in the military would have an onset during active service or very close to the time of separation; the MOS of cook had a low probability for hazardous noise exposure; there was no documentation for the development of hearing loss or standard threshold shifts during service and the August 2023 audiogram showed normal limits bilaterally.  The examiner considered the lay and medical evidence of record and provided an opinion with an adequate rationale; therefore, the negative opinion weighs against the element of direct nexus to service.  The factual assumptions supporting this nexus opinion - of no in-service tinnitus and no continuous tinnitus symptoms since service - are consistent with the Board's findings of fact in this case after weighing all the lay and medical evidence.

For the reasons described above, the Board finds that the persuasive weight of all the evidence, lay and medical, is against the appeal for service connection for tinnitus; therefore, the appeal must be denied. 

 

 

J. PARKER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	E. Beilsmith, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.