Citation Nr: A25034018
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 240514-442591
DATE: April 11, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to initial disability ratings for hepatitis C in excess of 20 percent prior to March 8, 2012, in excess of 40 percent from March 8, 2012, to December 21, 2012, and in excess of 20 percent from December 22, 2012, is denied.

Entitlement to an initial disability rating in excess for 50 percent for unspecified anxiety and depressive disorders is denied.

An effective date earlier than August 12, 2021, for the grant of a total disability rating based on individual unemployability (TDIU) is denied.

An effective date earlier than August 12, 2021, for eligibility for Dependents' Educational Assistance (DEA) benefits under 38 U.S.C. Chapter 35 is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. Throughout the appeal period, the Veteran's hepatitis C has been manifested by symptomatology more nearly approximating fatigue, malaise, right upper quadrant pain, and anorexia requiring dietary restriction or continuous medication without weight loss, hepatomegaly, or incapacitating episodes.

2. The severity, frequency, and duration of the Veteran's symptoms did not more closely approximate occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas or total occupational and social impairment.

3. Prior to August 12, 2021, the Veteran's service-connected disabilities did not render him unable to secure or follow substantially gainful employment.

4. Eligibility for DEA benefits under 38 U.S.C. Chapter 35 did not arise prior to August 12, 2021.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. Prior to March 8, 2012, and starting December 22, 2012, the criteria for a rating higher than 20 percent for hepatitis C have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.112, 4.114, Diagnostic Code 7354.

2. From March 8, 2012, to December 21, 2012, the criteria for a rating higher than 40 percent for hepatitis C have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.112, 4.114, Diagnostic Code 7354.

3. The criteria for an initial rating in excess of 50 percent for unspecified anxiety and depressive disorders have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.126, 4.130, Diagnostic Codes 9413-9435.

4. Prior to August 12, 2021, the criteria for TDIU have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 4.16.

5. The criteria for an effective date earlier than August17, 2020, for eligibility for DEA benefits under 38 U.S.C. Chapter 35 have not been met. 38 U.S.C. § 5110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.400, 3.807.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

For the Veteran's increased rating claim for hepatitis C, in August 2021, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, and requested readjudication of initial ratings for hepatitis C most recently addressed in a March 2021 rating decision. In November 2021, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued a supplemental claim decision, which found that new and relevant evidence had been received and denied the claim based on the evidence of record at the time of that decision. Although the Veteran initially requested Higher-Level Review when submitting the November 2022 VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR), in February 2023, the Higher-Level Reviewer determined that there had been a duty to assist error and transferred the claim to the Supplemental Claim decision review option for additional development. In November 2023, the AOJ issued a supplemental claim decision, decreasing the Veteran's disability rating based on the evidence of record at the time of that decision. In November 2023, the Veteran submitted an HLR, and requested review of a November 2023 decision. In February 2024, the AOJ issued the HLR decision on appeal, which considered the evidence of record at the time of the prior November 2023 decision. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the November 2023 decision and any evidence submitted during an applicable evidentiary window.  

For the Veteran's anxiety claim, in October 2023, the Veteran submitted HLR, and requested review of an October 2023 decision. In February 2024, the AOJ issued the HLR decision on appeal, which considered the evidence of record at the time of the prior October 2023 decision. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the October 2023 decision and any evidence submitted during an applicable evidentiary window.  

For the Veteran's TDIU and DEA earlier effective date claims, the rating decision on appeal was issued in February 2024 and constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.  

In the May 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

For the Veteran's hepatitis C claim, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the November 2023 AOJ decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. 

For the Veteran's anxiety claim, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the October 2023 AOJ decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301.

For the Veteran's TDIU claim, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the February 2024 AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. 

For all claims, any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim[s], considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

INITIAL RATINGS

Disability evaluations are determined by the application of a schedule of ratings which is based on average impairment of earning capacity. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. Part 4. Separate diagnostic codes identify the various disabilities. Where there is a question as to which of two evaluations should be applied, the higher evaluation will be assigned if that disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7. Any reasonable doubt regarding the degree of disability is resolved in favor of the veteran. 38 C.F.R. § 4.3.

In considering the severity of a disability, it is essential to trace the medical history of the veteran. 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.41. Consideration of the whole recorded history is necessary so that a rating may accurately reflect the elements of disability present. 38 C.F.R. § 4.2; Peyton v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 282 (1991).

Where a claimant appeals the initial rating assigned following an award of service connection, evidence contemporaneous with the claim for service connection and with the rating decision granting service connection would be most probative of the degree of disability existing at the time that the initial rating was assigned and should be the evidence "used to decide whether an [initial] rating on appeal was erroneous." Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119, 126 (1999). If later evidence obtained during the appeal period indicates that the degree of disability increased or decreased following the assignment of the initial rating, "staged" ratings may be assigned for separate periods of time based on facts found. Id.

1. Entitlement to initial disability ratings for hepatitis C in excess of 20 percent prior to March 8, 2012, in excess of 40 percent from March 8, 2012, to December 21, 2012, and in excess of 20 percent from December 22, 2012, is denied.

The Veteran's hepatitis C is evaluated under Diagnostic Code 7354. For the entirety of the appeal period, the provisions of Diagnostic Code 7354 allowed for a 20 percent rating requires daily fatigue, malaise, and anorexia (without weight loss or hepatomegaly), requiring dietary restriction or continuous medication, or; incapacitating episodes (with symptoms such as fatigue, malaise, nausea, vomiting, anorexia, arthralgia, and right upper quadrant pain) having a total duration of at least two weeks, but less than four weeks, during the past 12-month period.

A 40 percent rating requires daily fatigue, malaise, and anorexia, with minor weight loss and hepatomegaly (enlarged liver), or; incapacitating episodes (with symptoms such as fatigue, malaise, nausea, vomiting, anorexia, arthralgia, and right upper quadrant pain) having a total duration of at least four weeks, but less than six weeks, during the past 12-month period.

A 60 percent rating requires daily fatigue, malaise, and anorexia, with substantial weight loss (or other indication of malnutrition), and hepatomegaly, or; incapacitating episodes (with symptoms such as fatigue, malaise, nausea, vomiting, anorexia, arthralgia, and right upper quadrant pain) having a total duration of at least six weeks during the past 12-month period, but not occurring constantly.

A 100 percent rating requires near-constant debilitating symptoms (such as fatigue, malaise, nausea, vomiting, anorexia, arthralgia, and right upper quadrant pain). 38 C.F.R. § 4.114, Diagnostic Code 7354.

Note (1) in Diagnostic Code 7354 directs that sequelae, such as cirrhosis or malignancy of the liver, should be evaluated under an appropriate diagnostic code, but the same signs and symptoms should not be used as the basis for evaluation under Diagnostic Code 7354. Note (2) provides that, for purposes of evaluating conditions under Diagnostic Code 7354, "incapacitating episode" means a period of acute signs and symptoms severe enough to require bed rest and treatment by a physician.

Under 38 C.F.R. § 38 C.F.R. § 4.112, minor weight loss means a weight loss of 10 to 20 percent of the individual's baseline weight, sustained for three months or longer. The term substantial weight loss means a loss of greater than 20 percent of the individuals' baseline weight, sustained for three months or longer." Baseline weight means the average weight for the two-year period preceding the onset of the disease.

During the pendency of the appeal, the rating criteria for evaluating the Digestive System were amended effective May 19, 2024. If a law or regulation changes during a claim or an appeal, the version more favorable to the Veteran will apply, to the extent permitted by any stated effective date in the amendment in question. 38 U.S.C. § 5110(g); Kuzma v. Principi, 341 F.3d 1327 (Fed. Cir. 2003). If the revised version of the regulation is more favorable, the implementation of that regulation under 38 U.S.C. § 5110(g) can be no earlier than the effective date of that change. Id. Therefore, because the appeal period for this claim ends before May 19, 2024, the old version of the criteria shall be used.

Factual Background

Turning to the evidence of record, the Veteran submitted a statement dated in March 2007 indicated that his hepatitis became very active since November 2005. He reported bloating of the abdomen, painful urination, discolored stool, and very stiff hand. He stated he has a severe amount of pain in the abdomen and lower back. 

In November 2011 VA progress notes, the Veteran reported several days of feeling tired or having little energy and poor appetite or overeating. The Veteran reported he has been on Social Security Disability Insurance (SSDI) for a number of years, and was working part-time as a tutor at the local college, but was recently laid off. Upon physical examination, the abdomen was soft and non-tender, with no hepatosplenomegaly or jaundice. His weight was noted as 195lbs. 

In a December 2011 VA gastroenterology note, the examiner noted the Veteran's abdomen was soft, resonant, and nontender. 

In a January 2012 VA progress note, the Veteran described abdominal pain, but indicated this pain is generally worse on the left side of his body.  

A February 2012 VA progress noted the Veteran's weight as 192lbs. Upon physical examination, the abdomen was soft, non-tender in all quadrants, and there was no hepatosplenomegaly.

In a March 2022 VA gastroenterology note, the examiner noted the Veteran's abdomen was soft and non-tender with no hepatosplenomegaly. 

During an April 2012 VA examination, the examiner reported a diagnosis of hepatitis C. The Veteran reported his current symptoms included fatigue and occasional loss of appetite. He had been evaluated by the GI service and was taking medication for his hepatitis C. The examiner noted that continuous medication was required for control of the Veteran's liver condition. The Veteran endorsed symptoms of intermittent fatigue and intermittent anorexia. There was no evidence of malaise, nausea, vomiting, arthralgia, weight loss, or incapacitating episodes. The examiner noted the Veteran's hepatitis C does not impact his ability to work. 

In a May 2012 VA progress note, the examiner noted the Veteran started treatment for hepatitis C on April 4, 2012. The Veteran reported fatigue and weight loss. 

In a June 2012 VA progress note, the Veteran reported that going through chemotherapy for hepatitis C has been tough. He claimed the treatment is giving him fatigue, low energy, feeling sick, sore throat, sinus infection, and headaches. Upon physical examination, there was no hepatomegaly.

A subsequent June 2012 VA progress note indicated the Veteran complained of fatigue, insomnia, and rash with no other gastrointestinal complaints. His weight was noted as 186lbs. 

A July 2012 VA progress note showed the Veteran weight as 184lbs. 

In a September 2012 VA progress note, the Veteran reported that he finished his chemotherapy 2 weeks ago. He stated he is still not sleeping well and was having mood swings. He reported he was starting to have more energy.

In a December 2012 VA progress note, the Veteran reported he gained some of his weight back. He denied fatigue, irritability, depression, rash, weight loss, and hair thinning. His weight was noted as 188lbs. 

In a May 2013 VA progress note, the Veteran reported chronic fatigue and headaches. He denied abdominal pain and stated he was "just tired."

September 2013 VA progress notes indicated the Veteran's weight was up to 193lbs. The Veteran continued to complain of generalized pain, insomnia, and fatigue. The Veteran denied bowel habit changes, melena, change in appetite or weight changes.

In a December 2015 VA progress note, the Veteran presented with coughing and sore throat. He also complained of chronic joint and muscle pain with fatigue for three years. The examiner note the Veteran had previously been treated for hepatitis C and hypothyroidism. Upon physical examination, there was no evidence of organomegaly. 

The Veteran underwent another VA examination in June 2020. The examiner noted the Veteran finished treatment for hepatitis in September 2012. The Veteran endorsed symptoms of right upper quadrant abdominal pain. There was no evidence of fatigue, malaise, anorexia, nausea, vomiting, arthralgia, weight loss, or incapacitating episodes. The examiner noted the Veteran's hepatitis C does not impact his ability to work.

During a November 2020 VA examination, the Veteran reported right upper quadrant pain. 

In a December 2020 private evaluation, Dr. C. found that the Veteran's hepatitis C warrants a 10 percent disability evaluation from September 2011 to March 2012 due to intermittent fatigue, malaise, and anorexia without weight loss or incapacitating episodes. The doctor referred to a November 2011 VA progress note. Dr. C. found that the Veteran's hepatitis C warrants a 60 percent disability rating from March 1012 to December 2012 due to active treatment with PEG-interferon and ribavirin, for daily symptoms including fatigue, malaise, and anorexia with weight loss and debilitating episodes of nausea, vomiting, arthralgia, and right upper quadrant pain lasting at least 6 weeks. The examiner referred to treatment notes dated in June 2012, May 2012, and September 2012. For the period thereafter, Dr. C. found the Veteran's hepatitis C warrants a 20 percent rating for improvement of symptoms after completion of active treatment for daily fatigue, malaise, diffuse arthralgias, and persistent right upper quadrant pain. The examiner referred to treatment notes dated in September 2013, December 2015, and the June 2020 VA examination report. 

The Veteran underwent an additional VA examination in March 2021. The Veteran reported he continues to get monitored for his liver. The Veteran asserted his treatment for his hepatitis C caused painful urination, dried stools, and bloating and pain in his abdomen and depression. The Veteran stated he continues to have bloating and pain in his upper right abdomen and painful urination. The examiner noted the Veteran does not have any signs or symptoms attributable to chronic or infectious liver diseases, nor has the Veteran had any incapacitating episodes. 

In August 2021, the Veteran submitted self-completed hepatitis examination report asserting that from September 2011 to March 2012 he experienced daily fatigue, daily malaise, intermittent nausea and vomiting, and near-constant and debilitating right upper quadrant pain due to hepatitis. The Veteran asserted 6 weeks or more of incapacitating episodes. The Veteran reported near-constant and debilitating weakness, abdominal pain, and malaise due to cirrhosis of the liver. He asserted his weight dropped from 190lbs to 170lbs. He also asserted persistent jaundice. He stated his condition impacted his ability to work as he was in too much pain, had nausea, bloating and upper right-side discomfort on a daily basis. He also reported little to no appetite. 

In an August 2021 self-completed hepatitis examination report, the Veteran asserted that from March 9, 2012, through December 21, 2012, he experienced near-constant and debilitating fatigue, malaise, anorexia, nausea, and daily vomiting. He asserted weight loss due to hepatitis from 190lbs to 165lbs. He also reported near-constant and debilitating right upper quadrant pain. The Veteran asserted 6 weeks or more of incapacitating episodes. The Veteran reported near-constant and debilitating weakness, abdominal pain, and malaise due to cirrhosis of the liver. He asserted his weight dropped from 190lbs to 168lbs due to cirrhosis of the liver. He also asserted persistent jaundice. The Veteran asserted he had scarring on his liver and fatty liver. He stated he had no strength to work. He asserted he had never-ending pain throughout his body, near constant nausea, bloating, and upper right side constant pain with little to no appetite. 

In an August 2021 self-completed hepatitis examination report, the Veteran asserted that from December 22, 2012, to present, he experiences near-constant and debilitating fatigue and malaise, and intermittent nausea and vomiting. He asserted weight loss due to liver disease from 190lbs to 175lbs. He also reported daily right upper quadrant pain. The Veteran asserted 6 weeks or more of incapacitating episodes. The Veteran reported near-constant and debilitating weakness, abdominal pain, and malaise due to cirrhosis of the liver. He asserted his weight dropped from 190lbs to 180lbs due to cirrhosis of the liver. He stated he has no strength to work and that he has never-ending pain throughout his body, consistent nausea and bloating, and constant upper right side pain with varied appetite.

The Veteran underwent a VA examination in August 2022. The Veteran asserted he continues to constant dull pain and ongoing pain in the right side of the abdomen increasing with certain movement more with over exertion, burning with urination. The Veteran endorsed symptoms of daily fatigue, malaise, nausea, arthralgia, and right upper quadrant pain. The examiner noted at least 2 weeks, but less than 4 weeks of incapacitating episodes in the last 12 months. The examiner noted that chronic fatigue and pain make completing physical tasks difficult. He has difficulty with standing or walking for long periods of time and with lifting and carrying.

During an April 2023 VA examination, Veteran endorsed symptoms of intermittent fatigue and anorexia. The examiner noted no evidence of incapacitating episodes in the last 12 months. There were no signs or symptoms of cirrhosis. The examiner found the Veteran's hepatitis C did not impact his ability to work. 

Additional VA treatment records dated through March 2021 consistently show abdominal examinations with negative findings of muscle guarding, tenderness, or organomegaly.

Analysis

In this case, the Board finds the Veteran has experienced fatigue, malaise, anorexia, arthralgia, right upper quadrant pain, general abdominal pain, nausea, and a decreased appetite. However, despite his decreased appetite, the Veteran consistently maintained or even increased his weight. The Board recognizes that from February to July 2012, during his initial hepatitis C treatment, his weight went from 192lbs. to 183lbs. in about 6 months. This equates to a 6 percent weight loss, and, as such, does not constitute either a minor or significant weight loss. The Veteran's weight returned to 188lbs. by December 2012 and 193lbs by September 2013. There were no reports of or treatment for hepatomegaly at any time during the appeals period. 

The Board recognizes that the August 2022 VA examiner noted at least 2 weeks, but less than 4 weeks, of incapacitating episodes in the last 12 months. Additionally, the December 2020 private examiner found that the Veteran's hepatitis C manifested in debilitating episodes of nausea, vomiting, arthralgia, and right upper quadrant pain lasting at least 6 weeks during the period March 8, 2012, to December 21, 2012. As stated above, an incapacitating episode is a period of acute signs and symptoms severe enough to require bed rest and treatment by a physician. While the Veteran was frequently followed for hepatitis C by his VA providers, his VA medical records do not support he was prescribed a period of bed rest for any period of time. The December 2020 private examiner referred to treatment notes dated in June 2012, May 2012, and September 2012, but none of these records showed doctor proscribed bedrest. Even assuming the VA examiner's description of incapacitating episodes was correct, the Veteran's 2 weeks of incapacitating episodes would not warrant a disability rating above the currently assigned 20 percent disability rating assigned for that time period. 

While the Veteran reported fatigue, malaise, and anorexia, his hepatitis C did not result in minor, or any, weight loss and hepatomegaly. Therefore, entitlement to ratings for hepatitis C under Diagnostic Code 7354 in excess of 20 percent prior to March 8, 2012, in excess of 40 percent from March 8, 2012, to December 21, 2012, and in excess of 20 percent from December 22, 2012, are not warranted.

Although the Veteran asserted symptoms associated with cirrhosis of the liver in the August 2021 self-completed hepatitis examination reports, the VA treatment records and VA examination reports show no evidence of cirrhosis of the liver at any time during the appeals period. 

The Board observes that the Veteran has reported considerable symptoms, including near-constant and debilitating malaise, fatigue, anorexia, nausea, right upper quadrant pain, weakness, and abdominal pain, in his August 2021 self-completed examination reports. The Board finds that the Veteran is competent to report his symptoms both current and past. However, this lay evidence is inconsistent with the medical records dated during each time period. For example, the only complaints of right upper quadrant pain were in a January 2012 VA treatment record, November 2020 VA examination report, March 2021 VA examination report, and August 2022 VA examination report. The VA treatment records dated from 2011 to 2023 have been consistent in finding no tenderness or guarding in all four quadrants. Furthermore, VA examinations in April 2012, March 2021, June 2021, and April 2023 show the Veteran denied upper quadrant pain. Similarly, in the VA examinations of record, the Veteran has consistently denied near-constant or debilitating malaise, fatigue, anorexia, nausea, and weakness, noting at worst daily symptoms. As such, the Board concludes that the objective findings are far more probative and credible than the after-the-fact lay assertions submitted in support of the claim for benefits. Curry v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 59, 68 (1994) (contemporaneous evidence has greater probative value than subsequently reported history); Madden v. Gober, 125 F.3d 1477, 1481 (Fed. Cir. 1997) (the Board may discount the credibility of evidence in light of its relationship to other items of evidence). Finally, that the term debilitating is used to describe the most severe symptoms contemplated by Diagnostic Code 7354, and the evidence does not establish even less severe symptoms, such as weight loss and incapacitation episodes of at least four weeks. In other words, it is reasonable to conclude that the Veteran's condition is not debilitating as contemplated by this diagnostic code when his symptoms do not meet the criteria for the 40 and 60 percent ratings. Therefore, entitlement to a 100 percent disability rating is not warranted under Diagnostic Code 7354.

Based on the foregoing, the Board finds that the competent and credible evidence is not approximately balanced as to whether entitlement to a rating in excess of 20 percent prior to March 8, 2012, in excess of 40 percent from March 8, 2012, to December 21, 2012, and in excess of 20 percent from December 22, 2012, is warranted. Rather, the evidence persuasively weighs against finding the Veteran had weight loss, hepatomegaly, periods of bed rest, or near-constant debilitating symptoms due to his hepatitis C at any time during the period on appeal. The benefit of the doubt doctrine does not apply. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b), Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (holding the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine is not for application when the evidence is persuasively for or against the claim). The claim must be denied.

2. Entitlement to an initial disability rating in excess for 50 percent for unspecified anxiety and depressive disorders is denied.

A May 2023 rating decision granted the Veteran service connection for unspecified anxiety and depressive disorders and assigned a 50 percent disability rating, effective March 24, 2021. The Veteran asserts a disability rating higher than 50 percent is warranted for his service-connected anxiety and depressive disorders. 

Hyphenated Diagnostic Codes are used when a rating under one Diagnostic Code requires the use of an additional Diagnostic Code to identify the basis for the rating assigned; the additional Diagnostic Code is shown after the hyphen. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.27. The hyphenated Diagnostic Code here indicates the Veteran is assigned Diagnostic Code 9413 for his unspecified anxiety disorder and Diagnostic Code 9435 for his unspecified depressive disorder. 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, Diagnostic Codes 9413, 9435. These Diagnostic Codes are evaluated under the General Rating Formula for Mental Disorders (Formula). 38 C.F.R. § 4.130.

Under this Formula, a 50 percent rating is warranted where there is occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity due to such symptoms as: flattened affect; circumstantial, circumlocutory, or stereotyped speech; panic attacks more than once a week; difficulty in understanding complex commands; impairment of short- and long-term memory (e.g., retention of only highly learned material, forgetting to complete tasks); impaired judgment; impaired abstract thinking; disturbances of motivation and mood; difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships. Id.

A 70 percent rating under this Formula is warranted where there is occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a work like setting); inability to establish and maintain effective relationships. Id.

A 100 percent rating under this Formula is warranted when there is total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations, grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name. Id.

The symptoms listed are not exhaustive, but rather serve as examples of the type and degree of symptoms, or their effects, that would justify a particular rating. Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436, 442 (2002). A Veteran may only qualify for a given disability rating under § 4.130 by demonstrating the particular symptoms associated with that percentage, or others of similar severity, frequency, and duration. Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 117 (Fed. Cir. 2013). While symptomatology should be the primary focus when deciding entitlement to a given disability rating, § 4.130 requires not only the presence of certain symptoms but also that those symptoms have caused the requisite occupational and social impairment. Id.

In addition to frequency, severity and duration of symptoms, the Board must also consider the length of remissions and the Veteran's capacity for adjustment during periods of remission and then assign an evaluation based on all the evidence of record that bears on occupational and social impairment rather than solely on the examiner's assessment of the level of disability at the moment of the examination. 38 C.F.R. § 4.126(a).

Turning to the evidence, the Veteran underwent a VA examination in December 2021. The examiner determined the Veteran's anxiety and depressive disorders manifest in occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity. The Veteran reported he resides in a "typical small town, been there 30-years," and that he has a dog, cat, bird, flowers, stuff like that on a country road. The Veteran denied significant relationship at that time.  The Veteran reported having mood swings, depression and anxiety which make it hard to manage his life. He reported he has an adult son, an Army veteran, and reported having a close relationship. The Veteran reported that he has a sister and two friends.  Throughout the years, friends have died, or moved away. He moved in with his mother to help her out after his step-father died. The Veteran reported that he spends his days alone. He stated it is hard for him to manage himself, especially in a crowd.  He reported he likes to read, draw, and watch television. Physically, he cannot do a lot as he has severe arthritis in all of his joints. The Veteran reported he is not currently working and that he is disabled due to chronic pain, fatigue, depression, anxiety, and isolation. He stated he worked until August 2011. The Veteran endorsed symptoms of depressed mood, anxiety, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, inability to establish and maintain effective relationships, and suicidal ideation. The Veteran endorsed suicidal ideation, but described fleeting, impulsive thoughts. He convincingly denied intent and plan.

The Veteran underwent another VA examination in May 2023. The examiner determined the Veteran's anxiety and depressive disorders manifest in occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity. The Veteran described a positive relationship with his adult-aged son and enjoys spending time with his 11 year-old grandson. He maintains positive relationships with his two sisters. He resides independently in a home. He endorsed close friends and attends church once or twice monthly. The Veteran endorsed symptoms of depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, difficulty in motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, and difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances. He was appropriately groomed and dressed.  His thought process was tangential at times, he benefited from redirection. His speech pattern was within normal limits for rate, tone and rhythm. He was able to maintain eye contact during the interview. He was able to track the conversation during the interview and provide a coherent history. He did not experience any word finding difficulties or parapraxis. His mood was mildly dysphoric, and his affect was flat. He described daily anxiety and depressed mood, attributed to among other stressors, physical pain, financial stressors, worry about his home due to hurricanes, and "worry about my age". He endorsed decreased interest in previously pleasurable activities (creative writing; socializing). He endorsed sleep disturbances (nightly early and middle insomnia) and fatigue to both mental health and physical conditions. He described nervousness ("can't control the situation"), worry that is often hard to control, and irritability with verbal outbursts. He denied current suicidal ideation, most recent ideation was "a couple of months ago".  He denied prior attempts, protective factors include "logic and reason, still have loved ones... have faith..."  

VA treatment records dated October 2020 to September 2023 are consistent with the VA examination reports above.

In a November 2021 VA progress note, the Veteran stated his mood has been "depressed". However, he stated it is not significantly more depressed than his usual mood fluctuations. He reported he still greatly enjoys spending time with his son and grandson. He also spoke animatedly about a small reunion he hosted at his house with 2 of his Army buddies. He reported he enjoys gardening and woodworking. His sleep is "erratic, off and on" which is baseline for him. He stated that he misses working. He denied suicidal or homicidal ideation, intent or plan, and he denied any passive thoughts of death. 

In a March 2023 VA progress note, the Veteran reported experiencing symptoms of anxiety including chronic and uncontrolled irritability and being tense more days than not. In another March 2023 VA progress note, the Veteran reported his mood is "up and down" He reported his sister was staying with him and was stressing him out. Sleep is erratic, and he was dealing with a significant amount of pain. He denied suicidal or homicidal ideation, intent or plan. Upon mental status evaluation, the Veteran had good grooming and hygiene. His speech was spontaneous, fluent, relevant, and normal. He was oriented. His affect with constricted, but reactive and appropriate. His thought process was linear, logical and goal directed. His judgement and insight were fair. The examiner noted he was generally at his psychiatric baseline. The Veteran reported his depressed mood and anxiety intermittently flare, but are manageable when he is taking his psychotropics.

After careful review of the evidence of record, the Board finds that an initial rating in excess of 50 percent is not warranted. The VA examiners indicated that the Veteran's occupational and social impairment manifests primarily in symptoms of depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss, flattened affect, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances, inability to establish and maintain effective relationships, as well as suicidal ideation. While symptoms such as suicidal ideation, difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a work like setting), and, inability to establish and maintain effective relationships with the 70 percent rating criteria, the Board finds that Veteran's complete disability picture demonstrated by the VA examinations more nearly approximates the symptoms contemplated by a 50 percent rating. See 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.7, 4.130.

Impairment to mood was demonstrated as the Veteran has reported such symptoms as depression and anxiety. Impairment to thinking was not demonstrated as the Veteran was consistently found to be alert and oriented without hallucinations, delusions or perceptual disorders. Significantly, the Veteran always presented at VA treatment appointments and VA examinations as alert and oriented in all spheres. Although the Veteran reported difficulty with memory and concentration, he did not indicate he had difficulty remembering the names of his family or close friends. Although VA treatment records show the Veteran's judgment has been good to fair, there is no evidence of impaired judgment. With regards to impairment to family relations, the Veteran consistently indicated he had a good relationship with family members including his adult child and grandchild. School and work were not attempted during the appeal period, though the Veteran reported he worked for 2 months with census in October 2020 and that he attends church monthly or more often. As such, there has been no finding that the Veteran's symptoms have caused occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood. 

The Board notes that regarding suicidal ideation, during the December 2021 VA examination, the Veteran stated that he "had some fleeting impulsive thoughts." As noted above, suicidal ideation is contemplated by the 70 percent criteria. Bankhead v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 10, 19 (2017). However, the severity, frequency, and duration of the Veteran's suicidal ideation has not risen to the level contemplated by the 70 percent disability rating. Other than the VA examinations, the Veteran has consistently denied any suicidal ideation in the VA treatment records dated January 2021 through August 2023. 

Finally, the record reflects the Veteran's symptom of irritability comports with the impaired judgement and disturbances of motivation and mood that are contemplated by the 50 percent rating criteria, as opposed to the impaired impulse control, such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence, that is contemplated by the 70 percent rating criteria. 

The evidence of record shows that the Veteran is well-groomed, has linear thought processes without unprovoked violence, delusions, hallucinations, or homicidal ideations, and his mild memory loss does not reflect spatial disorientation. Moreover, the record shows that the Veteran has maintained a home, interacts with his adult child, and despite his trust issues, has social contact with his military friends and church. However, the Board finds that the Veteran's symptoms are not of such frequency, severity, and duration such that they more nearly approximate the criteria required for a 70 percent rating.

Moreover, the Board finds the criteria for a 100 percent schedular evaluation are not met at any time during the appeal period. For instance, symptoms typically associated with a 100 percent evaluation for the psychiatric disability are not demonstrated. For example, there was no evidence of gross impairment in thought processes or communication, persistent delusions or hallucinations, intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living, or disorientation to time or place. The evidence does not show the Veteran to consistently been unable to care for himself and tend to his activities of daily living.

The Board notes the contentions of the Veteran that his psychiatric symptoms are more severe than currently shown on examination. The Board acknowledges the reports of the Veteran with problems with depression, irritability, anxiety, and sleep disturbances. However, the Veteran's VA examinations and clinical evidence of record do not demonstrate functional impairments that rise to occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas or total occupational and social impairment, and a higher rating are not met. The Rating Schedule contemplates such impairment under the ordinary conditions of daily life. 38 C.F.R. § 4.10; see also Martinak v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 447, 455 (2007). This argument is therefore without merit.

Based on the foregoing, the Board finds that the competent and credible evidence is not approximately balanced as to whether entitlement to a rating in excess of 50 is warranted. Rather, the evidence persuasively weighs against finding the Veteran had occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas at any time during the period on appeal. The benefit of the doubt doctrine does not apply. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b), Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (holding the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine is not for application when the evidence is persuasively for or against the claim). The claim must be denied.

3. Entitlement to individual unemployability prior to August 12, 2021, is denied.

The rating decision on appeal granted Veteran's claim for TDIU from August 12, 2021. The Veteran contends that he is unable to obtain or maintain gainful employment due to his service-connected conditions prior to that date. 

A TDIU may be assigned, where the schedular rating is less than total, where a veteran is unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation as a result of service-connected disabilities. 38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a). To qualify for schedular consideration of a TDIU, if there is only one such disability, this disability shall be ratable at 60 percent or more, and, if there are two or more disabilities, there shall be at least one disability ratable at 40 percent or more and sufficient additional disability to bring the combined rating to 70 percent or more. Id.

From September 8, 2011, to March 7, 2012, the Veteran was only service connected for hepatitis C, rated at 20 percent disabling. From March 8, 2012, to December 21, 2012, the Veteran was only service connected for hepatitis C, rated at 40 percent disabling. From December 22, 2012, to March 23, 2021, the Veteran was only service connected for hepatitis C, rated at 20 percent disabling. From March 24, 2021, to August 11, 2021, the Veteran was service connected for hepatitis C, rated at 20 percent disabling; and, unspecified anxiety and depressive disorders, rated 50 percent disabling. The Veteran's combined disability ratings are 20 percent from September 8, 2011, to March 7, 2012; 40 percent from March 8, 2012, to December 21, 2012; 20 percent from December 22, 2012, to March 23, 2021; and 60 percent from March 24, 2021, to August 11, 2021.

Based upon the above, the Veteran does not meet the schedular criteria for an award of TDIU prior to August 12, 2021. If the percentage requirements of 38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a) are not met, as is the case here, then a TDIU may still be granted on an extraschedular basis in cases when a Veteran is unable to secure and follow a substantially gainful occupation by reason of service-connected disability. 38 C.F.R. § 4.16(b).

The noneconomic component concerns whether the Veteran is able to "secure or follow" gainful employment. In determining whether a Veteran can secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation, the Board should consider the Veteran's level of education, special training, and work experience, but not to the Veteran's age or non-service-connected disabilities. 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.341, 4.16, 4.19.

Consideration should also be given to whether the Veteran "has the physical ability (both exertional and non-exertional) to perform the type of activities (e.g., sedentary, light, medium, heavy, or very heavy) required" to work in a substantially gainful occupation, and "whether the Veteran has the mental ability to perform the activities required" to work in a substantially gainful occupation. Physical ability factors that may be relevant include, but are not limited to, the Veteran's limitations, if any, concerning lifting, bending, sitting, standing, walking, climbing, grasping, typing, and reaching, as well as auditory and visual limitations. Mental ability factors that may be relevant include, but are not limited to, limitations concerning memory, concentration, ability to adapt to change, handle workplace stress, get along with coworkers, and demonstrate ability and productivity.

The sole fact that a Veteran is unemployed or has difficulty obtaining employment is not enough. The ultimate question is whether the Veteran, in light of their service-connected disabilities, was capable of performing the physical and mental acts required by employment, not whether they could find employment. Van Hoose v. Brown, 4 Vet. App. 361 (1993).

However, the Board does not have the authority to assign an extraschedular total disability rating for compensation purposes based on individual unemployability in the first instance, rather, if the Board finds "sufficient evidence" to substantiate a "reasonable possibility" that a Veteran may be unemployable because of service-connected disabilities, then the proper course of action is to remand the claim for referral to the Director, Compensation Service, for an advisory opinion for extraschedular TDIU. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.16 (b); Bowling v. Principi, 15 Vet. App. 1 (2001); Wages v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 233 (2015). Snider v. McDonough, 35 Vet. App. 1 (2021). The "reasonable possibility" standard for granting or denying an initial referral is lower than the standard of unemployability for granting or denying TDIU. Holland v. McDonough, 2023 U.S. App. Vet. Claims LEXIS 4, citing Snider v. McDonough, 35 Vet. App. 1, 9 (2021).

If the Board determines that a referral is not appropriate, the Board must make two determinations: (1) that a referral for extraschedular TDIU consideration is not warranted because there is insufficient evidence to substantiate a reasonable possibility that the Veteran was unemployable because of service-connected disabilities; and (2) that TDIU benefits are not warranted because service-connected disabilities did not render the Veteran unemployable. Snider v. McDonough, 35 Vet. App. 1 (2021).

After a thorough and holistic review of the evidence of record, the Board finds that the low standard warranting referral for extraschedular TDIU has not been met, and moreover, the Veteran was not unemployable due to his service-connected conditions.

In the Veteran's June 2022 VA Form 21-8940, Veteran's Application for Increased Compensation Based on Unemployability, the Veteran asserted his disability affected full time employment as of September 2011. He stated he last worked full time in June 1996. He worked as a professional tutor par time from February 2004 to September 2011. He reported completing his senior year of college, and that he obtained a criminal justice degree between August 2006 and May 2009. 

In a November 2011 VA progress note, the Veteran reported that he was teaching part-time for 8 years but was laid off last August. He stated that he believed it was due to "office politics." The Veteran reported that he would like to find a new part time job, and has been looking online and is working with Employ Florida.

April 2012 and November 2020 VA hepatitis examination reports indicated the Veteran's hepatitis did not impact his ability to work. 

During a December 2021 VA mental health examination, the Veteran asserted he was disabled due to chronic pain, fatigue, depression, anxiety, and isolation. Most recently, the Veteran worked until August 2011 as a supervisor for learning resource center, tutors, etc. He reported that he missed his job. He stated that he became jaundiced at his job, working with young adults, and everyone became withdrawn from him. Two months later, they reduced staff and eliminated his position. He had 10 consecutive 1-year contract, and shortly after he extended another contract, they did away with his job. He enjoyed that position, and it kept him busy, interacting with people. 

A review of the competent and credible evidence of record does not support a finding that the Veteran's service-connected disabilities warrant an award of extraschedular TDIU for the period on appeal. While the Board acknowledges that the Veteran is competent to report the symptoms of his service-connected conditions, the record does not contain any evidence that the Veteran is competent to determine that he is unemployable due to his service-connected disabilities. Indeed, the Board is reminded that while a determination as to the nature and extent of physical or mental limitations may require medical expertise, the ultimate question of whether those physical or mental impairments preclude the ability to secure and maintain substantially gainful employment is a factual one to be determined by the Board based on the totality of the record. Withers v. Wilkie, 30 Vet. App. 139, 146-47 (2018). Pederson v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 276, 287 (2015) (en banc); Geib v. Shinseki, 733 F.3d 1350, 1354 (Fed. Cir. 2013); Moore v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 376, 381 (2013) (observing that "medical examiners are responsible for providing a 'full description of the effects of disability upon the person's ordinary activity,' 38 C.F.R. § 4.10 (2013), but it is the rating official who is responsible for 'interpret[ing] reports of examination in light of the whole recorded history, reconciling the various reports into a consistent picture so that the current rating may accurately reflect the elements of disability present,' 38 C.F.R. § 4.2."). Thus, while the Veteran is credible to report his symptoms, he is not competent to determine that his service-connected disabilities rendered him unemployable. 

Based upon the competent and credible evidence of record for the period on appeal, the Board finds that referral to the Director, Compensation Services, for consideration of an extraschedular TDIU award for the period on appeal is not warranted, as there is insufficient evidence to substantiate a reasonable possibility that the Veteran was unemployable because of his service-connected conditions alone. While the Veteran has asserted he lost his last position due to jaundice caused by his service-connected hepatitis C, there is no evidence of the Veteran having ever had jaundice in the VA treatment records. Moreover, the most credible, competent, and probative evidence of persuasively weighs against a finding that the Veteran was unable to follow or secure substantially gainful employment due his service-connected conditions during the period on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 4.16 (b); Snider v. McDonough, 35 Vet. App. 1 (2021).

In reaching the above conclusion, the Board has considered the applicability of the benefit of the doubt doctrine; however, as the competing evidence is not in approximate balance, the doctrine is not for application. See 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; see also Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

4. An effective date earlier than August 12, 2021, for eligibility for DEA benefits under 38 U.S.C. Chapter 35 is denied.

Upon review of the record, the Board finds that an effective date earlier than August 12, 2021, for eligibility for DEA benefits under 38 U.S.C. Chapter 35 is not warranted.

Eligibility for DEA benefits under 38 U.S.C. Chapter 35 has been established based on the Veteran being discharged from service under conditions other than dishonorable and having a permanent total service-connected disability. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.807(a). As the Veteran is not in receipt of a permanent total service-connected disability rating prior to August 12, 2021, the criteria for eligibility for DEA benefits prior to that date have not been met. Therefore, an effective date earlier than August 12, 2021, for eligibility for DEA benefits under 38 U.S.C. Chapter 35 is not warranted.

In reaching the above conclusion, the Board has considered the applicability of the benefit of the doubt doctrine; however, as the competing evidence is not in approximate balance, the doctrine is not for application. See 38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; see also Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021). 

 

Martin T. Mitchell

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	D. M. Donahue Boushehri

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.