Citation Nr: A25034055
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 210617-166534
DATE:  April 11, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent for gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD), hiatal hernia, and esophagitis is remanded.

Entitlement to an initial compensable disability rating for esophageal stricture is remanded.

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 60 percent for total right shoulder replacement with recurrent dislocation and referred right arm pain (hereinafter, "right shoulder disability"), on an extraschedular basis, is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from April 1966 to January 1970 and from August 1972 to July 1976.

This case comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal of a May 2021 rating decision by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In the June 2021 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Hearing docket. A Board hearing was held in November 2022. A transcript of the hearing is of record. The Board acknowledges that the undersigned did not preside over the November 2022 Board hearing; however, under the modernized review system, the Veterans Law Judge who conducts a Board hearing is not required to decide the appeal. 38 U.S.C. § 7107(c); Frantzis v. McDonough, 104 F.4th 262 (Fed. Cir. 2024).

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the May 2021 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or his representative at the hearing or within 90 days following the hearing. 38 C.F.R. § 20.302(a). If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal and prior to the Board hearing, or (2) more than 90 days following the hearing, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.302(a), 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the Veteran's claims, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

This matter was previously before the Board in May 2023, at which time the Veteran's claims for increase were denied. The Veteran appealed that decision to the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court). In September 2024 memorandum decision, the Court set aside the Board's May 2023 decision, remanding the case for further appellate consideration. See September 2024, Memorandum Decision.

Increased Rating - GERD, hiatal hernia, esophagitis & Esophageal Stricture

In the September 2024 memorandum opinion, the Court indicated that the Board's reliance on March 2021 examination for the Veteran's stomach conditions and May 2021 examination for the Veteran's esophageal stricture was erroneous because it was "unclear how either examiner was able to assess the appellant's conditions because neither examiner performed an updated endoscopy" and the Veteran's previous endoscopy report was almost a decade old. 

Thus, the Court indicated that the Board was required to "seek clarification" from the March 2021 and May 2021 examiners as to how they assessed the Veteran's current symptomatology and an opinion as to whether an updated endoscopy "was necessary to evaluate the appellant's conditions or whether a 5-to-10-year-old endoscopy was indicative of the current severity of appellant's conditions." 

In light of the foregoing, the Board finds that a retrospective VA medical opinion, with findings responsive to the applicable rating criteria and the means of assessing symptomatology, is warranted. See Chotta v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 80 (2008). In this regard, the March 2021 and May 2021 VA examinations are inadequate for full adjudication on the merits

The AOJ's reliance on inadequate medical opinions is a pre-decisional duty to assist error requiring corrective action. Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007). Accordingly, remand is warranted for the development as described above. 

Increased Rating - Right Shoulder

In the September 2024 memorandum opinion, the Court indicated that on remand the Board should consider whether extraschedular consideration for the Veteran's right shoulder disability is warranted. See September 2024, Memorandum Opinion, pg. 10. 

Although the Board is precluded by regulation from assigning an extraschedular rating under 38 C.F.R. § 3.321(b)(1) in the first instance, the Board is not precluded from considering whether the case should be referred to the Director of Compensation Service for extraschedular rating consideration.

Extraschedular consideration requires a three-step inquiry. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.321(b)(1); see also Thun v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 111 (2008), aff'd sub nom. Thun v. Shinseki, 572 F.3d 1366 (Fed. Cir. 2009). The first question is whether the schedular rating adequately contemplates the claimant's disability picture. Thun, 22 Vet. App. at 115. If the criteria reasonably describe the claimant's disability level and symptomatology, then the claimant's disability picture is contemplated by the rating schedule, the assigned schedular evaluation is, therefore, adequate, and no referral is required. If the schedular evaluation does not contemplate the claimant's level of disability and symptomatology and is found inadequate, then the second inquiry is whether the claimant's exceptional disability picture exhibits other related factors such as those provided by the regulation as governing norms marked interference with employment and frequent periods of hospitalization. If the claimant's disability picture meets the second inquiry, then the third step is to refer the case to the Director of Compensation Service to determine whether an extraschedular rating is warranted.

Here, unfortunately, the medical examinations of record are inadequate for the purposes of determining whether there was marked interference with employment, as required for consideration of an extraschedular rating. Although both examiners indicated that the Veteran lost a few weeks of work time due to his shoulder, in other areas on the examination, the examiners indicated that the shoulder could have interfered with the Veteran's work "daily." As such, clarification is needed to determine to what extent the Veteran's disability interfered with his employment for the entirety of period on appeal. See Chotta, 22 Vet. App. 80.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Forward the claims file to the examiners who conducted the March 2021 Stomach and Duodenal Conditions examination and the May 2021 Esophageal Conditions examination for an addendum medical opinion. The claims file must be reviewed by each examiner, and that review must be noted in the report.

Based on a thorough review of the record, each examiner must determine, or estimate, when the symptom severity as reflected in the respective March 2021 and/or May 2021 report began. Each examiner is further asked to clarify how the Veteran's symptoms and the severity of such symptoms were assessed. In doing so, the examiner is required to explain whether an updated endoscopy was necessary to evaluate the Veteran's conditions or whether the Veteran's prior 5-to-10-year-old endoscopy was indicative of the current severity of his conditions.

If the examiner finds that it is not possible to provide the requested medical findings without resorting the speculation, the examiner should explain why that is so with references to the evidence of record to support any such conclusion.

A complete and detailed rationale must be provided for all opinions expressed. If the March 2021 Stomach and Duodenal Conditions examiner and/or the May 2021 Esophageal Conditions examiner is unavailable, the claims file should be forwarded to another examiner with sufficient expertise to provide the requested medical findings.

If it is determined that updated imaging is necessary to determine the severity of the Veteran's GERD, hiatal hernia, esophagitis, and/or esophageal stricture disability, another VA examination of the Veteran should be conducted by the examiner providing the requested medical opinion. All indicated studies, including, but not limited to, endoscopy, must be conducted.

2. Forward the Veteran's claims file to an examiner with appropriate expertise for a retrospective opinion regarding the level of severity of the Veteran's right shoulder disability. The examiner must review the claims file and note that review in the report.

Based on a review of the record, the examiner must provide an opinion as to whether, and to what extent, the Veteran's service-connected right shoulder disability interfered with his employment. Specifically, the examiner is asked whether the Veteran's right shoulder disability irrespective of his other service-connected disabilities resulted in functional impairment that markedly interfered with his employment. 

In forming the opinion, the examiner should specifically address the Veteran's lay statements regarding his right shoulder symptoms, as well as the symptoms indicated in the Veteran's March 2021 and May 2021 VA examinations. 

A complete and detailed rationale for all opinions expressed must be provided. Another VA examination of the Veteran should only be conducted if deemed necessary by the examiner providing the requested medical opinions.

3. Based on the evidence, consider whether referral for extraschedular consideration pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 3.321(b) is warranted for the Veteran's right shoulder disability. 

 

 

Kristin Haddock

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Davis, Alexandra J.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.