Citation Nr: A25034610
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 240515-440850
DATE: April 15, 2025

ORDER

Service connection for a left ankle disorder is denied.

Service connection for a left leg disorder is denied.

Service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), is denied.

An initial compensable rating for erectile dysfunction is denied.

An initial rating of 20 percent, but no higher, for residuals of bladder cancer is granted, subject to the laws and regulations governing the payment of monetary awards. 

An initial rating in excess of 30 percent for left kidney removal is denied.

An initial rating of 10 percent, but no higher, for scar of the left lower quadrant is granted, subject to the laws and regulations governing the payment of monetary awards.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. A left ankle disorder is not shown to be causally or etiologically related to any disease, injury, or incident during service.

2. A left leg disorder is not shown to be causally or etiologically related to any disease, injury, or incident during service, and is not caused or aggravated by a service-connected disability.

3. At no time during the pendency of the claim does the Veteran have a current disability of an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include PTSD, and the record does not contain a recent diagnosis of a disability prior to the Veteran's filing of a claim.

4. For the entire appeal period, the Veteran's erectile dysfunction has been assigned the maximum schedular rating, and such disability does not result in symptomatology that is not contemplated by the currently assigned schedular rating.

5. Resolving all doubt in the Veteran's favor, for the entire appeal period, his residuals of bladder cancer more nearly approximates urinary frequency with, at most, a daytime voiding interval of 3 hours and nighttime awakening to void at least four times.

6. For the entire appeal period, the Veteran's left kidney removal has not resulted in chronic kidney disease with glomerular filtration rate (GFR) from 30 to 44 mL/min/1.73m2 for at least 3 consecutive months during the past 12 months; required regular routine dialysis; or rendered him an eligible kidney transplant recipient.

7. Resolving all doubt in the Veteran's favor, for the entire appeal period, his scar of the left lower quadrant measured 12 by 1.5 centimeters (cm) and is painful, but not unstable, and does not result in any disabling effects.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for service connection for a left ankle disorder have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

2. The criteria for service connection for a left leg disorder have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.310.

3. The criteria for service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include PTSD, have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.304, 4.125(a).

4. The criteria for an initial compensable rating for erectile dysfunction have not been met. 38 U.S.C. § §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.7, 4.115b, Diagnostic Code (DC) 7522.

5. The criteria for an initial rating of 20 percent, but no higher, for residuals of bladder cancer have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.7, 4.116, DC 7542.

6. The criteria for an initial rating in excess of 30 percent for left kidney removal have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.7, 4.115, DC 7500.

7. The criteria for an initial rating of 10 percent, but no higher, for scar, left lower quadrant have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.7, 4.118, DC 7802, 7804.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from April 1969 to October 1970. This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a rating decision issued in May 2024 by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office under the modernized appeals system known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA). In this regard, as relevant, the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) presumed that new and relevant evidence had been received so as to warrant readjudication of the claims for service connection for a left ankle, left leg, and acquired psychiatric disorder, claimed as PTSD, which are favorable findings binding on the Board, and denied them on the merits. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104 (c).

Later the same month, the Veteran filed a Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) (VA Form 101820) and requested a hearing before a Veterans Law Judge, which was held in November 2024. A transcript of the hearing is associated with the record.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the May 2024 AOJ decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or his representative at the hearing or within 90 days following the hearing. 38 C.F.R. § 20.302(a). If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal and prior to the Board hearing, or (2) more than 90 days following the hearing, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.302(a), 20.801. 

In this regard, the Board notes that additional evidence, to include VA treatment records and VA examination reports, was received within the 90-day evidence window after the November 2024 Board hearing. However, as such evidence was not submitted by the Veteran or his representative, but rather generated by VA, the Board may not consider such evidence in the adjudication of the claims on appeal. 38 C.F.R. §20.302 (a)(3). Nonetheless, the Veteran is advised that he may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

Service Connection

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by service.  38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a).  Service connection may also be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge, when all of the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).  Direct service connection may not be granted without evidence of a current disability; in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and a nexus between the claimed in-service disease or injury and the present disease or injury.  Id.; see also Caluza v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 498, 506 (1995) aff'd, 78 F.3d 604 (Fed. Cir. 1996).  

Service connection may also be established on a secondary basis for a disability which is proximately due to or the result of service-connected disease or injury. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a). Establishing service connection on a secondary basis requires evidence sufficient to show (1) that a current disability exists and (2) that the current disability was either (a) proximately caused by or (b) proximately aggravated by a service-connected disability. Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439, 448 (1995) (en banc). Further, service connection may not be awarded on the basis of aggravation without establishing a pre-aggravation baseline level of disability and comparing it to the current level of disability. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310 (b).

Pertinent to a claim for service connection, such a determination requires a finding of a current disability that is related to an injury or disease in service. Watson v. Brown, 4 Vet. App. 309 (1993); Brammer v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 223, 225 (1992); Rabideau v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 141, 143 (1992). Under applicable regulation, the term "disability" means impairment in earning capacity resulting from diseases and injuries and their residual conditions. 38 C.F.R. § 4.1; Hunt v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 292, 296 (1991); Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439 (1995); Saunders v. Wilkie, 886 F.3d 1356 (Fed. Cir. 2018) (the term "disability" as used in 38 U.S.C. § 1110 "refers to the functional impairment of earning capacity, not the underlying cause of said disability," and held that "pain alone can serve as a functional impairment and therefore qualify as a disability"). However, VA requires a diagnosis that conforms to the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition, (DSM-5) to compensate for a psychiatric disability, therefore constraining the application of Saunders in the context of claims for service connection for psychiatric disabilities. Martinez-Bodon v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 393 (2020); 38 C.F.R. § 4.125 (a).

In McClain v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 319, 321 (2007), the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) held that the requirement of the existence of a current disability is satisfied when a claimant has a disability at the time he files his claim for service connection or during the pendency of that claim, even if the disability resolves prior to adjudication of the claim. However, in Romanowsky v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 289 (2013), the Court held that when the record contains a recent diagnosis of disability prior to a claimant filing a claim for benefits based on that disability, the report of diagnosis is relevant evidence that the Board must address in determining whether a current disability existed at the time the claim was filed or during its pendency.

1. Entitlement to service connection for a left ankle disorder.

2. Entitlement to service connection for a left leg disorder, to include as secondary to a left ankle disorder.

The Veteran is seeking service connection for a left ankle and left leg disorder. Specifically, during his November 2024 Board hearing, he testified that he hurt his ankle and leg after falling off a military truck onto a wooden pallet. In this regard, the Veteran indicated that he was treated with a gelatin cast and crutches, resulting in light duty, and currently experiences pain and numbness in the ankle, which radiates up his left leg.  However, based upon a review of the evidence, the Board finds that service connection for left ankle and left leg disorders is not warranted.

In this regard, the Veteran's service treatment records (STRs) reveal that, in October 1969, he twisted his right ankle after jumping off a truck, which resulted in a cast, crutches, and light duty. However, they are negative for complaints, treatment, or diagnoses referrable to a left ankle and/or left leg disorder. Additionally, while the Veteran is competent to report his current symptomatology, his post-service treatment records do not suggest a relationship between such disorders and his military service.

In this regard, the Board notes the Veteran was not afforded a VA examination and/or opinion in connection with his claims for service connection for left ankle and left leg disorders. However, at the time of the May 2024 rating decision, there was no credible evidence of an event, injury, or disease in service, or an indication that such disorders may be related to service or a service-connected disability. Bardwell v. Shinseki, 24 Vet. App. 36 (2010); Waters v. Shinseki, 601 F.3d 1274, 1278 (2010); McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006). Rather, the Veteran first claimed that his left ankle and left leg disorders had their onset in service after he fell off a truck, and his left leg disorder may be secondary to his left ankle disorder, during his November 2024 Board hearing, which was after the issuance of the May 2024 rating decision on appeal. Therefore, the Board finds that there was no pre-decisional duty to assist error in the AOJ's determination not to afford him a VA examination and/or opinion. 

Moreover, there is no medical opinion of record demonstrating that the Veteran's left ankle and/or left leg disorder is related to his military service. Additionally, he is not currently service-connected for a left ankle disorder. Therefore, under the law, he lacks legal grounds to establish entitlement to service connection for a left leg as secondary to such disorder. See Sabonis v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 426 (1994) (in cases in which the law and not the evidence is dispositive, a claim for entitlement to VA benefits should be denied or the appeal to the Board terminated because of the absence of legal merit or the lack of entitlement under the law).

The Board has also considered the Veteran's assertions as to the etiology of his left ankle and left leg disorders. While he is competent to report relevant symptomatology as a lay person, he does not have the requisite training and experience necessary to offer an opinion addressing the etiology of such disorders as such is a complex medical question. See Jandreau, v. Nicholson,?491 F.3d 1372 (Fed. Cir. 2007) (noting general competence to testify as to symptoms but not to provide medical diagnosis). In this regard, the etiology of a left ankle and/or left leg disorder involves a medical subject concerning an internal physical process extending beyond an immediately observable cause-and-effect relationship. Therefore, such matter may not be competently addressed by lay statements. See Woehlaert v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 456, 462 (2007) (explaining that while the claimant is competent in certain situations to provide a diagnosis of a simple condition such as a broken leg or varicose veins, the claimant is not competent to provide evidence as to more complex medical questions). Accordingly, the Veteran's opinion as to the etiology of his left ankle and left leg disorders is not competent evidence and, consequently, is afforded no probative weight. 

Thus, based on the foregoing, the Board finds that the Veteran's left ankle and left leg disorders are not shown to be causally or etiologically related to any disease, injury, or incident during service, and his left leg disorder is not caused or aggravated by a service-connected disability. Consequently, service connection for left ankle and left leg disorders is not warranted. 

In reaching this decision, the Board has considered the applicability of the benefit of the doubt doctrine. However, as the weight of the probative evidence is against the Veteran's claims for service connection for a left ankle and left leg disorder, such doctrine is not applicable in the instant appeal and his claims must be denied. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

3. Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include PTSD.

In addition to the general laws and regulations governing service connection, for PTSD, service connection requires medical evidence diagnosing the condition in accordance with 38 C.F.R. § 4.125(a), which requires that a diagnosis of a mental disorder conform to the DSM-5, a link, established by medical evidence between current symptoms and an in-service stressor, and credible supporting evidence that the claimed in-service stressor occurred. 38 C.F.R. § 3.304(f). 

The Veteran contends he has an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include PTSD, that is directly related to his military service. Specifically, he testified that, while serving in Vietnam, he was traumatized after another service member gave him a boot with a deceased individual's foot inside while he was stripping parts off a helicopter, and he was afraid of hostile military or terrorist activity due to incoming mortar and rocket attacks. However, based upon a review of the evidence, the Board finds that at no time during the pendency of the claim does the Veteran have a current disability of an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include PTSD, and the record does not contain a recent diagnosis of such disability prior to him filing of a claim. Thus, service connection for such disorder is not warranted.

In this regard, in June 2015, the Veteran underwent a VA examination in connection with his original claim for service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, at which time it was determined that his symptoms did not meet the DSM-5 criteria for a diagnosis of PTSD or any other mental disorder. In this regard, the examiner found that the Veteran's reported stressor of being under enemy fire and seeing some body parts floating in the water met Criterion A; however, he found that the Veteran did not report Criterion D, E, or G of the magnitude or frequency to suggest the presence of PTSD or any other mental disorder. Additionally, the Veteran's post-service treatment records are negative for a diagnosis of an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include PTSD. Specifically, in September 2010 and January 2021, the Veteran had negative depression and PTSD screenings and, in December 2013, he denied having PTSD or depression. 

In this regard, the Board notes the Veteran was not afforded a VA examination and/or opinion in connection with his current claim for service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include PTSD. However, at the time of the May 2024 rating decision, there was no indication of a current disability, or persistent or recurrent symptoms thereof. Bardwell, supra; Waters, supra; McLendon, supra. Therefore, the Board finds that there was no pre-decisional duty to assist error in the AOJ's determination not to afford him a VA examination and/or opinion. 

The Board has also considered the Veteran's assertions that he has a current acquired psychiatric disorder; however, as a lay person, he does not have the requisite training and experience necessary to address such a complex medical matter. See Jandreau, supra. In this regard, the diagnosis of such disorder involves a medical subject concerning an internal psychiatric process extending beyond an immediately observable cause-and-effect relationship and, thus, may not be competently addressed by lay statements. See Woehlaert, supra. Therefore, the Board affords the Veteran's statements as to a diagnosis of an acquired psychiatric disorder no probative weight.

Therefore, based on the foregoing, the Board finds that service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include PTSD, is not warranted as the Veteran does not have a current disability during the pendency of his claim, and the record does not contain a recent diagnosis of disability prior to his filing of a claim. See McClain, supra; Romanowsky, supra. Thus, where, as here, there is no probative evidence indicating that the Veteran has the disability for which service connection is sought, there can be no valid claim for service connection. See Brammer, supra.  

In reaching this decision, the Board has considered the applicability of the benefit of the doubt doctrine.  However, as the weight of the probative evidence is against the Veteran's claim for service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include PTSD, such doctrine is not applicable in the instant appeal and his claim must be denied.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

Increased Ratings

Disability ratings are determined by applying a schedule of ratings that is based on average impairment of earning capacity. Separate diagnostic codes identify the various disabilities. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R., Part 4. Each disability must be viewed in relation to its history and the limitation of activity imposed by the disabling condition should be emphasized. 38 C.F.R. § 4.1. Examination reports are to be interpreted in light of the whole recorded history, and each disability must be considered from the point of view of the veteran working or seeking work. 38 C.F.R. § 4.2. All reasonable doubt will be resolved in the claimant's favor. 38 C.F.R. § 4.3. Where there is a question as to which of two disability evaluations shall be applied, the higher evaluation is to be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating. Otherwise, the lower rating is to be assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7.

Separate ratings can be assigned for separate periods based on the facts found - a practice known as "staged" ratings. Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119 (1999); Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007). Staged ratings are appropriate whenever the factual findings show distinct periods where the service-connected disability exhibits symptoms that would warrant different ratings. Id. 

For all initial rating claims adjudicated below, the appeal period before the Board begins on November 29, 2023, the date of award of service connection.

4. Entitlement to an initial compensable rating for erectile dysfunction.

For the entire appeal period, the Veteran's service-connected erectile dysfunction is rated as noncompensably disabling pursuant to DC 7522. 38 C.F.R. § § 4.115b. Additionally, he is in receipt of special monthly compensation based on loss of use of a creative organ pursuant to U.S.C. § 1114(k) for the entire appeal period. 

In this regard, DC 7522 specifically lists erectile dysfunction and provides for a sole noncompensable rating for such disability, with or without penile deformity. 38 C.F.R. § 4.115b. Thus, the only available rating for erectile dysfunction is a noncompensable rating. 

As there is no legal basis upon which to award a higher schedular disability rating for erectile dysfunction, his claim for an initial compensable rating on a schedular basis must be denied. The law, in particular the regulation governing schedular evaluation of erectile dysfunction, is dispositive of the claim. See Sabonis, supra. Further, as the Veteran has not asserted manifestations of his service-connected erectile dysfunction that are not contemplated by the currently assigned schedular rating, referral for consideration for extra-schedular consideration is not warranted. Thus, an initial compensable rating for erectile dysfunction is not warranted. 

5. Entitlement to an initial compensable rating for residuals of bladder cancer.

During the appeal period, the Veteran's service-connected residuals of bladder cancer has been evaluated as noncompensably disabling pursuant to DC 7542, which pertains to neurogenic bladder, and provides that such disorder is evaluated pursuant to the rating criteria for voiding dysfunction. 38 C.F.R. § 4.115b. In this regard, the Board notes that, in a March 2025 rating decision, an increased rating of 20 percent for such disability was awarded as of December 27, 2024; however, the propriety of such rating is not properly before the Board and will not be addressed herein.

In this regard, voiding dysfunction is rated as urine leakage, frequency, or obstructed voiding. 38 C.F.R. § 4.115a.  Only the predominant area of dysfunction is considered for rating purposes. Id. With continual urine leakage, post-surgical urinary diversion, urinary incontinence, or stress incontinence, a 20 percent rating is assigned where such disability requires the wearing of absorbent materials that must be changed less than two times per day. A 40 percent rating is assigned where such disability requires the wearing of absorbent materials that must be changed two to four times per day. A 60 percent rating is assigned where such disability requires the use of an appliance or the wearing of absorbent materials that must be changed more than four times per day. 

Urinary frequency resulting in a daytime voiding interval between two or three hours, or; awakening to void two times per night, warrants a 10 percent rating. Urinary frequency resulting in a daytime voiding interval between one and two hours, or; awakening to void three to four times per night warrants a 20 percent rating. A 40 percent rating is warranted for a daytime voiding interval less than one hour, or; awakening to void five or more times per night. 

Regarding obstructed voiding, a 10 percent disability rating is warranted for marked obstructive symptomatology (hesitancy, slow or weak stream, decreased force or stream) with post void residuals greater than 150 cc; uroflowmetry showing markedly diminished peak flow rate (less than 10cc/sec); recurrent urinary tract infections secondary to obstruction; or stricture disease requiring periodic dilation every 2 to 3 months.  A maximum 30 percent disability rating is warranted for urinary retention requiring intermittent or continuous catheterization.

The Veteran's current noncompensable rating was assigned based on his obstructed voiding and his reported symptoms of hesitancy and slow stream during his December 2023 VA examination. Such examiner also found that the Veteran's voiding dysfunction did not cause urinary leakage, require the use of an appliance, or cause increased urinary frequency. 

However, during his November 2024 Board hearing, the Veteran testified that he had to be close to a bathroom as he could not retain his bladder well. He also stated that he wakes up at least 4 times per night to go to the bathroom and, when he is awake, he goes to the bathroom every 3 hours. He also stated that, while he is at home and/or near a restroom, he did not often wear absorbent material, but he wore pads when he was away from a restroom for longer periods of time and had to change them at least a couple of times. 

Therefore, based on the foregoing, the Board finds that a rating of 20 percent, but no higher, is warranted for the Veteran's residuals of bladder cancer. In this regard, while the December 2023 VA examiner determined that his voiding dysfunction did not cause increased urinary frequency, he testified that he had daytime voiding intervals of 3 hours and had nighttime awakening to void at least 4 times per night. Additionally, while the Veteran testified that he sometimes wore pads when he was away from a restroom for longer periods of time, he also stated that he did not wear them often as he was usually home and near a restroom. Moreover, the Veteran's obstructed voiding resulted in, at most, hesitancy and slow stream. Thus, the predominant disability associated with his residuals of bladder cancer is urinary frequency, but, as such does not result in daytime voiding interval less than one hour or awakening to void five or more times per night, a rating in excess of 20 percent is not warranted.

Given the foregoing, the Board resolves all doubt in favor of the Veteran and finds that his residuals of bladder cancer more nearly approximates urinary frequency with, at most, a daytime voiding interval of 3 hours and nighttime awakening to void at least four times. Thus, an initial 20 percent rating, but no higher, for such disability is warranted. 

6. Entitlement to an initial rating in excess of 30 percent for left kidney removal.

The Veteran's service-connected left kidney removal disability is currently rated as 30 percent disabling pursuant to DC 7500, which pertains to the removal of one kidney.  Specifically, such provides that a minimum evaluation of 30 percent is warranted for the removal of one kidney, or, if there is nephritis, infection, or pathology of the other kidney, rate as renal dysfunction.  38 C.F.R. § 4.115b.

The criteria for evaluating renal dysfunction under 38 C.F.R. § 4.115a allows for a 100 percent rating for chronic kidney disease with GFR less than 15 mL/min/1.73m2 for at least 3 consecutive months during the past 12 months; or requiring regular routine dialysis; or eligible kidney transplant recipient.  An 80 percent rating is warranted for chronic kidney disease with GFR from 15 to 29 mL/min/1.73m2 for at least 3 consecutive months during the past 12 months.  A 60 percent rating is warranted for chronic kidney disease with GFR from 30 to 44 mL/min/1.73m2 for at least 3 consecutive months during the past 12 months.  A 30 percent rating is warranted for chronic kidney disease with GFR from 45 to 59 mL/min/1.73m2 for at least 3 consecutive months during the past 12 months. GFR from 60 to 89 mL/min/1.73m2 and either recurrent red blood cell (RBC) casts, white blood cell (WBC) casts, or granular casts for at least 3 consecutive months during the past 12 months; or GFR from 60 to 89 mL/min/1.73m2 and structural kidney abnormalities (cystic, obstructive, or glomerular) for at least 3 consecutive months during the past 12 months.  A noncompensable rating is warranted for GFR from 60 to 89 mL/min/1.73m2 and albumin/creatinine ratio (ACR) >30 mg/g for at least 3 consecutive months during the past 12 months. Id.

Note: GFR, estimates GFR (eGFR), and creatinine-based approximations of GFR will be accepted for evaluation purposes under this section when determined to be appropriate and calculated by a medical professional.  Id.

Turning to the evidence of record, at a February 2024 VA examination, it was noted that the Veteran had a left nephrectomy in 2012 and did not need any further treatment nor had a recurrence of his kidney cancer. He also did not have any current symptoms. The examiner determined that the Veteran did not have renal dysfunction or require regular dialysis. He also noted that the Veteran's kidney removal due to disease course was not of such that was medically determined to warrant transplant consideration. Diagnostic testing also revealed a normal BUN level of 25, creatinine level of 1.46, and GFR of 50.  

Therefore, based on the foregoing, the Board finds that an initial rating in excess of 30 percent for left kidney removal is not warranted. In this regard, he had no more than a GFR rate of 50 mL/min/1.73m2 for at least 3 consecutive months during the past 12 months. His left kidney removal disability also did not require regular routine dialysis and he was not an eligible kidney transplant recipient. Thus, the Veteran's service-connected left kidney removal disability does not more nearly approximate symptomatology contemplated by a rating in excess of 30 percent under DC 7500. 

7. Entitlement to an initial compensable rating for scar of the left lower quadrant. 

The Veteran has been assigned a noncompensable rating for scar of the left lower quadrant pursuant to DC 7802. 38 C.F.R. § 4.118.    

In this regard, scars are rated under 38 C.F.R. § 4.118, DCs 7800 through 7805.  DC 7800 pertains to burn scars of the head, face, or neck; scars of the head, face, or neck due to other causes; or other disfigurement of the head, face, or neck.  

DC 7801 pertains to burn scars or scars due to other causes, not of the head, face, or neck, that are associated with underlying soft tissue damage.  Under this DC, a 10 percent rating is assigned when the scar(s) cover an area or areas of at least 6 square inches (39 sq. cm.) but less than 12 square inches (77 sq. cm.).  Higher ratings are available for greater areas affected.     

DC 7802 pertains to burn scars or scars due to other causes not of the head, face, or neck that are not associated with underlying soft tissue damage.  Under this DC, a single 10 percent rating is assigned when the scar(s) cover an area or areas of 144 square inches (929 sq. cm) or greater.  

DC 7804 provides that one or two scars that are unstable or painful warrant a 10 percent evaluation.  Three or four scars that are unstable or painful warrant a 20 percent rating, while five or more scars that are unstable or painful warrant a 30 percent evaluation.  Note (1) states that an unstable scar is one where, for any reason, there is frequent loss of covering of skin over the scar.  Note (2) states that if one or more scars are both unstable and painful, the rater is to add 10 percent to the evaluation that is based on the total number of unstable or painful scars.  Scars evaluated under DCs 7800, 7801, 7802, or 7805 may also receive an evaluation under DC 7804, when applicable. Note (3). 

DC 7805 provides that other scars (including linear scars) and other effects of scars evaluated under DCs 7800, 7801, 7802, and 7804 that require the evaluation of any disabling effect(s) not considered in a rating provided under DCs 7800-7804 should be rated under an appropriate DC.  

Based on a review of the evidence, the Board finds that, for the entire appeal period, an initial rating of 10 percent rating, but no higher, for the Veteran's scar of the left lower quadrant is warranted pursuant to DC 7804. In this regard, the February 2024 VA examination reflects that the Veteran's scar of the left lower quadrant measured 12 by 1.5 cm. While the examiner noted that such scar was not painful or unstable, during his November 2024 Board hearing, the Veteran testified that he could not sleep on his stomach or lean against anything because his scar feels he is being stabbed with an ice pick. Therefore, after resolving all doubt in favor of the Veteran, the Board finds that, for the entire appeal period, a 10 percent rating, but no higher, is warranted for his painful scar of the left lower quadrant pursuant to DC 7804. 

In this regard, as DC 7800 pertains to scars of the head, face, or neck, such is inapplicable in the instant case as the Veteran's scar is of the left lower quadrant. The Board further finds that, as the evidence does not show that such scar is of a size to warrant a separate compensable rating under DC 7801 or 7802, or unstable so as to warrant a higher rating under DC 7804, or results in any additional disabling effects as contemplated by DC 7805, higher or separate ratings are not warranted under such DCs. Thus, an initial rating of 10 percent, but no higher, is warranted for the Veteran's scar of the left lower quadrant. 

Other Considerations 

In reaching the foregoing determinations, the Board recognizes the Veteran's sincerely held belief that his erectile dysfunction, residuals of bladder cancer, left kidney removal, and scar of the left lower quadrant are more severe than as reflected by the currently assigned ratings. The Board must consider the entire evidence of record when analyzing the criteria laid out in the rating schedule. While the Board recognizes that the Veteran is competent to describe his symptomatology, he is not competent to provide an opinion regarding the severity of his symptomatology in accordance with the rating criteria. Woehlaert, supra. The Board finds the medical evidence in which professionals with medical expertise examined the Veteran in regard to his erectile dysfunction, residuals of bladder cancer, left kidney removal, and scar of the left lower quadrant, acknowledged his reported symptoms, and described the manifestations of such disabilities in light of the rating criteria to be more persuasive than his own reports regarding the severity of such disabilities.

The Board considered whether staged ratings under Fenderson, supra, are appropriate for the Veteran's service-connected erectile dysfunction, residuals of bladder cancer, left kidney removal, and scar of the left lower quadrant; however, the Board finds that his symptomatology has been stable throughout the appeal period. Therefore, assigning staged ratings is not warranted. Further, neither the Veteran nor his representative have raised any other issues, nor have any other issues been reasonably raised by the record, in connection with the initial rating claims adjudicated herein. Doucette v. Shulkin, 28 Vet. App. 366 (2017).

In reaching the foregoing determinations, the Board has resolved all doubt in the Veteran's favor, which has resulted in a partial award of an increased rating for his residuals of bladder cancer and scar of the left lower quadrant. However, insofar as the Board has denied higher or separate ratings for such disabilities and increased ratings for left kidney removal and erectile dysfunction, the weight of the probative evidence is against such aspects of the Veteran's claims. Therefore, the benefit of the doubt doctrine is not applicable and such initial rating claims must otherwise be denied. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7.

 

A. JAEGER

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	K. Clark

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.