Citation Nr: A25034743
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 210811-177599
DATE: April 15, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea, to include as due to posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and persistent depressive disorder, is granted.

FINDING OF FACT

Resolving all reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, his obstructive sleep apnea is caused by service-connected PTSD and persistent depressive disorder.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for service connection for obstructive sleep apnea are met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.310.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran had active service from July 2001 to July 2004.

In February 2021, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR), and requested review of a January 2021 decision. In May 2021, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) noted a duty to assist error had been identified during the HLR, and that after additional development was completed, the claim would be moved to the Supplemental Claim Review process. 

The rating decision on appeal was issued in July 2021 and constitutes an initial decision; therefore, the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), applies.  

In the August 2021 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Evidence Submission docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the July 2021 AOJ supplemental claim decision on appeal, as well as any evidence submitted by the Veteran or representative with, or within 90 days from receipt of, the VA Form 10182. 38 C.F.R. § 20.303. If evidence was submitted either (1) during the period after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal and prior to the date the Board received the VA Form 10182, or (2) more than 90 days following the date the Board received the VA Form 10182, the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.303, 20.801. 

Finally, the Board notes that in January 2024, the Veteran submitted a Priority Processing Request, stating that he is experiencing extreme financial hardship. As support, he submitted a mortgage statement indicating that he had not paid his prior month's mortgage payment. This request is interpreted as a motion to have his case advanced on the docket (AOD) pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 20.902. 

Generally, appeals are considered in docket number order, but may be advanced with evidence of sufficient cause, to include financial hardship. See 38 C.F.R. 

§ 20.800. In this case, the Board considered the Veteran's AOD request and finds that there is insufficient evidence to demonstrate the necessity of an AOD due to financial hardship. Therefore, the motion for AOD is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea, to include as due to PTSD and persistent depressive disorder, is granted.

The Veteran asserts that his obstructive sleep apnea is due to his PTSD and persistent depressive disorder. See May 2020 VA 21-526EZ. 

Upon review of the record, the Board finds that service connection for obstructive sleep apnea as secondary to the Veteran's PTSD and persistent depressive disorder is warranted.

As the benefit is being granted secondary to PTSD and persistent depressive disorder, the Board finds it is not necessary to discuss the additional raised secondary service connection contention related to tinnitus.

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303. The three-element test for service connection requires evidence of: (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166-67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

Service connection may also be granted for a disability that is proximately due to, or aggravated by, service-connected disease or injury. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.310 (a). Secondary service connection requires: (1) a service-connected disability; (2) a nonservice-connected disability; and (3) evidence that the nonservice-connected disability is either (a) proximately due to or the result of the service-connected disability or (b) aggravated (increased in severity) by the service-connected disability and not due to the natural progress of the nonservice-connected disability. Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439, 448 (1995) (en banc).

When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, the benefit of the doubt should be given to the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102. When, after careful consideration of all procurable and assembled data, a reasonable doubt arises regarding service origin, the degree of disability, or any other point, such doubt should be resolved in favor of the claimant. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

In the July 2021 rating decision on appeal, the AOJ made favorable findings that: (1) the Veteran has a diagnosis of obstructive sleep apnea, and (2) the claimed primary disability, PTSD and persistent depressive disorder, are service connected. Under the AMA, the Board is bound by favorable findings made by the AOJ. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.104 (c). Therefore, service connection in this instance turns on the question of whether there is a nexus between the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea and his service-connected PTSD and persistent depressive disorder.

There are opinions in favor of and against the Veteran's claim. VA obtained medical opinions in June 2020, November 2020, December 2020, January 2021, and July 2021.

The June 2020 VA examiner noted that the Veteran was overweight, bordering on obese. The examiner stated that "[b]eing overweight is a strong risk factor to sleep apnea," and, for that reason, the examiner found that sleep apnea was "less likely than not proximately due to or the result of" PTSD and persistent depressive disorder.

The November 2020 VA examiner stated that "[t]here is no clear causal factor that PTSD causes [obstructive sleep apnea]." The examiner also noted that obesity is a known risk factor for obstructive sleep apnea and that the Veteran had an elevated body mass index (BMI). For this reason, the examiner found it less likely than not that obstructive sleep apnea is due to PTSD. The examiner also stated that "there is no evidence to suggest that depression or anxiety cause [obstructive sleep apnea] in the medical literature."

In December 2020, a VA examiner stated that obstructive sleep apnea was less likely than not aggravated beyond its natural progression by PTSD and persistent depressive disorder, again noting the Veteran's obesity. 

In a January 2021 VA medical opinion, the examiner stated, "[t]here is no clear causal factor that PSD causes [obstructive sleep apnea]." The examiner acknowledged that medical literature shows associations between the two disabilities, though. The examiner also reiterated that obesity is the main risk factor for individuals with obstructive sleep apnea. 

In July 2021, a VA examiner stated, "[i]t is not clear or evidenced that it is most likely that the veteran is obese due to his service-connected [PTSD] and persistent depressive disorder." The examiner stated the Veteran "may be obese for other reasons," citing dietary or social reasons as potential causes. The examiner thus opined that the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea is less likely than not aggravated beyond its natural progression by PTSD and persistent depressive disorder.

Here, the Board finds that the VA opinions are all flawed for various reasons, largely because they are conclusory and do not adequately discuss whether the obstructive sleep apnea was caused by a service-connected disability either in a direct, etiological way or via multiple steps in a causal chain. Spicer v. McDonough, 61 F.4th 1360 (Fed. Cir. 2023). In this regard, the Board notes that all the VA examiners associated the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea with his weight, but none adequately addressed whether obesity was an intermediate step between the obstructive sleep apnea and the PTSD and persistent depressive disorder.

The Veteran also submitted a private medical opinion dated August 2021 on multiple occasions. In the opinion, Dr. S.B. opined that the Veteran's sleep apnea is more likely than not caused by and/or aggravated by the Veteran's service-connected PTSD and tinnitus. 

In support of this contention, the private clinician noted that "[t]he incidence of sleep apnea in veterans suffering from PTSD, [traumatic brain injury], and mood disorder is about 10 times higher than the incidence of sleep apnea in the general population, and 3-4 times higher than the obese population." The clinician stated that the mechanism of the development of sleep apnea is the same in both obese patients and those with PTSD, and that both involve an alteration of sleep and the involvement of rapid eye movement (REM) sleep. The clinician noted there is a bidirectional effect of both sleep apnea and obesity, and that cannot be interpreted as lack of causation. The clinician further noted that "[o]besity and PTSD in combination are far more likely to cause sleep apnea than either condition alone." The clinician thus noted that the effect of one of the conditions cannot be "scientifically segregated" from the other."  

Lastly, the clinician noted that medical literature shows that PTSD can lead to obesity, pointing to epidemiological studies showing adolescent depression frequently precedes adult obesity and that other mood disturbances, to include PTSD, can also be associated with substantial weight gain. The studies noted mood disorders might be related to side effects of medication, decrease in physical activity and symptoms of fatigue, or other environmental and psychological factors related to depression that may lead to overeating. Thus, the clinician opined that here, obesity is an intermediate step in the causation of sleep apnea.

The Board finds that the private opinion adequately discussed whether obstructive sleep apnea was caused by a service-connected disability, namely PTSD and persistent depressive disorder, via multiple steps in a causal chain. See Spicer, supra. Thus, the Board finds this opinion probative. See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008) (holding that most of the probative value of an opinion comes from its rationale or underlying reasoning).

In weighing the evidence of record, the Board finds the evidence is at least in approximate balance as to whether the Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea is related to his service-connected PTSD and persistent depressive disorder. Therefore, after resolving all doubt in favor of the Veteran, the Board finds that service connection for obstructive sleep apnea, as secondary to PTSD and persistent depressive disorder, is warranted. 38 U.S.C. § 5107 (b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102. 

 

S. Schick

Acting Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	A. Dean, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.