Citation Nr: A25034209
Decision Date: 04/14/25	Archive Date: 04/14/25

DOCKET NO. 240508-438669
DATE: April 14, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for kidney cancer is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from April 1976 to April 1980. 

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal of a January 2024 rating decision issued by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ). 

In May 2024, the Veteran filed VA Form 10182 Decision Review Request, Board Appeal, Notice of Disagreement, under the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA), and selected direct review.

The Veteran is advised that under direct review, the Board is only able to consider the evidence of record as of the January 2024 decision. Any evidence received after the January 2024 rating decision cannot be considered. If evidence was associated with the claims file during a period of time when additional evidence was not allowed, the Board has not considered it in its decision on the claim. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.300. However, as remand is warranted for the issue of entitlement to service connection for kidney cancer, any new evidence associated with the case file concerning that issue will be considered by the AOJ on remand.

Entitlement to service connection for kidney cancer is remanded.

The Veteran contends that the VA did not adequately develop the claim because exposure to chemical liquids and vapors encountered in the execution of clinical chemistry bench tests in the unvented laboratory facilities and exposure risks due to chemical vapors and absorption, via ungloved hands, was not considered. 

Under the AMA framework, the Board may remand, where there has been a duty to assist error prior to issuance of a rating decision. The VA has the duty to make reasonable efforts to assist a claimant in securing evidence necessary to substantiate their claim for VA benefits. See 38 U.S.C. ยง 5103, 5103A; 38 C.F.R. ยง 3.159(c). 

In November 2023, the AOJ completed a toxic risk exposure activity (TERA) assessment. However, the AOJ did not generate an Individual Longitudinal Exposure Record (ILER) to assess all of the TERA the Veteran was involved in during service. In failing to take this action the VA has not met the duty to assist.

In completing the TERA memorandum, the AOJ correctly determined that the Veteran was exposed to hematologics. However, the Veteran's military personnel records show that he, as a medical laboratory specialist, was involved in urinalysis, bacteriology, hematology chemistry, parasitology, and serology. He prepared medias and reagents used in isolating, identifying, and sensitivity testing of microorganisms, provided physician support and prepared reagents and solutions used in chemistry, maintained quality control, and performed administrative procedures necessary for his section. 

Given the nature of the Veteran's job duties, it is evident that in addition to exposure to the materials being tested, the Veteran would have been exposed to chemicals used in testing those materials. The AOJ did not consider any of the chemicals the Veteran would have been exposed to in performing his job duties. Therefore, the Board finds that the November 2023 TERA memorandum is deficient, and a new TERA memorandum must be completed. Furthermore, in completing the TERA memorandum, the AOJ must provide the Veteran with an opportunity to submit evidence of the particular chemicals that he was exposed to during his military service, as well as generate an ILER.

Additionally, the Veteran was afforded a VA kidney cancer examination in January 2024. As the examiner only considered the Veteran's exposure to hematologics, rather than all of the TERA the Veteran was involved in during service, the Board must find the January 2024 VA kidney cancer opinion to be inadequate. The Board further finds this opinion inadequate as the examiner did not discuss any facts of the case, to include private treatment records that showed a radical nephrectomy which had concerns for possible malignant tumor in the right kidney, or provide any analysis in support of its conclusion, to include the etiology of the Veteran's kidney condition. As part of the duty to assist, once VA has provided a VA examination, it is required to provide an adequate one, regardless of whether it was legally obligated to provide an examination in the first place. Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007). 

Based on the foregoing, remand is warranted for further development. 

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

1. The AOJ must conduct any appropriate development to determine all of the Veteran's toxic exposures during military service, to include generating an ILER for TERA and issuing a letter to the Veteran requesting information regarding his exposure to specific chemicals in service. The AOJ must then prepare a TERA memorandum.

2. After completing the development directed above, obtain an addendum opinion from an appropriate examiner not previously associated with the claim for the issuance of a medical opinion as to the nature and etiology of his kidney condition. The examiner must thoroughly review the Veteran's entire claims file, including a copy of this Remand.

The examiner is asked to provide the following:  

a.)	Opine whether it is at least as likely as not (at least an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence) that the Veteran's kidney condition is related to his military service, to include his TERA during his military service.

The examiner must consider all toxic exposures during the Veteran's military service. The examiner is asked to consider total potential exposure and the synergistic combined effect of all TERA of the Veteran.  

The examiner is reminded that a lack of evidence cannot be corroborating to conclude that there is no relationship between the Veteran's current disability and his military service. 

The examiner is advised that the Veteran is competent to report symptoms and treatment and that his reports, including his reports as to the onset and nature of his symptoms, must be considered along with the other evidence of record in formulating the requested opinion.

The examiner must provide a complete rationale for any opinion expressed. If the examiner is unable to opine without resorting to speculation, a basis for reaching this conclusion must be provided. 

 

 

A. J. Spector

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	B. Temple, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.1303.