Citation Nr: A25034067
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 240523-443202
DATE: April 11, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for tinnitus is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from September 1995 to September 2000.

The rating decision on appeal was issued in April 2024 under the modernized review system, also known as the Appeals Modernization Act.  In May 2024, the Veteran filed a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) and elected the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the April 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301.  Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.  However, because the Board is remanding the claim, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

REMAND

The Veteran seeks service connection for tinnitus that he contends is due to his active military service.  See March 2023 VA Form 21-4138.

For the following reasons, the Board remands?the Veteran's claim to correct pre-decisional duty to assist errors under the provisions of?38?C.F.R. §?20.802.? 

In September 2023, the Veteran was afforded a Hearing Loss and Tinnitus VA Examination.  The Veteran reported recurrent tinnitus that began in 1998 and has worsened.  The examiner opined that the Veteran's tinnitus was less likely than not caused by or a result of military noise exposure.  As a rationale, the examiner stated that the Veteran did not complain of tinnitus or hearing loss during or right after military service and that the Veteran's separation exam showed normal hearing without significant positive thresholds shifts.  The examiner further stated that the lack of evidence of any complaints during service and the time between the date of the present examination is significant without evidence of any audiology treatment in the intervening years.  Citing to a 2006 study, the examiner explained that while there is a possibility of a delay in onset of tinnitus due to noise exposure, as the time between noise exposure and onset of tinnitus lengthens the possibility that tinnitus will be triggered by other factors increases.  Some of the factors that contributed to hearing loss and tinnitus following service included: recreational, occupational, environmental, aging, disease, medications, pollution, genetics, hereditary, and smoking.  In conclusion, the examiner stated that although the Veteran may have had noise exposure, noise exposure does not equate to noise injury, and the Veteran's tinnitus is less likely than not related to military noise exposure.  See September 2023 Hearing Loss and Tinnitus VA Examination.

When VA undertakes to obtain an evaluation, it must ensure that the evaluation is adequate.? See Barr v. Nicholson, 21?Vet. App.?303, 312 (2007).? In this instance, the medical opinion is inadequate.? Specifically, the examiner impermissibly relied on a lack of in-service complaint and provided a conclusory opinion. See Horn v. Shinseki,?25?Vet. App.?231, 240?(2012); see also Dalton v. Nicholson,?21?Vet. App.?23?(2007).? Furthermore, to the extent the examiner asserted that other factors following service triggered the Veteran's tinnitus, the assertion is conclusory and does not contain clear supporting data and a reasoned medical explanation connecting the two, especially considering the Veteran contended that his tinnitus began in service.  See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22?Vet. App.?295, 301 (2008).  Here, the AOJ's reliance on the inadequate opinion in denying the Veteran's claim is a pre-decisional duty to assist error that must be corrected.? 

Based on the foregoing facts, prior to denying the Veteran's claim, the AOJ should have obtained an adequate medical opinion.? On remand, an adequate medical opinion should be obtained to correct the AOJ's pre-decisional duty to assist error.? 

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Obtain a medical opinion from an appropriate examiner addressing the etiology of the Veteran's tinnitus.? The entire claims file should be made available to and reviewed by the opinion provider.? 

Following review of the entire record, the opinion provider should opine whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's tinnitus had its onset during, or is otherwise related to, his military service, to include in-service noise exposure.? 

If the reviewing opinion provider maintains that no report of tinnitus in service is the basis for the lack of a relationship between the Veteran's?tinnitus?and service, the opinion provider must explain that clinical significance, and explain from a medical standpoint, how such results bear on the question at issue.? The opinion provider should still provide a nexus opinion even if it is determined that tinnitus had post-service onset.? 

The opinion provider should explain the significance, if any, of normal hearing test results on separation and how such results bear on the issue of entitlement to service connection for tinnitus, to include on a delayed onset theory of entitlement.? 

All opinions should be supported with a complete and thorough explanation or rationale and should be based on consideration of all pertinent lay and medical evidence.? 

If, in the opinion of the opinion provider, responses to the questions above cannot be provided without an in-person or virtual exam or interview, such should be scheduled.? The opinion provider should provide an explanation as to why an examination is necessary.? All efforts to schedule an examination should be documented in the claims file. 

 

 

JIMMY L. BARDIN

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Ti'a L. Smith, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.