Citation Nr: A25034288
Decision Date: 04/14/25	Archive Date: 04/14/25

DOCKET NO. 240828-470250
DATE: April 14, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an effective before March 10, 2023, for service connection for irritable bowel syndrome with diarrhea is denied.

Entitlement to a 30 percent initial rating for irritable bowel syndrome with diarrhea is granted.

Entitlement to service connection for lumbosacral strain is granted.

Entitlement to service connection for hematemesis, claimed as vomiting blood, as secondary to service-connected posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) with alcohol abuse, is granted.

REMANDED

Service connection for an acid reflux disability, claimed as gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD), is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The evidence weighs persuasively against the claim for an effective before March 10, 2023, for service connection for irritable bowel syndrome with diarrhea

2. VA received an intent to file a claim on March 10, 2023, and the Veteran filed his initial claim for service connection for irritable bowel syndrome on June 7, 2023.

3. There were no earlier claims for service connection for irritable bowel syndrome.

4. The Veteran's irritable bowel syndrome with diarrhea manifested severe symptoms with diarrhea and more or less constant abdominal distress.

5. The Veteran's lumbosacral strain is directly related to an in-service injury.

6. The Veteran's hematemesis is proximately caused by PTSD with alcohol abuse.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for an effective date before March 10, 2023, for service connection for irritable bowel syndrome with diarrhea have not been met. 38 U.S.C. § 5110; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.155, 3.400.

2. The criteria for a 30 percent rating for irritable bowel syndrome with diarrhea have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.105, 4.1, 4.2, 4.7, 4.114, Diagnostic Code 7319.

3. Lumbosacral strain was incurred during active service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303 (d).

4. Hematemesis is proximately due to and the result of the Veteran's service-connected PTSD with alcohol abuse. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.310 (a).

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from March 2004 to March 2008.

These matters come to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a June 2024 rating decision. In August 2024, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 10182 Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) and elected the Direct Review docket. Although the Veteran may have changed his docket election as of the time this decision, the Board finds that prompt adjudication, instead of more delay, benefits the Veteran in this particular case.

The June 2024 decision on appeal is a Higher-Level Review decision. In January 2024, the Veteran filed a VA Form 20-0996 Request for Higher-Level Review that sought review of a December 2023 rating decision. In reviewing a Higher-Level Review decision, the Board's review is limited to the evidence of record when the underlying rating decision for which the Veteran requested higher-level review. As a result, this decision can only consider the evidence of record when December 2023 rating decision was issued on December 11, 2023. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301.

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider with respect to the appealed claim, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501.  If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered.  Id.  Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.  However, because the Board is remanding the claim for service connection for an acid reflux disability, claimed as GERD, any evidence the Board could not consider with respect to that claim will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claim.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

Effective Date

The effective date of an award based on an initial claim, or a supplemental claim of compensation, dependency and indemnity compensation or pension, shall be fixed in accordance with the facts found, but shall not be earlier than the date of receipt of application therefor. 38 U.S.C. § 5110 (a). Unless provided otherwise, the effective date of an evaluation and award of pension, compensation, or dependency and indemnity compensation based on an initial claim or supplemental claim will be the date of receipt of the claim or the date entitlement arose, whichever is later. 38 C.F.R. § 3.400.

If VA receives a complete application form prescribed by the Secretary appropriate to the benefit sought within one year of receipt of an intent to file a claim, VA will consider the complete claim filed as of the date the intent to file a claim was received. 38 C.F.R. § 3.155 (b).

1. Effective date for service connection for irritable bowel syndrome with diarrhea.

The Veteran seeks an earlier effective date for service connection for his irritable bowel syndrome with diarrhea. The current effective date is March 10, 2023. After reviewing the record, the Board finds that an earlier effective date is not warranted. The correct effective date for service connection for irritable bowel syndrome with diarrhea is March 10, 2023, the date the Veteran's initial claim for service connection is considered to have been received. 

Here, VA mailed the Veteran and his representative a letter stating that VA had received an intent to file a claim on March 10, 2023. VA then received the Veteran's VA Form 21-526EZ application for service connection for irritable bowel syndrome with diarrhea on June 7, 2023. The application for service connection was received within one year of the intent to file, and as such, the application is considered to have been filed on March 10, 2023.

Service connection was granted for irritable bowel syndrome in a December 2023 rating decision, and the effective date was initially set as June 7, 2023. However, in the June 2024 higher-level review rating decision on appeal, the Agency of Original Jurisdiction corrected the effective date to March 10, 2023, the date the intent to file a claim was received and the date the Veteran's initial claim for service connection for irritable bowel with diarrhea is considered to have been received.

The Board has considered whether there is another basis to grant an effective date before March 10, 2023. However, the evidence does not demonstrate an earlier application for service connection for irritable bowel syndrome was received before March 10, 2023.

VA did receive earlier intent to file a claim forms in June 2018 and July 2021. These forms were received well over a year before the June 7, 2023 application and did not preserve an earlier effective date for service connection for irritable bowel syndrome. The Veteran did not file any application within one year of the June 2018 intent to file, and submitted additional claims later in July 2021 which did not include a claim for service connection for irritable bowel syndrome.

Considering the foregoing, the Board finds an effective date before March 10, 2023, for the grant of service connection for irritable bowel syndrome is not warranted. VA received an intent to file a claim on March 10, 2023, then received the Veteran's initial claim for service connection for irritable bowel syndrome within one year. The initial claim is considered to be filed as of the date the intent to file was received. No earlier application for service connection for irritable bowel syndrome, and there was no other intent to file a claim received within the one year prior to the Veteran's initial application for service connection for irritable bowel syndrome. The appeal for an earlier effective date for service connection for irritable bowel syndrome is denied. 38 U.S.C. § 5110; 38 C.F.R. §§, 3.155 (b), 3.400.

Disability Ratings

Disability ratings are determined by applying the criteria set forth in the VA Schedule for Rating Disabilities (Rating Schedule), found in 38 C.F.R., Part 4. The ratings are intended to compensate impairment in earning capacity due to a service-connected disease or injury. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1. 

Where there is question as to which of the two evaluations shall be applied, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria for that rating. Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7.

After consideration of the evidence, any reasonable doubt remaining is resolved in favor of the veteran. 38 C.F.R. § 4.3.

2. Evaluation of irritable bowel syndrome with diarrhea.

The Veteran seeks a higher rating for his service-connected irritable bowel syndrome with diarrhea, which is currently assigned a 0 percent noncompensable rating.

The Veteran's irritable bowel syndrome is rated under Diagnostic Code 7319, which applies to irritable colon syndrome. A noncompensable rating is warranted for mild irritable colon syndrome with disturbances of bowel function with occasional episodes of abdominal distress; a 10 percent rating is warranted where there is moderate irritable colon syndrome with frequent episodes of bowel disturbance with abdominal distress; a 30 percent rating is warranted for severe irritable colon syndrome, with diarrhea, or alternating diarrhea and constipation, with more or less constant abdominal distress. 38 C.F.R. § 4.114, Diagnostic Code 7319.

VA treatment records show the Veteran has reported having chronic diarrhea for many years, with diarrheic episodes every day. In June 2022 he reported having chronic diarrhea for at least 10 years, and in April 2023 the Veteran again complained of frequent diarrhea for years.

The Veteran was provided a VA examination for intestinal conditions in November 2023. He reported progressively worsening, persistent, and recurrent distress. While many of the Veteran's symptoms were related to acid reflux, the Veteran also reported abdominal distension and bloating, excessive gas and flatulence, changes in bowel habits including frequent bowel movements and diarrhea three times per day. He also reported being prescribed Rifaximin with no change in his symptoms. No other intestinal conditions were identified. The examiner found no weight loss or malnutrition due to the Veteran's irritable bowel syndrome, and no other complications or general health effects attributable to the condition.  

Considering the foregoing, the Board finds the Veteran's symptoms more nearly approximate the "severe" symptoms contemplated by a 30 percent rating under Diagnostic Code 7319 for diarrhea with more or less constant abdominal distress. The Veteran has reported having diarrhea at least three times per day for many years, with associated symptoms occurring almost constantly. Laypersons are competent to testify to visible or otherwise observable symptoms of disability, and the Veteran's reported symptoms are lay observable. Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1376-77 (Fed. Cir. 2007); Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331, 1336 (Fed. Cir. 2006). The Veteran is competent to report the nature, frequency, and severity of his symptoms, and the Board finds him credible. The November 2023 examiner did determine the Veteran had no episodes of any abdominal distress. However, the Veteran's competent and credible lay statements provided during the examination and throughout VA treatments indicate he has significant abdominal distress consisting of diarrhea multiple times per day with abdominal distention, bloating, and excessive gas. 

A 30 percent rating is the maximum schedular rating available under Diagnostic Code 7319. The Veteran has not contended, and the evidence does not reflect, that he has experienced symptoms not contemplated by the criteria. The Board is not obligated to analyze whether remand for referral for extraschedular consideration is warranted if extraschedular ratings are neither sought by a claimant or reasonably raised by the facts found by the Board. Doucette v. Shulkin, 28 Vet. App. 366, 369-70 (2017). In addition, Diagnostic Code 7319 reflects the predominant disability picture of the Veteran's irritable bowel syndrome with diarrhea, and rating the Veteran's disability under another diagnostic code is not warranted. 38 C.F.R. § 4.114.

In sum, a 30 percent initial rating is warranted under Diagnostic Code 7319 for the Veteran's irritable bowel syndrome with diarrhea. 

Service Connection 

Veterans are entitled to compensation from VA if they develop a disability resulting from personal injury suffered or disease contracted in line of duty, or for aggravation of a preexisting injury suffered or disease contracted in line of duty. 38 U.S.C. § 1110. Service connection may also be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge, when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (d).

To establish a right to compensation for a present disability, a Veteran must show: (1) the existence of a present disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

If the evidence for and against a claim is in equipoise, the claim will be granted. 38 C.F.R. § 4.3. When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, the Secretary shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49, 56 (1990). Only when the evidence persuasively favors one side or another is the benefit of the doubt doctrine not for application. Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021).

3. Back disability.

The Veteran seeks service connection for a back disability. Service treatment records include a December 2007 post-deployment health assessment showing the Veteran reported back pain during a deployment to Okinawa. The service treatment records do not show any further complaints or treatments for back pain, and the Veteran denied a history of recurrent back pain and problems in the January 2008 separation report of medical history.

Post-service VA treatment records do show the Veteran reported chronic untreated lower back pain during a February 2018 VA mental health evaluation. The post-service records again do not show further complaints or treatments for back pain.

The Veteran was provided a VA back conditions examination in November 2023. He reported a gradual onset of lower back pain while in service, which was aggravated by jumping off 7-ton trucks, during ruck marches, and physical and infantry trainings. He also reported that he was seen during service for back pain and was treated with motrin, and that his back pain had been occasional since separating from service. The examiner diagnosed lumbosacral strain.

The November 2023 examiner provided four separate negative medical opinions that addressed whether the Veteran's current back disability was related to the documented back pain during his service, related to the Veteran's combat during his service in Iraq, was related to toxic exposure risk activities during service, or was related to an undiagnosed illness or medically unexplained chronic multi symptom illness. 

The November 2023 examiner provided similar rationales for each opinion offered, including the opinion addressing whether the Veteran's current back disability was related to the back pain during his service. The examiner it was less likely than not the Veteran's current back disability was caused by back pain during service or toxic exposures during service. The examiner explained that while the service treatment records noted the Veteran did report symptoms of back pain during a deployment, there is no medical record or documentation of the Veteran being seen, treated, or diagnosed with any back conditions. The examiner noted diagnosing a lumbar strain due to limited range of motion and x-ray imaging, but that the Veteran has not sought medical treatment or obtained x-ray imaging during or since separation from service in 2008, more than 15 years after separation from service. The examiner concluded that without chronicity of care or evidence to confirm a current diagnosis or injury during service or after service, a post-service event, illness, the injury is considered to be a more likely etiology.

The Board considered the Veteran's lay statements in support of his claim regarding the onset and continuity of his back symptoms. Veterans are competent to provide evidence of that which they experience, including symptoms and medical history, and are competent to testify observable symptoms of disability. Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465 (1994); Jandreau, 492 F.3d at 1376-77; Buchanan, 451 F.3d at 1336. If lay evidence is competent, the Board must then determine if the evidence is credible, or worthy of belief. Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 308 (2007).

The Veteran is competent to report that he had a gradual onset of lower back pain while in service related to jumping off trucks, ruck marches, and trainings, which were treated with motrin. His reports of in-service symptoms are supported by his reports in the December 2007 post-deployment health assessment showing back pains related to his deployment to Okinawa. While the January 2008 report of medical history indicates the Veteran denied a history of recurrent back pains during service, the Board observes that the December 2007 post-deployment assessment was completed only one month prior. 

The Veteran is also competent to report that his back pains continued following his separation from service and were occasional thereafter. Post-service treatment records are mostly negative for complaints, treatments, or diagnoses relating to the Veteran's back. However, he did report chronic untreated lower back pains during a February 2018 VA mental health evaluation. This supports finding the Veteran's back pains, while intermittent, have been present for an extended period of time and are generally untreated. 

Resolving any doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Board finds the Veteran's reports that he had gradually worsening back pains during service that have continued following his separation from service are credible and constitute highly probative evidence in support of the claim. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

For a medical opinion to be given weight, it must be: (1) based upon sufficient facts or data; (2) the product of reliable principles and methods; and (3) the result of principles and methods reliably applied to the facts. Nieves-Rodriquez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 302 (2008). The probative value of a medical opinion primarily comes from its reasoning; threshold considerations are whether a person opining is suitably qualified and sufficiently informed. Id. at 304.

Initially, the Board observes that the Veteran has not argued that a current back disability is related to combat, is related to toxic exposure risk activities during his service in Southwest Asia, or is otherwise related to an undiagnosed illness or medically unexplained chronic multi symptom illness. Furthermore, sub-regulatory guidance exempts claims based on physical trauma from requiring medical opinions addressing toxic exposure risk activity under 38 U.S.C. § 1168 based on a lack of scientific evidence indicating an association between such injuries and toxic exposure. See VBA Letter 20-22-10, 10-13, Processing Claims Involving the PACT Act, 87 Fed. Reg. 78,543 (Dec. 22, 2022). In addition, the Veteran's lumbosacral strain is a diagnosed injury with a clear and specific etiology. As such, the opinions that address combat, toxic exposure risk activity, and Gulf War presumptions for undiagnosed illnesses and medically unexplained chronic multi symptom illnesses are not particularly relevant to the Veteran's claim.

However, the Board finds the November 2023 opinion that the Veteran's current lumbosacral strain is less likely than not related to his in-service back pains is of lessened probative weight. The examiner relied heavily on the lack of post-service complaints, treatments, or diagnoses in VA treatment records in support of the negative opinion. However, the Board has found the Veteran's reports of post-service continuity are credible, and VA may not determine the Veteran's lay reports of back symptoms that have continued since separation lack credibility merely because they are unaccompanied by contemporaneous medical evidence. Buchanan, 451 F.3d at 1337. The Veteran also did report chronic lower back pains during a December 2018 VA appointment, which the examiner did not address. The examiner also explained that a post-service event, illness, the injury is considered to be a more likely etiology of the Veteran's current lumbosacral strain, of which there is little to no evidence. The opinion also indicates the Veteran did not injure his back during service, despite acknowledging the Veteran did report back pains during a deployment in service and the Veteran's lay reports of the onset of his back pains. 

Considering the foregoing, the most probative evidence weighs in favor of the claim for service connection for a back disability. The Veteran reported back pains during service, and has competently and credibly reported that his symptoms continued after separation without evidence of post-service injuries. The medical opinions are afforded substantially lessened probative weight. Service connection for lumbosacral strain is accordingly granted. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303.

4. Vomiting blood and hematemesis.

The Veteran also seeks service connection for vomiting blood, which has been diagnosed as hematemesis. He initially claimed service connection for the disability as directly incurred during service. However, after reviewing the record, the evidence weighs in favor of finding that the Veteran's current hematemesis is secondary to his PTSD with alcohol abuse.

For secondary service connection, disability which is proximately due to, or the result of, a service-connected disease or injury shall be service connected. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310 (a). Any increase in severity of a nonservice-connected disease or injury that is proximately due to or the result of a service-connected disease or injury, and not due to the natural progress of the nonservice-connected disease, will also be service connected. C.F.R. § 3.310 (b).

Here, the Veteran's service treatment records do show he reported coughing and vomiting blood for the past 2.5 years in September 2007. A physical examination of the Veteran's abdomen was normal, and no specific diagnosis was made at the time. In-service health assessments, and the January 2008 separation report of medical history, are generally negative for relevant symptoms or complaints. The January 2008 medical history does indicate the Veteran reported that he had coughed up blood, but that this response was crossed out and that the Veteran selected "no" instead.

Post-service VA treatment records do show the Veteran had reported nausea and vomiting in the morning during treatments related to chronic alcohol use. The post-service records do not generally include complaints of vomiting or coughing up blood.

The Veteran was provided a VA examination for stomach and duodenal conditions in November 2023. He reported vomiting blood every morning due to his alcohol consumption, and that he drank a 12 pack and a bottle of bourbon every day. He also reported that his VA providers were aware and that he was trying to get assistance with alcoholism, and that this was related to his PTSD. The Veteran also reported that he began vomiting blood in 2009, which was after he separated from active service. The examiner diagnosed hematemesis. 

The November 2023 examiner did provide two negative medical opinions. The first opinion addresses whether the Veteran's hematemesis constituted an undiagnosed illness or a medically unexplained chronic multi-symptom illness of unknown etiology under 38 U.S.C. § 1117. The second opinion addresses whether the Veteran's hematemesis was related to his toxic exposure risk activities during his service in Iraq under 38 U.S.C. § 1168. Both opinions contained similar rationales. In each opinion, the examiner concluded the Veteran's hematemesis condition was due to his alcohol consumption, and explained the hematemesis was less likely than not related to the total potential exposures through all applicable military deployments. No medical opinions addressing whether the Veteran's hematemesis was incurred directly during his service or was secondary to a service-connected disease or injury were provided. 

There is some evidence the Veteran's hematemesis began during his service. As noted, he was treated for coughing and vomiting blood during service in September 2007. There are no other documented complaints or treatments in the service treatment records, and the Veteran appears to have denied any relevant history when he completed the January 2008 report of medical history for separation. In addition, while the Veteran has reported nausea and vomiting in post-service treatment records relating to his alcohol use disorder, those records are entirely negative for complaints or treatments of any coughing or vomiting blood. The Veteran also reported a post-service onset during the November 2023 examination. 

However, the evidence weighs persuasively in favor of finding that the Veteran's currently diagnosed hematemesis disability is proximately due to and the result of his service-connected PTSD with alcohol abuse. The Veteran has reported that he coughs up blood in the morning due to his alcohol consumption. Laypersons are competent to testify to visible or otherwise observable symptoms of disability, and the Veteran's reported symptoms are lay observable. Jandreau, 492 F.3d at 1376-77; Buchanan, 451 F.3d at 1336. Although the November 2023 examiner provided two negative opinions, she explicitly determined that the Veteran's hematemesis was due to his alcohol consumption based on the Veteran's competent lay reports relating to his symptoms. While the November 2023 examiner did not provide any formal medical opinion addressing secondary service connection, she did conclude the Veteran's hematemesis is caused by his alcohol consumption. This determination is in effect a medical opinion weighing in favor of finding that the Veteran's hematemesis is secondary to his service-connected PTSD with alcohol abuse. There is little probative evidence to the contrary.

In sum, the probative evidence weighs in favor of finding the Veteran's hematemesis is proximately due to his service-connected PTSD with alcohol abuse. Service connection for hematemesis as secondary to service-connected PTSD with alcohol abuse is therefore warranted.  

REASONS FOR REMAND

This appeal is subject to the Appeals Modernization Act. When a pre-decisional duty-to-assist error occurs, the Board may have those errors corrected before deciding the claims on appeal. The Board may also remand for correction of any other error by the Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ) in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty if correction of the error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating a Veteran's claim. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802.

5. Service connection for an acid reflux disability, claimed as gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD).

The Veteran seeks service connection for an acid reflux disability, which he has claimed as gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD). The record does not show the Veteran has been diagnosed with GERD. However, there is evidence the Veteran has current reflux symptoms, and the Board has recharacterized the issue on appeal.

After reviewing the record, the Board finds the claim for service connection for an acid reflux disability must be remanded to correct multiple pre-decisional duty to assist errors in developing the Veteran's claim for service connection for Parkinson's disease. 

Service treatment records show the Veteran reported a history of frequent indigestion or heartburn on the January 2008 separation report of medical history, with additional notes showing the Veteran used over-the-counter medications for heartburn. Post-service treatment records do not show complaints, treatments, or diagnoses relating to acid reflux or GERD.

The Veteran was provided a VA esophageal conditions examination in November 2023. He reported his symptoms had started approximated 10 years prior, that he had not been treated for GERD, and that he had reflux symptoms after drinking soda. The examiner determined the Veteran did not have any current esophageal disability, including GERD. 

The examiner also provided two medical opinions. First, the examiner concluded it was less likely than not that the Veteran's claimed GERD disability was incurred in or caused by his service. The examiner explained she was unable to confirm any current or chronic diagnosis because the Veteran's complaints were subjective only, and no diagnosis was warranted. Second, the examiner concluded the Veteran's claimed GERD disability was less likely than not caused by toxic exposure risk activities during the Veteran's service. The examiner did explain that there was currently no known cause to explain the development of GERD. However, the examiner again explained the Veteran did not have GERD, and that his complaints were subjective only and no diagnosis was warranted.

Here, the examiner disregarded the Veteran's competent lay statements indicating that he has acid reflux symptoms, and did not address the January 2008 report of medical history showing the Veteran had reflux symptoms treated with over-the-counter medications during his service. The examiner provided little explanation for favoring the absence of post-service medical evidence over the in-service documentation of symptoms and the Veteran's competent lay statements of current symptoms. Notably, the Veteran is competent to report lay-observable symptoms of disability, including acid reflux and heartburn symptoms. Jandreau, 492 F.3d at 1376-77; Layno, 6 Vet. App. 465. The United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims has held that a VA medical examiner must address a Veteran's lay statements to provide the Board with an adequate medical opinion, and that when the Board does not find a Veteran to be not credible or not competent to offer the lay evidence, the appropriate remedy is to remand for VA to obtain a new examination. Miller v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 249, 259-60 (2020).

Furthermore, the November 2023 examination and pinions appear to be partially based on an inaccurate factual premise. The examiner found the Veteran's complaints were subjective only, and indicated there were no complaints or symptoms during the Veteran's service. However, he reported a history of indigestion and heartburn on the January 2008 separation report of medical history, which also shows he used over-the-counter medication to treat his heartburn symptoms. Although medical records do not show the Veteran has been diagnosed with GERD, there is in-service evidence of relevant symptoms. A medical opinion based on an inaccurate factual premise has no probative value. Reonal v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 458, 461 (1993); Monzingo v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 97, 107 (2012). However, there is still conflicting evidence regarding whether the Veteran has a current disability that is related to his service. Although the service treatment records show the Veteran took over-the-counter medications to treat heartburn symptoms, he reported a post-service onset of his current symptoms during the November 2023 examination, and he has not been diagnosed with any particular acid reflux disorder. 

When VA provides an examination and opinion, it must ensure that the examination and opinion are adequate. Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007). Considering the foregoing, a new VA examination and opinion should be obtained to determine whether the Veteran has a current acid reflux disability that was incurred in or is otherwise related to his service.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for an appropriate VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of his claimed acid reflux disability, including but not limited to GERD. After identifying any current disability, the examiner must provide the following opinions:

a.	Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's current acid reflux disability was incurred in or is otherwise related to his active service? 

The examiner must address the January 2008 report of medical history showing the Veteran reported a history of indigestion and heartburn, and that he took over-the-counter medications for his symptoms.

b.	Is it at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that there is a relationship between the Veteran's claimed acid reflux disability and his toxic exposure risk activities during service, specifically his exposures during his deployments to Iraq?

The examiner must consider the total potential exposure through the Veteran's applicable military deployments, and the synergistic, combined effect of all the Veteran's toxic exposure risk activities.

 

 

SHAUN S. SPERANZA

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Morse, Stenson

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.