Citation Nr: A25034564
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 240105-407481
DATE: April 15, 2025

ORDER

An increased rating of 60 percent for gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) is granted.

Service connection for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), with anxiety and depression, is granted.

Service connection for erectile dysfunction, to include as secondary to the Veteran's service-connected PTSD, is granted.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1.  For the entire appeal period, the Veteran's GERD has more nearly approximated symptom combinations productive of severe impairment of health.

2. The Veteran has a current diagnosis of PTSD, which is related to his in-service stressor.

3. The Veteran's erectile dysfunction disability is due to his service-connected PTSD.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for a 60 percent rating for GERD are met. 38 U.S.C. § 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.321, 4.1, 4.114, Diagnostic Code (DC) 7399-7346.

2. The criteria for service connection for PTSD are met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.304.

3. The criteria for service connection for erectile dysfunction, to include as secondary to service-connected PTSD, are met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.304.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Navy from September 1981 to September 1985. The Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) is grateful to the Veteran for his honorable service.

In January 2024, the Veteran timely appealed the September 2023 rating decision (which denied service connection for PTSD and an increased rating for GERD) and the March 2023 rating decision (which denied service connection for erectile dysfunction) and requested Direct Review of the evidence considered by the AOJ. 84 Fed. Reg. 138, 177 (Jan. 18, 2019) (codified at 38 C.F.R. § 19.2(d)). As the Veteran elected a direct review appeal lane, this review will be based upon the evidence already submitted to VA as of the date of the rating decisions on appeal.

Increased rating.

Disability evaluations are determined by evaluating the extent to which a Veteran's service-connected disability adversely affects his or her ability to function under the ordinary conditions of daily life, including employment, by comparing his or her symptomatology with the criteria set forth in the Schedule for Rating Disabilities. The percentage ratings represent as far as can practicably be determined the average impairment in earning capacity resulting from such diseases and injuries and the residual conditions in civilian occupations. Generally, the degree of disabilities specified are considered adequate to compensate for considerable loss of working time from exacerbation or illness proportionate to the severity of the several grades of disability. 38 U.S.C. § 1155 ; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1. Separate diagnostic codes identify the various disabilities and the criteria for specific ratings.

If two disability evaluations are potentially applicable, the higher evaluation will be assigned to the disability picture that more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating. Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7. Any reasonable doubt regarding the degree of disability will be resolved in favor of the Veteran. 38 C.F.R. § 4.3. However, the evaluation of the same disability under various diagnoses, known as pyramiding, is to be avoided. 38 C.F.R. § 4.14.

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent for GERD.

The Veteran contends he is entitled to a rating in excess of 10 percent for gastroparesis with GERD.

The service-connected GERD was assigned a 10 percent disability rating under Diagnostic Code 7399-7346 indicating that GERD has been rated as analogous to hiatal hernia. 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.20, 4.114. 

This disability is rated under Diagnostic Code (DC) 7399-7346. Hyphenated diagnostic codes are used when a rating under one diagnostic code requires use of an additional diagnostic code to identify the basis for the disability rating assigned; the additional code is shown after the hyphen. 38 C.F.R. § 4.27. Unlisted disabilities requiring rating by analogy will be coded first with the numbers of the most closely related body part and "99." 38 C.F.R. § 4.27. In this instance DC 7399 pertains to the schedule of ratings - digestive system. 38 C.F.R. § 4.114. DC 7346 pertains to hernia hiatal. 38 C.F.R. § 4.114, Diagnostic Codes 7399, 7346.

Ratings under Diagnostic Codes 7301 to 7329, inclusive, 7331, 7342, and 7345 to 7348, inclusive, will not be combined with each other. A single rating will be assigned under the Diagnostic Code that reflects the predominant disability picture, with elevation to the next higher rating where the severity of the overall disability warrants elevation. 38 C.F.R. § 4.114.

Diagnostic Code 7346 provides for a 60 percent rating for hiatal hernia when there are symptoms of pain, vomiting, material weight loss and hematemesis or melena with moderate anemia; or other symptom combinations productive of severe impairment of health. A 30 percent rating is assigned for hiatal hernia with persistently recurrent epigastric distress with dysphagia, pyrosis, and regurgitation, accompanied by substernal or arm or shoulder pain, productive of considerable impairment of health. A 10 percent rating is assigned if there are 2 or more symptoms for the 30 percent evaluation of less severity.

The rating criteria does not define the terms "considerable" or "severe." However, the term "considerable" is defined by the dictionary as "large in extent or degree," and "severe" is defined as "very painful or harmful." Merriam-Webster's Collegiate Dictionary 267, 1140 (11th ed. 2012).

In assigning a rating under diagnostic 7346, the Board may not consider the ameliorative effects of medication. See Jones v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 56, 63 (2012). The rating criteria are not successive or cumulative with that of the lower rating. See Tatum v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 152, 155 (2009); see also Stankevich v. Nicholson, 19 Vet. App. 470, 472 (2006) (The Court recognized that disabilities rated by analogy will not show all objective criteria of the analogous rating.

With respect to the phrase "persistently recurrent," the Board notes that generally the word "persistent" is defined as existing for a long or longer than usual time or continuously; thus, the Board finds that the phrase persistent recurrent refers to symptoms that reoccur for continuously for a long period of time. See MERRIAM-WEBSTER, https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/persistent.

Dysphagia is defined as difficulty in swallowing. See Dorland's Illustrated Medical Dictionary, 587 (31st ed. 2007).

Pyrosis is defined as heartburn. Id., at 1587.

Hematemesis is defined as the vomiting of blood. Id., at 842.

Melena is defined as the passage of dark-colored feces stained with blood pigments or with altered blood. Id., at 1142.

The Board notes that the criteria for diagnostic code 7346 changed in May 2024. The May 19, 2024, amendments added Diagnostic Code 7206 for rating GERD. Under Diagnostic Code 7206, a 10 percent rating is assigned for documented history of esophageal stricture(s) that requires daily medications to control dysphagia otherwise asymptomatic. A 30 percent rating is assigned for documented history of recurrent esophageal stricture(s) causing dysphagia which requires dilation no more than two times per year. A 50 percent rating is assigned for documented history of recurrent or refractory esophageal stricture(s) causing dysphagia which requires at least one of the following: (1) dilation three or more times per year, (2) dilation using steroids at least one time per year, or (3) esophageal stent placement. Finally, an 80 percent rating is assigned for documented history of recurrent or refractory esophageal stricture(s) causing dysphagia with at least one of the following symptoms present: (1) aspiration, (2) undernutrition, and/or (3) substantial weight loss as defined by 38 C.F.R. § 4.112 (a) and treatment with either surgical correction of esophageal stricture(s) or percutaneous esophago-gastrointestinal tube (PEG tube).

Under Note (4) to Diagnostic Code 7206, recurrent esophageal stricture is defined as the inability to maintain target esophageal diameter beyond four weeks after the target diameter has been achieved. Note (5) defines refractory esophageal stricture as the inability to achieve target esophageal diameter despite receiving no fewer than five dilation sessions performed at two-week intervals.

Under 38 C.F.R. § 4.112 (a), substantial weight loss means involuntary loss greater than 20 percent of an individual's baseline weight sustained for three months with diminished quality of self-care or work tasks. Baseline weight is defined as the clinically documented average weight for the two-year period preceding the onset of illness or, if relevant, the weight recorded at the veteran's most recent discharge physical. 38 C.F.R. § 4.112 (b). If neither of these weights is available or currently relevant, then VA is to use ideal body weight as defined by either the Hamwi formula or Body Mass Index (BMI) tables, whichever is most favorable to the veteran. Id. 

Undernutrition is defined as a deficiency resulting from insufficient intake of one or multiple essential nutrients, or the inability of the body to absorb, utilize, or retain such nutrients. 38 C.F.R. § 4.112 (c). Undernutrition is characterized by failure of the body to maintain normal organ functions and healthy tissues. Signs and symptoms may include loss of subcutaneous tissue, edema, peripheral neuropathy, muscle wasting, weakness, abdominal distention, ascites, and BMI below normal range. Id. 

In this case, the Veteran is competent to testify on factual matters of which he has first-hand knowledge. See Washington v. Nicholson, 19 Vet. App. 362 (2005). The Veteran is also competent to report symptoms of his GERD. See Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 469-71 (1994). The Veteran is competent to describe his GERD symptoms and their effects on employment and/or daily activities.

Upon complete review of the appellate record, the probative evidence of record supports a higher 60 percent rating for the Veteran's GERD by analogy under Diagnostic Code 7399-7346. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7. The claim is granted. In making this determination regarding a higher 60 percent rating, the Board has considered both the competent and credible medical and lay evidence of record. Specifically, the medical and lay evidence of record establishes that the Veteran's GERD exhibits persistently recurrent epigastric distress with pyrosis (heartburn), acid reflux, dysphagia, regurgitation, substernal pain, dark colored stools, weight loos, food impaction, resulting in severe impairment of health due to fear of eating causing weight loss and sleep disturbance as well as chronic pain, which supports a higher 60 percent rating. 38 C.F.R. § 4.114, Diagnostic Code 7346.

On VA examination in January 2023, the Veteran reported heart burn and chest pain usually occurring several hours after eating, which gets worse in the middle of the night when he describes having reflux symptoms. The VA examiner noted the Veteran has the following esophageal symptoms: pyrosis, reflux, regurgitation, pain (substernal), sleep disturbance by esophageal reflux (four or more times per year) and nausea (four or more times per year). The examiner did not indicate that the Veteran had persistently recurrent epigastric distress or that his symptoms are productive of considerable impairment of health.

In May 2023, the Veteran submitted a lay statement indicating that he believes his current 10 percent rating does not reflect the current severity of his GERD symptoms. He reported having heartburn with acid reflux, regurgitation of stomach contents into his throat, a sore throat with painful swallowing, chest pain that radiates into his shoulder, upper abdominal pain, nausea, frequent coughing, and nighttime choking due to regurgitation, weight loss, dark colored stool, and tooth enamel damage from stomach acid coming into his mouth multiple times a day. He noted taking tums, Rolaids, Prilosec, Maalox, and Mylanta daily to help control his symptoms. He reported avoiding certain food and stated that he has chest pain, arm pain, and shoulder pain when his GERD symptoms are flaring up. He indicated that he can't sleep more than four hours a night and noted that his lack of sleep impacts his quality of life as he has difficulty concentrating, mood changes, irritability, paranoia, depressed mood, difficulty enjoying social events and interactions, and self-neglect in personal care.

Also in May 2023, the Veteran was provided an independent VA rating evaluation for his GERD by a private practitioner. The private practitioner noted DC 7346 and indicated that the Veteran's GERD symptoms warrant a 60 percent rating because they are productive of severe impairment. The private practitioner listed medical literature and case law to explain the differences "severe impairment of health" and "considerable impairment of health." The private practitioner analyzed the Veteran's current symptoms of GERD and how those impact his health. Next, the private practitioner acknowledged that the March 2023 rating decision concedes physical symptomatology combinations such as pyrosis, regurgitation and substernal pain. The private practitioner then acknowledged the Veteran's May 2023 lay statement, as described above. In sum, the private practitioner opined that the Veteran suffers from physical symptoms of GERD, health related emotional, psychological, and spiritual impacts on behavioral and social functioning, and has developed abnormal physical structural/cellular anatomical defects with the loss of normal GI function related to GERD. The private practitioner opined that based on the criteria of DC 7346 and the Veteran's lay reports of his GERD symptomatology, he is entitled to a 60 percent rating due to severe impairment of health.

In August 2023, the Veteran was provided an additional VA examination. He reported heartburn with acid reflux, regurgitation of stomach contents into his throat, a sore throat with painful swallowing, chest pain that radiates into his shoulder, upper abdominal pain, nausea, frequent coughing, and nighttime choking due to regurgitation. The VA examiner noted the Veteran has the following esophageal symptoms: dysphagia, reflux, regurgitation, and pain (substernal and shoulder). The examiner did not indicate that the Veteran had persistently recurrent epigastric distress or that his symptoms are productive of considerable impairment of health.

The Board finds that a 60 percent rating for GERD is warranted. The Veteran's symptoms included dysphagia, pyrosis, reflux, regurgitation, and pain (substernal and shoulder), sleep disturbance by esophageal reflux, heartburn with acid reflux, regurgitation of stomach contents into his throat, chest pain that radiates into his shoulder, upper abdominal pain, nausea, frequent coughing, nighttime choking due to regurgitation, dark colored stool, and weight loss. The Veteran also indicated that he can't sleep more than four hours a night and noted that his lack of sleep impacts his quality of life as he has difficulty concentrating, mood changes, irritability, paranoia, depressed mood, difficulty enjoying social events and interactions, and self-neglect in personal care. The Board notes that a private medical opinion reviewed the Veteran's lay statements of severe GERD symptoms, his claims file, and the rating criteria, and opined that the Veteran's symptoms reflect a 60 percent rating. 

The Board has considered the Veteran's various medical opinions and lay statements, and finds that the evidence is in approximate balance on whether the Veteran's disability warrants a 60 percent rating under DC 7346, as the evidence shows that the Veteran experienced epigastric distress with dysphagia, pyrosis, regurgitation, substernal pain, vomiting, nausea, weight loss, food impaction, choking, self-neglect in personal care, irritability, paranoia, depressed mood and sleep disturbance. Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021). 

Upon resolution of all reasonable doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Board concludes that the Veteran is entitled to a 60 percent rating for his GERD. This is the maximum schedular rating available under the old version of Diagnostic Code 7346. The Board considered the applicability of the revised regulations for GERD. Significantly, as noted above, this appeal stems from a September 2023 rating decision and the Veteran elected the direct review lane and accordingly all the evidence reviewed is prior to the change in the regulation. Accordingly, a higher rating under the revised diagnostic code for GERD is not warranted at this time based upon the evidence the Board is able to review. 

Service connection for PTSD.

Service connection will be granted if the evidence demonstrates that a current disability resulted from an injury or disease incurred in or aggravated by active military service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a). Establishing service connection generally requires competent evidence of three things: (1) a current disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship, i.e., a nexus, between the claimed in-service disease or injury and the current disability. Holton v. Shinseki, 557 F.3d 1362, 1366 (Fed. Cir. 2009); 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a).

There are particular requirements for establishing entitlement to service connection for PTSD in 38 C.F.R. § 3.304(f) that are separate from those for establishing service connection generally. Arzio v. Shinseki, 602 F.3d 1343, 1347 (Fed. Cir. 2010). Those requirements are: (1) a diagnosis of PTSD in accordance with 38 C.F.R. § 4.125; (2) credible supporting evidence that the claimed in-service stressor actually occurred; and (3) medical evidence of a causal nexus between current symptomatology and the specific claimed in-service stressor. 38 C.F.R. § 3.304(f).

Notably, corroboration of the stressor is not required when a VA psychiatrist or psychologist diagnoses PTSD resulting from a fear of hostile military or terrorist activity when that fear is consistent with the circumstances of the Veteran's service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.304(f)(3). "Fear of hostile military activity" is defined to mean that a Veteran experienced, witnessed, or was confronted with an event or circumstance that involved actual or threatened death or serious injury, or a threat to the physical integrity of the veteran or others, and the veteran's response to the event or circumstance involved a psychological or psycho-physiological state of fear, helplessness, or horror. Id. The list of examples of such an event or circumstance specifically includes attack upon friendly military aircraft, vehicle-imbedded explosive devices, and incoming artillery, rocket, or mortar fire. Id.  Corroboration of the existence of a stressor is also not required in certain circumstances when the Veteran was diagnosed with PTSD in service, the Veteran engaged in combat with the enemy and the claimed stressor is related to that experience, or the Veteran was a prisoner of war and the claimed stressor is related to that experience. 38 C.F.R. § 3.304 (f)(1), (2), (4). Corroboration of the existence of an in-service stressor is necessary in all other cases.

By way of history, the Veteran filed a claim for service connection for PTSD in October 2020, which was denied by the AOJ in March 2022 as the condition did not occur nor was caused by service. The Veteran submitted an April 2022 VA Form 20-0995 Supplemental Claim appealing the March 2022 decision. The AOJ continued the previous denial in a July 2022 rating decision and the Veteran again submitted a VA Form 20-0995 Supplemental Claim appealing the July 2022 rating decision. The Veteran timely appealed the July 2022 rating decision with an August 2022 VA Form 20-0995 Supplemental Claim and a November 2022 rating still denied the claim for service connection and found that new and relevant evidence had been received and reconsidered and denied the claim for PTSD based on the evidence of record at the time of that decision. The Veteran appealed the November 2022 rating decision with a December 2022 VA Form 20-0995 Supplemental Claim and a March 2022 rating decision continued the previous denial but made favorable findings that the Veteran had a current PTSD disability and that his he was stationed onboard the USS Spiegel Grove in November 1983. The Board notes that it is bound by the favorable findings made by the AOJ in the March 2023 rating decision. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c). Absent clear and unmistakable error, these favorable finding are binding on the Board. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104. The Board notes that the Veteran filed another VA Form 20-0995 Supplemental Claim in May 2023 appealing the March 2023 rating decision and a May 2023 rating decision was issued continuing the previous denial. Lastly, a June 2023 Higher-Level Review (HLR) was submitted by the Veteran and a September 2023 rating decision continued the denial for service connection for PTSD. 

The Veteran asserts that his PTSD is warranted based upon an in-service stressor that occurred onboard the USS Spiegel Grove in November 1983. In October 2020, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 21-0781 Statement in Support of Claim for PTSD, detailing the November 1983 incident aboard the USS Spiegel Grove. He heard "erry screams" coming from a man in a storage room, who was getting burned from a fire - the Veteran saw the man's uniform getting cut off because he was on fire. The Veteran described this man as his best friend - the fellow veteran passed away from his injuries suffered from the fire. In December 2020, a fellow shipmate of the Veteran's aboard the USS Spiegel Grove in November 1983 submitted a statement indicating he was with the Veteran when the fellow serviceman caught fire. An additional buddy statement was submitted in December 2020 detailing the events that happened to the serviceman who passed away from the fire and described how this affected the Veteran. 

After review of the evidence, service connection is warranted for the Veteran's PTSD. As noted above, the Board notes that the March 2023 rating decision made favorable findings that the Veteran had a current PTSD disability and that his PTSD disability had it's onset in service. See 38 U.S.C. § 5104A; 38 C.F.R. § 3.104 (c). Given these favorable findings, two of the three elements necessary to establish service connection are met. Although the VA has conceded a current diagnosis of PTSD and an in-service incurrence, the remaining inquiry is whether there is medical evidence of a causal nexus between current symptomatology and the specific in-service stressor. 

The Board finds that there are two medical opinions that opine on the etiology of the Veteran's PTSD: a January 2023 VA medical opinion and an April 2023 private medical opinion. The January 2023 VA examiner extensively detailed the Veteran's events pre-military service, during military service, and post-military service. The Veteran's stressors were noted: (1) the Veteran reported being physically abused repeatedly during his childhood; (2) the November 1983 fire incident aboard the USS Spiegel Grove; (3) reported getting hit in the head after service in the late 1980s; and (4) getting kidnapped in the early 1990s. The VA examiner provided rationale to support their opinion, that included references to lay statements and medical records. The January 2023 VA medical opinion stated that the PTSD diagnosis is related to both pre-military and post-military stressor events and the unspecified depressive disorder diagnosis appears to have begun since Navy service. Specifically, the VA examiner stated the following: "the Veteran's claimed depression is attributable to unspecified depressive disorder. This diagnosis appears to have begun since Navy service. I am unable to locate any objective medical evidence documenting complaints of depressive symptoms on active duty. At both his enlistment and separation physical exams, denied depression or excessive worry." Additionally, the VA examiner stated that the Veteran separately reports the presence of DSM-5 intrusion symptoms of PTSD specifically in relation to reported post Navy service stressors. 

In April 2023, a private medical opinion was submitted by a licensed psychologist, Dr. E.B.. Dr. E.B. indicated that the Veteran's claims file, lay statements, buddy statements, and relevant medical history were all reviewed as well as an evaluation and interview which revealed a current PTSD diagnosis. Dr. E.B. opined that the Veteran's current PTSD symptoms are related to the traumatic events he experienced during service aboard the USS Spiegel Grove in November 1983. In making this opinion, Dr. E.B. considered the Veteran's family history, pre-military events and post-military events. In determining that the Veteran's PTSD was related to the fire incident aboard the USS Spiegel Grove in November 1983, Dr. E.B. acknowledged the Veteran's description of the event, the buddy statements relevant to the event and how the events description related to the DSM-5 PTSD diagnostic criteria. Dr. E.B. also indicated support for their rationale and also noted that research indicates that PTSD can be acquired vicariously from witnessing traumatic events and may lead to difficulties including anxiety, dysphoric mood, behavioral disturbance and interpersonal concerns. Dr. E.B. noted that the Veteran's report of witnessing a shipmate's injury and learning of his subsequent death, meets the criteria for PTSD and his current symptomatology indicates that his response to the stressor event and circumstances, involved a psychological state of hear and helplessness. 

The Board has considered the Veteran's various medical opinions and lay statements, and finds that the evidence is in approximate balance on whether the Veteran's spine disability is related to service. "[I]f the positive and negative evidence is in approximate balance (which includes but is not limited to equipoise), the claimant receives the benefit of the doubt." Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021). There is medical evidence indicating that the Veteran's PTSD is related to the traumatic events in service, as shown by the April 2023 private medical opinion. The Board finds this medical opinion probative. See Prejean v. West, 13 Vet. App. 444 (2000) (factors for assessing the probative value of a medical opinion include the examiner's access to the claims folder and the Veteran's history, and the thoroughness and detail of the opinion); see also Guerrieri v. Brown, 4 Vet. App. 467, 470-71 (1993) (noting that the credibility and weight to be attached to medical opinions are within the province of the Board). However, the Board also notes that there is medical evidence indicating that the Veteran's PTSD is not related to service as shown by the January 2023 VA medical opinion.

Under the "benefit-of-the- doubt" rule, where there exists "an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding the merits of an issue material to the determination of the matter," the Veteran shall prevail upon the issue. Ashley v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 52, 59 (1993). In this case, the evidence is in approximate balance on the issue of whether the Veteran current PTSD diagnosis is related to service. See Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4 th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2022). As such, service connection for PTSD is warranted.

Service connection for erectile dysfunction.

The Veteran contends that his erectile dysfunction is secondary to his service-connected PTSD.

Service connection may be granted on a secondary basis for a disability if it is proximately due to or the result of a service-connected disease or injury. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310. Establishing service connection on a secondary basis requires evidence sufficient to show that a current disability exists and that the current disability was either proximately caused by or proximately aggravated by a service-connected disability. Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439, 448 (1995).

Here, the AOJ in a March 2023 rating decision made favorable findings that the Veteran had a current erectile dysfunction disability and also a current PTSD disability. The AOJ also found that the Veteran's erectile dysfunction is secondary to the Veteran's PTSD disability as the January 2023 VA examiner opined the Veteran's erectile dysfunction is mostly likely due to the PTSD disability. See March 2023 rating decision (noting that at the time of the rating decision, the Veteran was not service connected for PTSD). The Board notes that it is bound by the favorable findings made by the AOJ in the March 2023 rating decision. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).

As noted above in this decision, the Board has granted service connection for the Veteran's PTSD disability. Therefore, the Board finds that secondary service connection is warranted for the Veteran's erectile dysfunction. Significantly, the Board notes that there is no conflicting medical evidence suggesting that the Veteran's erectile dysfunction is not secondary to his service-connected PTSD disability.

 

 

H. SEESEL

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	M. Dourmashkin

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.