Citation Nr: A25034642
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 240222-420580
DATE: April 15, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to accrued benefits is denied.

Entitlement to Dependency and Indemnity Compensation (DIC) under the provisions of 38 U.S.C. § 1318 is denied.

Entitlement to DIC based on service connection for the cause of the Veteran's death is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to nonservice-connected (NSC) survivor's (death) pension benefits, to include the preliminary matter of the appellant's permanent incapacity for self-support prior to attaining the age of 18, is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran did not have a claim or appeal for benefits pending at the time of his death. 

2. The Veteran was not in receipt of a total disability rating for 10 continuous years prior to his death, was not rated as totally disabled continuously since his release from active duty and for at least 5 years preceding death, and he was not a prisoner of war (POW).

3. Evidence indicates that the Veteran died in November 2003; however, evidence as to his cause of death has not been associated with the claims file, and there is no specific evidence or contention etiologically relating the Veteran's cause of death to service-connected disability, presumed exposure to herbicide agents, or to any event, injury, or disease incurred during service.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for entitlement to accrued benefits have not been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1101, 5121; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.104, 3.1000.

2. The criteria for entitlement to DIC under the provisions of 38 U.S.C. § 1318 have not been met.  38 U.S.C. § 1318; 38 C.F.R. § 3.22.

3. The criteria for DIC based on service connection for the cause of the Veteran's death have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1131, 1310; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.312.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran had active-duty service from October 1969 to September 1971, including service in the Republic of Vietnam.  His awards and decorations included the Combat Action Ribbon.  The evidence of record indicates that the Veteran passed away in November 2003.  The appellant in this appeal has been identified as the Veteran's adult child.  

This current appeal before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) arose from a December 2023 decision by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) which denied the appellant's claims of entitlement to survivor's pension benefits, accrued benefits, and DIC generally.  In February 2024, the appellant filed a Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement [NOD]) of the decision to deny entitlement to survivor's benefits generally.  The appellant elected the direct review option to have his appeal directly reviewed by a Veterans Law Judge.  In light of the appellant's selection, the Board may only consider evidence dated through the date of the December 2023 AOJ decision.  Any evidence submitted after the December 2023 AOJ decision may not be considered by the Board.  Notably, the appellant did not submit additional evidence pertinent to the claims on appeal following issuance of the December 2023 AOJ decision.  

Entitlement to accrued benefits

Accrued benefits are defined as periodic monetary benefits authorized under a law administered by VA, to which a payee was entitled at death under existing ratings or decisions or those based on evidence in the file at the date of death, and due and unpaid.  38 U.S.C. § 5121; 38 C.F.R. § 3.1000; Zevalkink v. Brown, 102 F.3d 1236 (Fed. Cir. 1996).  For a claimant to prevail on an accrued benefits claim, the record must show that: (i) the individual has standing to file a claim for accrued benefits; (ii) the VA payee had a claim pending at the time of death; (iii) the VA payee would have prevailed on the claim if he or she had not died; and (iv) the claim for accrued benefits was filed within one year of the VA payee's death.  38 U.S.C. §§ 5101(a), 5121; 38 C.F.R. § 3.1000; Jones v. West, 136 F.3d 1299 (Fed. Cir. 1998).

In the instant case, the record is devoid of any indication that the late Veteran had a claim or appeal pending at the time of his death.  Prior to the Veteran's death, an October 2002 rating decision continued a noncompensable (zero percent) rating for service-connected left ear hearing loss and denied entitlement to NSC pension benefits, however, the Veteran did not appeal the decision, and thus, the decision became final one year after issuance of the November 16, 2002, AOJ letter that notified the Veteran of the October 2002 rating decision, which letter was also issue more than one year prior to the Veteran's death.  See 38 C.F.R. §§ 19.52; 20.1103.  There is no evidence of any outstanding or pending claim or appeal, and the appellant has not identified any pending claim or appeal or made any specific contention or pointed to evidence indicating that such claim or appeal existed at the time of the Veteran's death.  Based on the absence of any indication in the record that the Veteran had a pending claim or appeal at the time of his death, the present claim for accrued benefits must be denied as a matter of law.  See Sabonis v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 426 (1994) (where the law, not the evidence, is dispositive, the appeal should be terminated for lack of legal merit or entitlement).

Entitlement to DIC under 38 U.S.C. § 1318

Entitlement to DIC under 38 U.S.C. § 1318 may be established in the same manner as if a veteran's death were service-connected where it is shown that the veteran's death was not the result of willful misconduct, and the veteran was (1) continuously rated totally disabled for the 10 years immediately preceding death; (2) was rated totally disabled upon separation from service, was continuously so rated, and died more than five but less than ten years after separation from service; or (3) the veteran was a former prisoner of war (POW) who died after September 30, 1999, and the disability was continuously rated totally disabling for a period of not less than one year immediately preceding death.  38 U.S.C. § 1318(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.22(a). 

In this case, while the record reveals that service connection was in effect for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), rated as 10 percent disabling, and for left ear hearing loss, rated as noncompensable, the Veteran was not in receipt of a total disability rating at any point in time preceding his death, and thus, he also had not been rated by VA as totally disabled for a continuous period of at least 10 years immediately preceding his death and he had not been rated totally disabled continuously since his release from active duty and for a period of not less than five years immediately preceding his death.  Additionally, there is no evidence establishing that the late Veteran was a former POW. 

Accordingly, under these undisputed facts, the legal criteria for entitlement to DIC pursuant to 38 U.S.C. § 1318 are simply not met.  Therefore, this claim must be denied as a matter of law.  See Sabonis, 6 Vet. App.  at 429.

Entitlement to service connection for the cause of the Veteran's death

In order to establish service connection for the cause of a veteran's death, the evidence must show that a disability incurred in or aggravated by service either caused or contributed substantially or materially to death.  38 U.S.C. § 1310; 38 C.F.R. § 3.312(a).  A service-connected disability will be considered the principal cause of death when the disability singly or jointly with some other condition was the immediate or underlying cause of death or was etiologically related thereto.  38 C.F.R. § 3.312(b).

A contributory cause of death is inherently one not related to the principal cause.  In determining whether a service-connected disability contributed to death, it must be shown that it contributed substantially or materially, that it combined to cause death, or that it aided or lent assistance to the production of death.  It is not sufficient to show that such disability casually shared in producing death, but rather it must be shown that there was a causal connection.  38 C.F.R. § 3.312(c).

Service connection may be established for disability resulting from personal injury suffered or disease contracted in the line of duty, or from aggravation of a preexisting injury suffered or disease contracted in the line of duty.  38 U.S.C. § 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.  Service connection may be granted for a disability diagnosed after discharge, when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disability is due to disease or injury that was incurred or aggravated in service.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).

While sympathetic to the general assertions of record that the Veteran's death was related to his active service, after careful review of the evidence of record, the Board finds that there is no evidence of record, apart from general assertions, to support the claim for service connection for the cause of the Veteran's death.  Specifically, there is no evidence showing that the cause of the Veteran's death was at least as likely as not in any way related to his service, to include any event, injury, or disease therein.

As noted above, the evidence of record indicates that the Veteran died in late November 2003; however, no evidence pertaining to his cause of death, to include a death certificate has been associated with the claims file.  While the record indicates that a death certificate was requested, certification was obtained from the County Clerk of Cook County, Illinois, where the Veteran presumably died, noting that a death certificate could not be found.  A December 2003 funeral announcement containing the Veteran's purported obituary merely indicated that he died suddenly in November 2003.  The service treatment records associated with the claims file reveal no indication of an event, injury, or disease during service that might have led to his cause of death more than thirty years later.  

While the Veteran had service in Vietnam during the Vietnam Era, and was presumed to have been exposed to herbicide agents during service, there is no indication that a disease presumptively associated with exposure to herbicide agents caused or contributed to his cause of death.  38 C.F.R. § 3.307(a)(6).  Moreover, the appellant has not proffered any specific argument or contention as to how the Veteran's death may have been related to his active service.  

While VA has not obtained a medical opinion with respect to whether the Veteran's death was etiologically linked to his active service, the Board again notes that there is simply no medical evidence as to the cause of the Veteran's death or of any association between his death and any event, injury, or disease during service.  There is simply no argument or contention of record indicating how the Veteran's death may have been etiologically related to his active service.  Therefore, the Board finds that remand to obtain a VA opinion on this matter is not required.  See McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006).

The holding of the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court) in McLendon provides that in disability compensation claims, VA must provide a medical examination when there is (1) competent evidence of a current disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability, and (2) evidence establishing that an event, injury, or disease occurred in service or establishing certain diseases manifesting during an applicable presumptive period for which the claimant qualifies, and (3) an indication that the disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of disability may be associated with the Veteran's service or with another service-connected disability, but (4) insufficient competent medical evidence on file for the VA to make a decision on the claim.  Here, the standard under McLendon has not been met as there is simply no evidence of record indicating what the Veteran's cause of death was or suggesting that his death was specifically linked to any event, injury, or disease during service.  

Finally, where there is no evidence, aside from bare assertions, as to an etiological relationship between the Veteran's active service and his later cause of death, the Board finds that the evidence simply does not support a claim for service connection for the cause of the Veteran's death.  Service connection cannot be granted based on a bare speculative assertion offered by a claimant, where such evidence does not reach the required "at least as likely as not" evidentiary standard for VA claims.  Cf. 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.  In this regard, the term "at least as likely as not" does not mean "within the realm of medical possibility."  Rather, it means that the weight of medical evidence both for and against a conclusion is so evenly divided that it is as medically sound to find in favor of the conclusion (e.g., etiology) as it is to find against the conclusion.  Cf. McLendon, 20 Vet. App. at 83 (an opinion that something "is possible" and "within the realm of medical possibility" is too speculative to establish medical nexus).

The Board does not doubt the appellant's sincerity in maintaining a belief that the Veteran's death was somehow related to his active service.  While sympathetic to such assertions, there is simply no evidence tending to support the service connection claim for the cause of the Veteran's death.  A bare assertion constitutes, at most, merely speculative evidence.  The appellant is not competent to assert that the Veteran's cause of death was etiologically related to his active service, as he lacks medical training or credentials.  See Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 (Fed. Cir. 2007); see also Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 469 (1994) (a lay person is competent to report information of which he or she has personal knowledge, i.e., information that he or she can gather through the senses).

Based on the foregoing, the Board finds that the weight of the probative evidence of record is against the claim for service connection for the cause of the Veteran's death, as there is simply no medical evidence or specific lay contention indicating that the Veteran's death was at least as likely as not related to service-connected disability, presumed exposure to herbicide agents, or otherwise to any event, injury, or disease incurred during his active service.  Accordingly, the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine is not applicable in the instant appeal, and the appellant's claim must be denied.  38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49, 55-57 (1990); Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

REASONS FOR REMAND

Entitlement to NSC survivor's pension benefits

The Board's review of the claims file reveals that further AOJ action on the matter of entitlement to NSC survivor's pension benefits is warranted to correct duty to assist errors that occurred prior to December 2023 decision on appeal and pursuant to the necessity to fulfill statutory and regulatory duties with respect to this claim.  See 38 C.F.R. § 20.802.  

The appellant seeks entitlement to NSC survivor's pension benefits as a "helpless child" due to reported permanent incapacity for self-support prior to attaining age 18.  Initially, the Board notes that it appears that the AOJ has implicitly accepted the evidence as establishing the Veteran's death in December 2003.  Thus, the initial question is whether the appellant became permanently incapable of self-support prior to attaining age 18.  

In response to an AOJ request for evidence of his permanent incapacity, the appellant has provided a letter from his treating practitioner noting diagnoses of schizoaffective disorder, depressed type, PTSD, and drug-induced Parkinsonism, and he submitted private treatment records from Southeastern Behavioral Healthcare, dated from October 2020 to September 2023.  Unfortunately, neither the letter nor the treatment records provide a clear picture of the severity of the appellants' disabilities at the age of 18, let along his permanent incapacity.  

While the appellant has made efforts to provide documentation of his incapacity, but has not provided adequate evidence on the question of his permanent incapacity for self-support prior to attaining age 18, possibly due to mental incapacity, the Board finds that remand is warranted to afford the appellant a VA examination to obtain a medical opinion addressing the likelihood that he became permanently incapable of self-support by reason of a mental or physical disability prior to attaining the age of 18.  See Chotta v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 80, 84-85 (2008) (VA's duty to assist may require it to obtain a retrospective medical opinion if such an opinion" is necessary to make a decision on the claim.").  See also McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006).

Also, given the appellant's attempts to provide evidence of his incapacity, and his noted psychiatrist disabilities, the Board finds it prudent for the AOJ to again request that the appellant provide additional evidence of his incapacity consistent with the request made in the October 2023 AOJ development letter. 

Additionally, a December 2023 inquiry regarding SSA benefits revealed that the appellant had been awarded Title XVI status, which is likely indicative of a more severe level of incapacity.  Notably, despite evidence of the appellant's entitlement to SSA disability benefits, his SSA records have not been associated with the claims file.  Where the record indicates that outstanding SSA records pertinent to the current appeal may be available, remand is necessary to obtain the records.  Cf. Murincsak v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 363, 372 (1992).  

Although the appellant has been awarded Title XVI status, clarification has not been obtained as to what portion of his SSA benefits consisted of Supplemental Security Income (SSI).  While disability benefits administered by the SSA are not specifically excluded from countable income for pension purposes, under 38 C.F.R. § 3.272, and therefore, are generally included as countable income, SSI is not considered countable income for NSC pension benefits purposes.  See M21-1 Part IX, subpart iii, Chapter 1, Section B.1.k.  Given the prospective purpose of determining the appellant's entitlement to the payment of survivor's pension benefits, clarification of the amount of SSI, if any, that he has received during the pertinent period is required. 

Accordingly, this matter is hereby REMANDED for the following action:

1. Send a letter to the appellant to again request evidence that was not provided consistent with the October 2023 AOJ development letter, including current medical evidence showing the extent of his incapacitating disabilities, including prognosis and date of onset, evidence of ability or non-ability to perform self-care functions and/or complete ordinary tasks for his age, any available evidence pertaining to his prior institutionalization(s), evidence from schools attended showing any progress made during school attendance, and evidence of any employment, including dates and amounts earned.  Advise the appellant that all available documentation would greatly help in ensuring that his claim is properly adjudicated.

2. Obtain the appellant's federal records from SSA pertaining to his application(s) for disability benefits.  Document all requests for information as well as all responses in the claims file.

3. Take all appropriate action to determine the type(s) and amount(s) of SSA benefits the appellant has received during the pertinent period, to include obtaining clarification as to what portion of his monthly SSA benefits, if any, has consisted of Supplemental Security Income.  As may be necessary, contact the Social Security Administration and request reports of monthly benefits, including a specific notation of the amount of SSI benefits, paid to the appellant throughout the pertinent period.  

4. After completion of the above, schedule the appellant for an appropriate retrospective VA examination to obtain an opinion as to his permanent incapacity for self-support prior to attaining the age of 18.  The relevant portions of the claims file, and a copy of this REMAND, must be made available to, and reviewed by, the examiner, and the examination report should include discussion of the appellant's documented medical history and assertions.  

After review of the claims file, interview of the appellant, and complete examination, the examiner should provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (i.e., an approximately evenly balanced or nearly equal probability) that the appellant became permanently incapable of self-support by reason of a mental and/or physical condition prior to attaining 18 years of age. 

In providing the above requested opinion, the examiner must consider and discuss all pertinent medical evidence, to include statements from the appellant's treating clinicians noting his diagnoses and mental/physical capacity.  The examiner must also address and consider the appellant's lay statements pertaining to the symptoms and severity of his disability prior to attaining the age of 18.  The examiner must provide a clear rationale for all opinions, and a discussion of the facts and medical principles involved would be of considerable assistance to the Board.

 

 

Christopher Seppanen

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Michael Wilson, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.