Citation Nr: A25034712
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 240428-436326
DATE: April 15, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an initial evaluation in excess of 30 percent prior to September 24, 2021, a compensable evaluation prior to October 5, 2022, and in excess of 50 percent thereafter for the service-connected migraine headaches is denied.

Entitlement to an initial evaluation in excess of 10 percent prior to October 5, 2022, and in excess of a 50 percent evaluation thereafter for the service-connected bilateral pes planus and hallux valgus is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The competent and credible evidence of record persuasively establishes a finding that prior to September 24, 2021, the service-connected migraine headache symptoms manifested as characteristic prostrating attacks averaging one in 2 months over last several months.

2. The competent and credible evidence of record persuasively establishes a finding that prior to October 5, 2022, the service-connected migraine headache symptoms manifested as less frequent attacks.

3. The competent and credible evidence of record persuasively establishes a finding that from October 5, 2022, the service-connected migraine headache symptoms manifested as very frequent completely prostrating and prolonged attacks productive of severe economic inadaptability.

4. The competent and credible evidence of record persuasively establishes a finding that prior to October 5, 2022, the service-connected bilateral pes planus and hallux valgus symptoms manifested as painful motion.

5. The competent and credible evidence of record persuasively establishes a finding that from October 5, 2022, the service-connected bilateral pes planus and hallux valgus symptoms were pronounced.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for entitlement to an initial evaluation in excess of 30 percent prior to September 24, 2021, a compensable evaluation prior to October 5, 2022, and in excess of 50 percent thereafter for the service-connected migraine headaches have not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.124a, Diagnostic Code (DC) 8100.

2. The criteria for entitlement to an initial evaluation in excess of 10 percent prior to October 5, 2022, and in excess of a 50 percent evaluation thereafter for the service-connected bilateral pes planus and hallux valgus have not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.59, 4.71a, DC 5276.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from April 1986 to April 2006. This case comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a March 2024 rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In November 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR), and requested review of a May 2023 decision. In March 2024, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the HLR decision on appeal, which considered the evidence of record at the time of the prior May 2023 decision.  

In the April 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the May 2023 AOJ decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Increased Ratings

Disability ratings are determined by applying the criteria set forth in the VA Schedule for Rating Disabilities (Schedule), found in 38 C.F.R. Part 4. The Schedule is primarily a guide in the evaluation of disability resulting from all types of diseases and injuries encountered as a result of or incident to military service. The ratings are intended to compensate, as far as can practicably be determined, the average impairment of earning capacity resulting from such diseases and injuries and their residual conditions in civilian occupations. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1. Where there is a question as to which of two evaluations shall be applied, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria for that rating. Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7. When reasonable doubt arises as to the degree of disability, such doubt will be resolved in the Veteran's favor.  38 C.F.R. § 4.3.

In considering the severity of a disability, it is essential to trace the medical history of the Veteran. 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2, 4.41. Consideration of the whole-recorded history is necessary so that a rating may accurately reflect the elements of any disability present. 38 C.F.R. § 4.2; Peyton v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 282 (1991). Although the regulations do not give past medical reports precedence over current findings, the Board is to consider the Veteran's medical history in determining the applicability of a higher rating for the entire period in which the appeal has been pending. Powell v. West, 13 Vet. App. 31, 34 (1999).

Where entitlement to compensation has been established and an increase in the disability rating is at issue, the present level of disability is of primary concern.  Francisco v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 55, 58 (1994). Where an appeal is based on an initial rating for a disability, however, evidence contemporaneous with the claim and the initial rating decision are most probative of the degree of disability existing when the initial rating was assigned and should be the evidence "used to decide whether an original rating on appeal was erroneous." Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119, 126 (1999). In either case, if later evidence indicates that the degree of disability increased or decreased following the assignment of the initial rating, staged ratings may be assigned for separate periods of time. Fenderson, 12 Vet. App. at 126; Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505 (2007) (noting that staged ratings are appropriate whenever the factual findings show distinct time periods in which a disability exhibits symptoms that warrant different ratings). When adjudicating a claim for an increased initial evaluation, the relevant time period is from the date of the claim.  Moore v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 211, 215 (2007), rev'd in irrelevant part, Moore v. Shinseki, 555 F.3d 1369 (2009).  

Here, the Veteran submitted a Supplemental Claim in June 2020 when he requested to reopen previously denied claims of entitlement to service connection for pes planus, and migraines. In an August 2020 decision, the AOJ granted service connection. The Veteran submitted another Supplemental Claim in September 2021 where he contested the assigned evaluations. With that submission, the Veteran's representative acknowledged that they submitted the claim more than one year since the last rating decision but requested an extension due to the COVID-19 pandemic. 

During the COVID-19 national emergency, VBA Policy Letter 20-02 provided that effective March 1, 2020, if a claimant or representative requested an extension of a time limit associated with a required action based on the COVID-19 pandemic, VBA would grant the requests under the good cause provisions (pertinent here, 38 C.F.R. § 3.109(b)), provided the time limit would have expired on or after March 1, 2020. The letter provided instructions for how a claimant should request such an extension, including that claimants should note the request on their filing submission or attach the request as a separate document.

The Board finds that the Veteran has established continuous pursuit of the claims, pursuant to VBA Policy Letter 20-02. Such document provided that where a Veteran or appellant requested an extension of a filing deadline due to the COVID-19 pandemic after on or after March 1, 2020, VA would grant such extension under the criteria of 38 C.F.R. § 3.109(b). Accordingly, the Veteran's September 2021 submission of the request for an extension concurrent with the Supplemental Claim meets the requirements of VBA Policy Letter 20-02.

In April 2022, the AOJ denied the pes planus claim and reduced the migraines to a noncompensable evaluation. The Veteran submitted a new claim for increased ratings in February 2023, which the AOJ granted in May 2023. In November 2023, the Veteran submitted the HLR discussed above and requested that the 50 percent evaluations be assigned an effective date consistent with the August 2020 claim. Accordingly, the Board will consider evidence from August 2020 until the May 2023 rating decision which was subject to an HLR. 

1. Entitlement to an increased rating for the service-connected migraine headaches

Under DC 8100 for migraines, a noncompensable rating is assigned for less frequent attacks. A 10 percent rating is assigned for migraines with characteristic prostrating attacks averaging 1 in 2 months over the previous several months. A 30 percent rating is assigned for migraines with characteristic prostrating attacks occurring on an average once a month over the previous several months. A maximum 50 percent rating is assigned for migraines with very frequent completely prostrating and prolonged attacks productive of severe economic inadaptability. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.124a, DC 8100; see also Pierce v. Principi, 18 Vet. App. 440, 445 (2004) (finding rating criteria do not define "severe economic inadaptability," but nothing in DC 8100 requires that Veteran be completely unable to work to qualify for 50 percent rating; "productive of economic inadaptability" can be read as either "producing" or "capable of producing").

The phrase "characteristic prostrating attacks" means migraine attacks that typically produce powerlessness or a lack of vitality. Johnson v. Wilkie, 30 Vet. App. 245 (2018). In other words, the term "prostrating" takes on its plain meaning of "lacking in vitality or will: powerless to rise: laid low." Id. See also DORLAND'S ILLUSTRATED MEDICAL DICTIONARY 1531 (32nd ed. 2012) (defining prostration as "extreme exhaustion or powerlessness").

Relevant to this appeal, the criteria for rating migraines are "successive." Johnson, 30 Vet. App. 245. "Successive" criteria exist where the evaluation for each higher disability rating includes the criteria of each lower disability rating, such that if a component is not met at any one level, the Veteran can only be rated at the level that does not require the missing component. Tatum v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 152, 156 (2008).

Evidence

The Veteran underwent a VA examination in July 2020 where the reported migraines twice per month, with photo- and phonophobia, and which manifested as dull, throbbing pain. His treatment plan included taking medication. The Veteran described the headache pain as pulsating and throbbing, which lasted 1 to 2 days, localized on one side of the head, and with non-headache symptoms to include nausea, vomiting, and sensitivity to light and sound. The examiner noted characteristic prostrating attacks once every month, but no very prostrating and prolonged attacks productive of severe economic inadaptability. They opined that there was functional impact, which included dull, right-sided headaches, which progressed to throbbing, and the Veteran seeing wavy lines. 

August 2020 VA treatment records noted 2 headaches monthly, which had improved, involved photo- and phonophobia, and were resolved with sleep and medication.

March 2021 VA treatment records indicated migraines without aura once approximately every 3 weeks and included photo and phonophobia.

The Veteran submitted a July 2021 private medical opinion, which did not indicate that there was any sort of physical examination, phone interview, or review of the records. Rather, it appears that the opinion is based solely on a statement that the Veteran provided to his representative. This private examiner opined that the Veteran experienced very frequent, completely prostrating migraines 3 to 4 times per month, causing more than a month of absences from work, which was productive of severe economic inadaptability.

The Veteran submitted his statement to VA in September 2021. He asserted that he had migraines 2 to 3 times per week, on both sides of the head, and that at least 3 to 4 times per month, they knocked him out of commission to the point that he was totally incapacitated. The Veteran stated that he experienced light sensitivity, noise sensitivity, nausea, vertigo, dizziness, and throbbing pain, which he treated with medication. He concluded that he had lost more than a month of work in the past year.

The Veteran underwent another VA examination in September 2021. His treatment plan included taking medication. The migraines manifested as pain on both sides of the head, nausea, sensitivity to light and sound, and lasted for 1 to 2 days. The examiner noted that the Veteran had no characteristic prostrating attacks of migraine pain, and no very prostrating or prolonged attacks of migraines that were productive of severe economic inadaptability. They opined that there was functional impact which included low physical and mental performance during headaches.

November 2022 VA treatment records noted the Veteran's report of throbbing migraines with auras twice weekly, and one headache approximately twice a month with pounding pain, and photo- and phonophobia.

The Veteran submitted a January 2023 VA disability benefits questionnaire (DBQ) completed by a private examiner, which indicated that it was based on an in-person examination, and review of the record. That examiner noted the Veteran's report that the migraines occurred frequently, with severe intense throbbing pain, nausea, vomiting, and sensitivity to light and sound that had worsened over time. His treatment plan included taking medication. The examiner noted that the headache pain manifested as pulsating or throbbing, both sides of the head, worsened with physical activity, nausea, vomiting, sensitivity to light and sound, changes in vision, and sensory changes, which lasted more than 2 days. There were characteristic prostrating attacks of migraine pain once every month, and very prostrating and prolonged attacks productivity of severe economic inadaptability. 

VA attempted to schedule the Veteran for another examination in February 2023, but he refused to attend the examination.

Analysis

Based on the aforementioned, the Board finds that the service-connected migraines are appropriately assigned a 30 percent evaluation prior to September 24, 2021. The record demonstrated characteristic prostrating attacks occurring on an average once a month over last several months. A higher 50 percent evaluation is not warranted as there was no evidence of very frequent completely prostrating and prolonged attacks productive of severe economic inadaptability.

The Board also finds that that the service-connected migraines are appropriately assigned a noncompensable evaluation prior to October 5, 2022. The record demonstrated that there the Veteran did not experience any characteristic prostrating attacks of migraine pain during this period. The Board acknowledges the July 2021 private medical opinion which noted that there were completely prostrating migraines 3 to 4 times per month that were productive of severe economic inadaptability; however, the Board affords this opinion low probative value. 

This examiner did not indicate that they examined the Veteran in person, performed a telehealth interview, or even reviewed the claims file. The examiner noted that they were based in Florida, while the Veteran resides in Tennessee. More important, this opinion is inconsistent with rest of the record during this period. The Veteran never reported completely prostrating migraines to his regular VA treatment providers. In fact, March 2021 VA treatment records noted that he was not compliant with his prescription medication and had not refilled his prescriptions in 7 months. Specifically, on examination in September 2021, the examiner found that there were no prostrating attacks. VA examiners come to these sorts of conclusions upon examination and interview with veterans. The Board would expect that if he experienced prostrating attacks during this period, he would report them in person. He did not need to be experiencing a prostrating attack during the examination itself, he merely needed to describe his recent history of prostrating attacks. Instead, the only evidence of record that noted prostrating attacks during this period was based on the statement provided to the private examiner by the Veteran's representative. 

In short, the private examiner provided no sort of indication that they were actually familiar with the Veteran, or recent disability picture of the service-connected migraine headaches. Contrast this with the September 2021 VA examination, which was conducted in-person, including interview with the Veteran, and indicated that the examiner reviewed the claims file. In support of this, they included excerpts from VA treatment records which covered the development of this condition, which supports a finding that the examiner was familiar with the treatment history. As such, the Board affords this examination greater probative value.

Finally, for the period from October 5, 2022, the Board finds that the service-connected migraines are appropriately assigned a 50 percent evaluation. This is based on the evidence from the January 2023 private DBQ. 50 percent is also the highest available scheduled rating under DC 8100.

The Board is sympathetic to the Veteran's lay statements that the disability is worse than currently evaluated and those statements have been considered. The Veteran is competent to report symptoms because this requires only personal knowledge as it comes to him through his senses. Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465 (1994). He is not, however, competent to identify a specific level of disability according to the appropriate diagnostic codes. Such competent evidence concerning the nature and extent of the Veteran's disability have been provided by the medical personnel who have examined the Veteran during the current appeal and who have rendered pertinent opinions in conjunction with the evaluations. The medical findings (as provided in the examination reports and the clinical records) directly address the criteria under which the disability is evaluated. The medical and lay evidence has been assessed by the Board in determining the overall disability rating. The Board ultimately affords greater weight to the probative evidence of record.

Accordingly, the criteria for entitlement to an initial evaluation in excess of 30 percent prior to September 24, 2021, a compensable evaluation prior to October 5, 2022, and in excess of 50 percent thereafter for the service-connected migraine headaches have not been met, and the appeal is denied.

In reaching this decision the Board considered the doctrine of reasonable doubt. In determining whether service connection is warranted for a disability, VA is responsible for determining whether the evidence persuasively favors the claim or is in approximate balance, with the Veteran prevailing in either event, or whether the evidence persuasively weighs against the claim, in which case the claim is denied. In other words, when there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination, the benefit of the doubt is afforded to the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (2021). Here, however, as the evidence is persuasively against the claim and the positive and negative evidence is not in approximate balance, the doctrine is not for application. Id.

2. Entitlement to an increased rating for the service-connected bilateral pes planus and hallux valgus

Disability of the musculoskeletal system is primarily the inability, due to damage or infection in the parts of the system, to perform the normal working movements of the body with normal excursion, strength, speed, coordination, and endurance. It is essential that the examination on which ratings are based adequately portray the anatomical damage, and the functional loss, with respect to all these elements. The functional loss may be due to absence of part, or all, of the necessary bones, joints and muscles, or associated structures, or to deformity, adhesions, defective innervation, or other pathology, or it may be due to pain, supported by adequate pathology and evidenced by visible behavior of the claimant undertaking the motion.

When evaluating musculoskeletal disabilities based on limitation of motion, 38 C.F.R. § 4.40 requires consideration of functional loss caused by pain or other factors listed in that section that could occur during flare-ups or after repeated use and, therefore, not be reflected on range-of-motion testing. 38 C.F.R. § 4.45 requires consideration also be given to less movement than normal, more movement than normal, weakened movement, excess fatigability, incoordination, and pain on movement. See DeLuca v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 202 (1995); see also Mitchell v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 32, 44 (2011). Nonetheless, even when the background factors listed in § 4.40 or 4.45 are relevant when evaluating a disability, the rating is assigned based on the extent to which motion is limited, pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a; a separate or higher rating under § 4.40 or 4.45 itself is not appropriate. See Thompson v. McDonald, 815 F.3d 781, 785 (Fed. Cir. 2016) ("[I]t is clear that the guidance of § 4.40 is intended to be used in understanding the nature of the veteran's disability, after which a rating is determined based on the § 4.71a criteria."). Under 38 C.F.R. § 4.59, painful motion is a factor to be considered with any form of arthritis; however, 38 C.F.R. § 4.59 is not limited to disabilities involving arthritis. See Burton v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 1 (2011).

The intent of the Rating Schedule is to recognize painful motion with joint or periarticular pathology as productive of disability. It is the intention to recognize actually painful, unstable, or malaligned joints, due to healed injury, as entitled to at least the minimum compensable rating for the joint. 38 C.F.R. § 4.59.

Under DC 5276, a noncompensable rating is assigned for mild flatfoot with symptoms relieved by built-up shoe or arch support. A 30 percent rating is assigned for severe bilateral flatfoot with objective evidence of marked deformity (pronation, abduction, etc.), pain on manipulation and use accentuated, indication of swelling on use, and characteristic callosities. A 50 percent rating is assigned for pronounced bilateral flatfoot with marked pronation, extreme tenderness of the plantar surfaces of the feet, marked inward displacement and severe spasm of the tendon Achilles on manipulation, which is not improved by orthopedic shoes or appliances. 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, DC 5276.

For the purposes of DC 5276, the Board observes that words such as "mild", "moderate" and "severe" are not defined in the VA Schedule for Rating Disabilities. In the absence of an express definition, words are given their ordinary meaning. Prokarym v. McDonald, 27 Vet. App. 307, 310 (2015) (citing Terry v. Principi, 340 F.3d 1378, 1382-83 (Fed. Cir. 2003)).

The ordinary meanings of "mild," as relevant here, include being "gentle in nature or behavior," "not being or involving what is extreme," and "not severe." Merriam-Webster Dictionary, available at https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary.

The ordinary meaning of "moderate" is "average in amount, intensity, quality, or degree." Gallagher v. Wilkie, No. 19-1855, 2020 U.S. App. Claims LEXIS 1889 (2020) (quoting New Oxford American Dictionary 1124 (3d ed. 2010).

The ordinary meaning of "severe" is "very great [or] intense," or "of a great degree." Id. (quoting, respectively, the New Oxford American Dictionary 1599 (3d ed. 2010) and Merriam-Webster Dictionary (internal citation omitted)). The term "severe" is used throughout the rating schedule, including in Diagnostic Code 8105, to indicate a very great degree of the specific listed disability, in order to differentiate between lesser (or sometimes greater) cases of that same disability within the specific diagnostic code. Within the context of Diagnostic Code 8105, which establishes a successive, tiered rating structure, it represents the highest or most extreme level (absent progressive grave types of pronounced chorea). Certain sections of the Rating Schedule use the term "marked" which the Board equates as similar to "severe."

The Board finds that the term "moderately severe" denotes a level of disability that is between being "average in amount, intensity, quality, or degree" (the definition of "moderate") and being "very great [or] intense" (the definite of "severe"), such that it does not more nearly approximate the lower or the higher level of disability.

DC 5276 also provides guidance regarding the types of findings that would indicate the specific level of severity. For example, while moderate flatfeet could present with a weight-bearing line over or medial to the great toe, severe flatfeet could present with pronation, swelling on use and calluses. Additionally, flatfeet presenting with marked pronation, extreme tenderness of the plantar surface and other symptomatology not improved by orthopedic shoes or appliances could be indicative of pronounced flatfeet. Rather than applying a mechanical formula, VA must evaluate all evidence, to the end that decisions will be equitable and just. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.6. Although the use of similar terminology by medical professionals should be considered, it is not dispositive. Instead, all evidence must be evaluated in arriving at a decision regarding a request for a higher disability rating. 38 U.S.C. § 7104; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.2, 4.6.

The rating schedule also provides guidance. In evaluating the relative severity of neurological conditions. Under 38 C.F.R. § 4.120, which has the heading "Evaluations by comparison," disability from neurological conditions and convulsive disorders is "ordinarily to be rated in proportion to the impairment of motor, sensory, or mental function." The regulation further provides, as relevant here, that consideration must be given especially to complete or partial loss of use of one or more extremities, disturbances of gait, and tremors. Id.

Evidence

The Veteran underwent a VA examination in August 2020 where he denied any flareups, or functional loss. On examination, there was pain on both feet, which was accentuated on use, but without pain on manipulation of the feet. There was no evidence of any swelling on use, characteristic calluses, extreme tenderness of the plantar surfaces, marked deformity, marked pronation, inward bowing of the Achilles' tendon, or marked inward displacement or severe spasm of the tendon on manipulation of the feet. There was decreased longitudinal height on weight-bearing, but the weight-bearing line did not fall over or medial to the great toe. The examiner opined that the hallux valgus was mild or moderate, and that the Veteran had surgery for that condition. The Veteran reported the regular use of inserts when leaving home. The examiner indicated that there was no pain, weakness, fatigability, or incoordination that significantly limited functional ability during flare-ups or when the foot was used repeatedly over a period of time. They opined that there was no functional impact.

The Veteran submitted a July 2021 private medical opinion from the same nurse practitioner discussed at length in the migraine decision above. As with their migraine discussion, they did not indicate that they evaluated the Veteran with an in-person interview, telehealth interview, or a review of the claims file. They based their opinion on a statement submitted to them by the Veteran's representative, as well as 4 photos of the feet outside, and at an angle from above. The examiner indicated that the photos showed marked pronation, and inward displacement, calluses, extreme tenderness of the plantar surfaces, and severe spasm of the Achilles' tendon. They noted that the Veteran had reported pain, swelling, stiffness, spasms, and that he had described the pain as stabbing, throbbing, and sharp, which worsened with any activity which involved prolonged standing, walking, stair climbing, high impact activity, running, jogging, and squatting, and he treated with Motrin. The examiner shared the Veteran's report that he worse orthopedic shoes for good arch support, which did not always help, and that his shoes were always wearing down because his feet tilted inward.

The Veteran underwent another VA examination where the Veteran denied any flareups, or functional impairment. The examiner found pain on both feet that was accentuated on use, but not on manipulation. There was no swelling on use, characteristic calluses, extreme tenderness of plantar surfaces, marked deformity, or marked pronation, inward bowing of the Achilles' tendon, or marked inward displacement or severe spasm of the Achilles' tendon on manipulation of the feet. There was decreased longitudinal arch height of both feet on weight-bearing, but the weight-bearing line was not over or medial to the great toe, and there was no other deformity which affected the weight-bearing line. The examiner opined that the hallux valgus was mild, but no other symptoms. The Veteran reported the use of orthotic shoes and inserts. The examiner found functional impact, including an inability to sit, stand, or walk for long periods, jog, jump, hike, climb, run, or sprint.

The Veteran submitted a January 2023 VA DBQ completed by a private examiner. They indicated that it was based on an in-person examination, and a review of the claims file. There, the Veteran reported severe pain, swelling, and tenderness which had continued for years. He also shared that weight-bearing activities were hindered due to pain, tenderness, and numbness, and described functional loss to include an inability to stand or walk for more than 5 minutes without severe pain. The Veteran endorsed frequent flareups, which required multiple unauthorized breaks while working. There was pain on examination, on both use and manipulation.  The examiner noted swelling on use, characteristic calluses, extreme tenderness of the plantar surfaces, decreased longitudinal arch height, marked deformity, marked pronation, and that the weight-bearing line was over or medial to the great toe. They found that there was no inward bowing of the Achilles' tendon, marked inward displacement and severe spasm of the Achilles' tendon, or severe spasm of the Achilles' tendon on manipulation. The examiner indicated that the hallux valgus, which was mild, also affected the weight-bearing line. They also found degenerative arthritis, which was moderately severe, compromised weight-bearing, and required assistive devices. 

The examiner found that functional loss included less movement than normal, weakened movement, swelling, deformity, instability of station, disturbance of locomotion, interference with standing, pain, fatigue, weakness, lack of endurance, and incoordination. They opined that during flareups and repeated use over time, daily pain and swelling limited ability to walk, stand, or complete weight-bearing activities during frequent flareups. The examiner noted that the Veteran was prescribed orthotics, but they did not provide relief. They found that the foot disability was moderately severe in nature and had progressed since service. The examiner noted that there was pain on passive motion, active motion, weight-bearing, but not non-weight-bearing. They opined that functional impact included daily pain that caused severe pain when walking or standing for more than 5 minutes. 

VA attempted to schedule the Veteran for another examination in February 2023, but he refused to attend the examination.

Analysis

Based on the aforementioned, the Board finds that the service-connected pes planus with hallux valgus is appropriately assigned a 10 percent evaluation prior to October 5, 2022, based on painful motion. A higher evaluation is not warranted as there was no evidence of an altered weight-bearing line, inward bowing of the Achilles' tendon, pain on both manipulation and use of the feet, marked deformity, swelling on use, characteristic calluses, marked pronation, extreme tenderness of the plantar surfaces, or marked inward displacement and severe spasm of the Achilles' tendon.

The Board acknowledges the July 2021 private medical opinion, but for reasons similar to those in the migraine discussion above, it is afforded low probative value. The private examiner provided no sort of indication that they were actually familiar with the Veteran, or recent disability picture of the service-connected migraine headaches. Instead, their opinion was based entirely on the statement provided to them by the representative, and photos of the feet taken from an extreme angle that do not actually show the bottoms of the feet. Their findings were inconsistent with the record at the time, including the September 2021 examination conducted mere weeks later. The Board would expect that if he experienced the symptoms as described in that private opinion, he would report them in person at an examination designed specifically to evaluate the severity of his symptoms. The September 2021 VA examination was conducted in-person, including interview with the Veteran, and indicated that the examiner reviewed the claims file. In support of this, they included excerpts from medical records which covered the development of this condition, which supports a finding that the examiner was familiar with the treatment history. As such, the Board affords this examination greater probative value.

As for the period from October 5, 2022, the Board finds that the service-connected pes planus with hallus valgus is appropriately assigned a 50 percent evaluation, which is also the highest available rating under DC 5276. There is no possible higher evaluation. This is based on the findings of the January 2023 private examination. 

The Board is sympathetic to the Veteran's lay statements that the disability is worse than currently evaluated and those statements have been considered. The Veteran is competent to report symptoms because this requires only personal knowledge as it comes to him through his senses. Layno, 6 Vet. App. At 465. He is not, however, competent to identify a specific level of disability according to the appropriate diagnostic codes. Such competent evidence concerning the nature and extent of the Veteran's disability have been provided by the medical personnel who have examined the Veteran during the current appeal and who have rendered pertinent opinions in conjunction with the evaluations. The medical findings (as provided in the examination reports and the clinical records) directly address the criteria under which the disability is evaluated. The medical and lay evidence has been assessed by the Board in determining the overall disability rating. The Board ultimately affords greater weight to the probative evidence of record.

Accordingly, the criteria for the claim of entitlement to an initial evaluation in excess of 10 percent prior to October 5, 2022, and in excess of a 50 percent evaluation thereafter for the service-connected bilateral pes planus and hallux valgus have not been met, and the appeal is denied.

In reaching this decision the Board considered the doctrine of reasonable doubt. In determining whether service connection is warranted for a disability, VA is responsible for determining whether the evidence persuasively favors the claim or is in approximate balance, with the Veteran prevailing in either event, or whether the evidence persuasively weighs against the claim, in which case the claim is denied. In other words, when there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination, the benefit of the doubt is afforded to the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch, 21 F.4th at 776. Here, however, as the evidence is persuasively against the claim and the positive and negative evidence is not in approximate balance, the doctrine is not for application. Id.

 

 

Thomas L. English

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Rogos, John M.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.