Citation Nr: A25034830
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 240108-408942
DATE: April 15, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an initial compensable rating for left knee strain, limitation of flexion, is denied.

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent for left knee sprain, limitation of extension, is denied.

REMANDED

Entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent for right knee osteoarthritis is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for hypertension is remanded.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran's left knee disability, manifest by limitation of flexion, is characterized by pain on motion.   

2. The Veteran's extension is not limited to 15 degrees, even in consideration of his complaints of pain, pain on motion, and functional loss. 

3. He did not have dislocated or removed semi-lunar cartilage or recurrent subluxation or instability.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for an initial rating of 10 percent, but no higher, for left knee strain, limitation of flexion, are met. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Codes 5257-5259, 5260.

2. The criteria for a rating in excess of 10 percent for left knee sprain, limitation of extension, are not met. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.71a, Diagnostic Codes 5257-5259, 5261.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran had active service in the Navy from February 1993 to January 2013.

The appeal originates from a November 2023 decision of a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO/AOJ). In January 2024, the Veteran submitted a Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) and elected direct review.

Consideration can only be given to the evidence of record at the time of the AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.303. The Board cannot consider (1) evidence submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision on appeal and before the VA Form 10182 was received, or (2) evidence submitted after the VA Form 10182. Id.

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims for increased ratings for his left knee disabilities, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent for the right knee, and service connection for hypertension, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Increased Ratings

1. Entitlement to an initial compensable rating for left knee strain, limitation of flexion.

2. Entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent for left knee sprain, limitation of extension.

Disability ratings are determined by comparing a veteran's present symptoms with criteria set forth in VA's Schedule for Rating Disabilities, which is based on average impairment in earning capacity. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. Part 4. Regulations require that where there is a question as to which of two evaluations is to be applied, the higher evaluation will be assigned if the disability picture more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating. Otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7.

For disabilities evaluated based on limitation of motion, VA must determine the extent the disability results in an inability to perform the normal working movements of the body with normal excursion, strength, speed, coordination, and endurance as described in the provisions pertaining to functional impairment. See DeLuca v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 202 (1995). In so doing, VA should obtain examinations evaluating the disability in accordance with the regulations that provide information on whether the disability was manifested by functional loss. 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.40, 4.45. These determinations are, if feasible, to be expressed in terms of the degree of additional range-of-motion loss due to any weakened movement, excess fatigability, incoordination, or pain during flare-ups and after repetitive use over time. See Mitchell v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 32 (2011); Correia v. McDonald, 28 Vet. App. 158 (2016); Sharp v. Shulkin, 29 Vet. App. 26 (2017).

Diagnostic Code 5257 addresses other impairment of the knee. For recurrent subluxation or instability, a 10 percent rating requires sprain, incomplete ligament tear, or complete ligament tear (repaired, unrepaired, or failed repair) causing persistent instability, without a prescription from a medical provider for an assistive device (e.g., cane(s), crutch(es), walker) or bracing for ambulation.

For patellar instability under Diagnostic Code 5257, a 10 percent rating requires a diagnosed condition involving the patellofemoral complex with recurrent instability (with or without history of surgical repair) that does not require a prescription from a medical provider for a brace, cane, or walker.

Diagnostic Code 5258 assigns a 20 percent rating for dislocated semilunar cartilage with episodes of "locking," pain, and effusion into the joint.

Diagnostic Code 5259 assigns a 10 percent rating for removal of symptomatic semilunar cartilage.

Diagnostic Code 5260 addresses limitation of flexion of the leg. A 10 percent rating requires extension limited to 45 degrees.

Diagnostic Code 5261 addresses limitation of extension of the leg. A 20 percent rating requires extension limited to 15 degrees.

The Veteran underwent a VA knee examination in August 2023. He complained of pain, popping, and stiffness affecting his ability to run, squat, and lift. He reported undergoing physical therapy and using a brace. He described having flareups occurring with overuse and alleviated by rest. He denied a history of instability or recurrent subluxation of the left knee.

Based on the evidence, the Veteran is not entitled to an increased rating for his left knee disability based on limitation of extension.  The August 2023 VA examination showed limitation of extension to 10 degrees, which is commensurate with a rating of 10 percent under Diagnostic Code 5261.  Such measurement includes consideration of repetitive and passive use, repeated use over time, and flareups. These range of motion does not approximate limitation required for increased rating based on extension. 

Further, as this is the only objective evidence of record during the appeals period regarding limitation of extension of the left knee, the Board finds a rating in excess of 10 percent is not warranted. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.400; Harper v. Brown, 10 Vet. App. 125 (1997).

Regarding an initial compensable rating for limitation of flexion, the Board finds that a rating of 10 percent, but no higher, is warranted. During the August 2023 VA examination, his flexion was limited to, at worst, 60 degrees during flareups. Such measurements include consideration of repetitive and passive use, repeated use over time, and flareups. 

In addition, prior examinations in May 2013, October 2016, April 2018, and September 2021 showed flexion limited to (at worst) 70 degrees, which is consistent with a noncompensable rating. Nevertheless, the Veteran has repeatedly complained of pain associated with the left knee based on flexion. Given that the Veteran's limitation of extension is to 10 degrees, which meets the requirements of a 10 percent rating based on limitation of motion (as opposed to pain), the Veteran is entitled to the 10 percent rating, but no higher, for limitation of flexion without violating pyramiding. See 38 C.F.R. § 4.14; Correia, supra; Mitchell, supra.

With respect to a meniscal condition, the Veteran was not found to have dislocated or removed semilunar cartilage confirmed by imaging. The August 2023 examiner made a specific finding that he had no such condition. The Veteran also denied a history of recurrent subluxation or instability, and joint stability testing was normal.  Therefore, a separate rating based on subluxation or instability is not warranted.  See Diagnostic Code 5257.

The Board notes that the October 2016 VA knee examiner found a left knee meniscal tear ostensibly diagnosed in 2005. However, this was an erroneous finding based on a misunderstanding of the Veteran's medical history. Service treatment records show that the Veteran was evaluated for a suspected meniscal tear in June 2004 following a football injury. He did not undergo imaging of the left knee to confirm that diagnosis in service.

Following separation from active service, the Veteran underwent imaging of the left knee in May 2013 to determine if he had a meniscal tear. The left knee showed normal alignment with no fracture or dislocation. The interpreter stated, "Unremarkable radiographic appearance of the left knee." Given the preceding history and the notation that the October 2016 examiner did not review the record prior to completing the report, the finding of a meniscal tear is afforded no weight. See Diagnostic Codes 5258, 5259. 

The Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims has established that reports of flareups of symptomatology must be considered. Sharp, 29?Vet. App.?26. Guidance on how to evaluate flareups has not been particularly clear. However, the Board finds overall wisdom in Mitchell, 25?Vet. App.?32. Flareups must be quantifiable and result in limitation of motion or function beyond that contemplated by the already provided evaluation. In addition, because there is a regulation addressing stabilization of ratings, the flareup must be of such length as to establish that the overall impairment is more severe than currently evaluated, rather than a brief snapshot in time. 

With that in mind, consideration has been given to the Veteran's report of experiencing left knee flareups. The contemporaneous treatment records contain little, if any, findings pertaining to flareups much less information regarding his functional ability during a flareup or after repeated use over time. The additional limitation (functional loss) he experienced due to pain was accounted for by the examiner when determining his ranges of motion, including with flareups.

Accordingly, an initial rating of 10 percent for left knee strain, limitation of flexion and no higher is granted. A rating in excess of 10 percent for left knee sprain, limitation of extension must be denied. 

In reaching the conclusion above, the Board has considered the applicability of the benefit of the doubt doctrine.  However, as the evidence is persuasively against the assignment of higher ratings, that doctrine is not for application.  See Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc); 38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

?

REASONS FOR REMAND

1. Entitlement to a rating in excess of 10 percent for right knee osteoarthritis.

At the August 2023 knee examination, the Veteran reported using an arthritis cream to treat his right knee osteoarthritis. There is no indication that any ameliorative effect from this medication was accounted for in determining his ranges of motion at the examination. See Ingram v. Collins, No. 23-1798 (Mar. 12, 2025). Consequently, remand is necessary for an addendum.

2. Entitlement to service connection for hypertension is remanded.

The Veteran contends that his hypertension is related to hazardous exposure he suffered during Southwest Asia service. See August 2023 Claim. VA has made favorable findings of a current disability and service in the Southwest Asia theater of operations. See November 2023 Rating Decision.

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in September 2023, and the examiner provided opinions on direct service connection, including Toxic Exposure Risk Activity (TERA) participation. After summarizing relevant evidence (such as post-service treatment records and lay statements), the examiner opined that hypertension was less likely as not related to service. However, little rationale was provided beyond noting an absence of evidence in the service treatment records. 

The Board notes that a post-service initial diagnosis of a disorder does not necessarily preclude service connection. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d). The absence of evidence in the service treatment records is but one factor for consideration, and a negative opinion relying solely on that factor is inadequate. Dalton?v. Nicholson,?21 Vet. App. 23?(2007). Therefore, remand is necessary for a new opinion.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Request an addendum from the August 2023 knee examiner. The examiner is asked to estimate the Veteran's right-knee ranges of motion (including passive use and during flareups) absent the ameliorative effect of arthritis cream. Any additional functional limitation should also be noted.

Rationale should be provided for any opinion, with citation to supporting clinical data/lay statements, as deemed appropriate. If the examiner cannot provide the requested opinion without resorting to?speculation, he or she should expressly indicate this and provide a supporting?rationale?as to why an opinion cannot be made without resorting to?speculation.

2. Request an addendum from the September 2023 hypertension examiner. The examiner is asked to opine whether it is at least as likely as not (the likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that hypertension had its onset in or is otherwise etiologically related to active service.

The examiner is advised that an absence of evidence in the service treatment records is but one factor for consideration, and that other evidence should also be discussed.

Rationale should be provided for any opinion, with citation to supporting clinical data/lay statements, as deemed appropriate. If the examiner cannot provide the requested opinion without resorting to?speculation, he or she should expressly indicate this and provide a supporting?rationale?as to why an opinion cannot be made without resorting to?speculation.

(Continued on the next page)

 

 

T. Berry

Acting Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	M. Alhinnawi

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.