Citation Nr: A25034034
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 240523-444889
DATE: April 11, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a back disability, to include degenerative arthritis, is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from July 1980 to July 1984.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeal (Board) on appeal from July 2023 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In the May 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the July 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of degenerative arthritis, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

1. Entitlement to service connection for a back disability, to include degenerative arthritis, is remanded.

The Veteran is seeking service connection for degenerative arthritis, which he contends is due to repetitive heavy lifting of artillery rounds in service. See 4/12/23 VA Form 21-526EZ. Although the Board regrets the delay, upon review of the claims file, additional development is necessary.

Under the?AMA,?remand?is permissible only for correction of?pre-decisional?duty to assist errors and correction of an AOJ error in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty, if correction of such error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the appellant's claim. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802.

The law provides that VA shall make reasonable efforts to notify a claimant of the evidence necessary to substantiate a claim and requires VA to assist a claimant in obtaining that evidence. 38 U.S.C. §§ 5103, 5103A; 38 C.F.R. § 3.159. Such assistance includes obtaining treatment records and providing the claimant a medical examination or obtaining a medical opinion when such an examination or opinion is necessary to decide a claim. 38 U.S.C. §§ 5103, 5103A; 38 C.F.R. § 3.159. The threshold for determining whether the evidence "indicates" that there "may" be a nexus between a current disability and an in-service event, injury, or disease is a low one. See McLendon v. Nicholson, 20?Vet. App.?79, 83 (2006).

Here, there is evidence showing that the Veteran has a current back disability. In April 2023, he submitted a statement from a chiropractor stating that the Veteran's spinal segmental dysfunction resulted in pain in the low back, right and left hip, left gluteus, left posterior though, left leg, and left foot. See 4/12/23 Correspondence. He also stated that he examined the Veteran and took x-rays, which showed lumbar spinal and disc degeneration. The Veteran has also consistently reported that his claimed arthritis is due to repetitive heavy lifting in the military. Id. However, there is no VA examination or medical opinion of record regarding the Veteran's claimed back disability, which is needed to adjudicate the claim. Thus, the low threshold of McLendon is met, and a VA examination and medical opinion is needed.

Furthermore, the chiropractor's statement regarding treatment indicates unobtained records and the failure to attempt to obtain these records constitutes a pre-decisional error, even if such records are not located thereafter. Therefore, a remand is necessary to also obtain such medical records.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Ask the Veteran to execute a VA Form 21-4142 for all providers he has seen for his claimed back disability. If any providers are identified by the Veteran, please obtain a medical release authorization and obtain the medical records from all providers identified in the Veteran's executed VA Form 21-4142.?

2. After any medical records are received in connection with the Veteran's treatment for a back disability, arrange a VA examination by a clinician with sufficient expertise to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's back disability. The entire claims file and all pertinent evidence of records should be reviewed by the examiner prior to examination. The examiner should also elicit from the Veteran a detailed medical history. All necessary tests and studies should be performed. The examiner should indicate whether the Veteran has a back disability. Please opine to the following:

For any back disability diagnosed, is it at least as likely as not (likelihood of approximately 50 percent or greater) that the Veteran's back disability had its onset in service or is otherwise causally related to his active service?

The examiner is also advised that the Veteran is competent to report symptoms and treatment and that his reports, including his reports as to the onset and nature of his symptoms, must be taken into account, along with the other evidence of record, in formulating the requested opinions. 

The examiner should set forth all examination findings, along with the complete rationale for any conclusions reached.

 

 

Eric S. Leboff

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	J. Sproviero

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.