Citation Nr: A25034879
Decision Date: 04/16/25	Archive Date: 04/16/25

DOCKET NO. 240911-471498
DATE: April 16, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to an initial rating of 30 percent, but no higher, for functional gastrointestinal disorder (claimed as irritable bowel syndrome (IBS)), is granted, subject to the laws and regulations governing the payment of monetary benefits.

FINDING OF FACT

For the entire appeal period, the Veteran's functional gastrointestinal disorder results in alternating episodes of diarrhea and constipation, with more or less constant abdominal distress.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for an initial rating of 30 percent, but no higher, for functional gastrointestinal disorder have been met.  38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.114, Diagnostic Code 7319.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from February 2006 to September 2008, with a period of active duty for training from August 2004 to November 2004, and with additional service in the Army Reserve.  For his service, the Veteran was awarded the Army Achievement Medal, National Defense Service Medal, Global War on Terrorism Service Medal, Korean Defense Service Medal, Army Service Ribbon, Overseas Service Ribbon, and Iraq Campaign Medal with One Bronze Service Star.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a rating decision issued in September 2024 by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office under the modernized appeals system known as the Appeals Modernization Act.

In September 2024, the Veteran filed a timely Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) (VA Form 10182) and requested the Direct Review docket.  Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the September 2024 AOJ decision on appeal.  See 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board.  See 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

Entitlement to an initial compensable rating for a functional gastrointestinal disorder.

Disability ratings are determined by evaluating the extent to which a veteran's service-connected disability adversely affects his or her ability to function under the ordinary conditions of daily life, including employment, by comparing his or her symptomatology with the criteria set forth in the Schedule for Rating Disabilities (Rating Schedule).  See 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1.  If two ratings are potentially applicable, the higher rating will be assigned if the disability more nearly approximates the criteria required for that rating; otherwise, the lower rating will be assigned.  See 38 C.F.R. § 4.7.  Any reasonable doubt regarding the degree of disability will be resolved in favor of the Veteran.  38 C.F.R. § 4.3.

Separate ratings can be assigned for separate periods based on the facts found-a practice known as "staged" ratings.  Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119, 126 (1999); Hart v. Mansfield, 21 Vet. App. 505, 509 (2007).  Staged ratings are appropriate whenever the factual findings show distinct periods where the service-connected disability exhibits symptoms that would warrant different ratings.  Hart, 21 Vet. App at 509-10.

The current appeal stems from March 22, 2024, the date of service connection.  Throughout the appeal period, the Veteran is currently in receipt of a noncompensable rating for his functional gastrointestinal disorder pursuant to Diagnostic Code 7319 for IBS.  38 C.F.R. § 4.113.

The Veteran contends that his service-connected functional gastrointestinal disorder is more severe than as reflected by the currently assigned noncompensable rating.  The Veteran further contends that he has an IBS diagnosis.

As an initial matter, because the Veteran's functional gastrointestinal disorder is rated under Diagnostic Code 7319, for IBS, and because the Veteran's symptoms are being evaluated under such Diagnostic Code, the Board declines to remand the claim for a determination of whether the Veteran's service-connected functional gastrointestinal disorder should instead be called IBS.

In addressing the Veteran's claim for an initial compensable rating for his functional gastrointestinal disorder, the Board first notes that, effective May 19, 2024, VA revised the criteria for evaluating disabilities of the digestive system.  See Schedule for Rating Disabilities: Digestive System, 89 Fed. Reg. 19735, 19743 (Mar. 20, 2024).

Under the pre-May 19, 2024, version of Diagnostic Code 7319, a noncompensable rating is warranted for mild disturbances of bowel function with occasional episodes of abdominal distress.  38 C.F.R. § 4.114.  A 10 percent rating is warranted for moderate irritable colon syndrome with frequent episodes of bowel disturbance with abdominal distress.  Id.  A 30 percent rating is warranted for severe irritable colon syndrome with diarrhea, or alternating diarrhea and constipation, with more or less constant abdominal distress.  Id.  There is no 20 percent evaluation for irritable colon syndrome; 30 percent is the maximum allowable evaluation under Diagnostic Code 7319.  Id.

"Abdominal distress" is not defined in the Rating Schedule.  Absent an express definition, it is presumed that VA regulations employ words using their ordinary dictionary meanings at the time the regulations were promulgated.  See Nielson v. Shinseki, 607 F.3d 802, 805-06 (Fed. Cir. 2010).  In the medical context, "distress" means "pain or suffering affecting the body, a bodily part, or the mind."  Merriam-Webster Dictionary Online, https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/distress, Definition 2(a), (last visited Apr. 15, 2025).  Therefore, the Board interprets "abdominal distress" to mean pain or suffering affecting the abdomen.

Effective May 19, 2024, IBS is rated under Diagnostic Code 7319.  38 C.F.R. § 4.114.  A 10 percent rating is warranted for abdominal pain related to defecation at least once during the previous three months; and two or more of the following: (1) change in stool frequency, (2) change in stool form, (3) altered stool passage (straining and/or urgency), (4) mucorrhea, (5) abdominal bloating, or (6) subjective distension.  Id.  A 20 percent rating is warranted for abdominal pain related to defecation for at least three days per month during the previous three months; and two or more of the following: (1) change in stool frequency, (2) change in stool form, (3) altered stool passage (straining and/or urgency), (4) mucorrhea, (5) abdominal bloating, or (6) subjective distension.  A maximum 30 percent rating is warranted for abdominal pain related to defecation at least one day per week during the previous three months; and two or more of the following: (1) change in stool frequency, (2) change in stool form, (3) altered stool passage (straining and/or urgency), (4) mucorrhea, (5) abdominal bloating, or (6) subjective distension.  Id.

The note following Diagnostic Code 7319 states that such disability rating may include functional digestive disorders, such as dyspepsia, functional bloating and constipation, and diarrhea, and to evaluate other symptoms of a functional digestive disorder not encompassed by this diagnostic code under the appropriate diagnostic code, to include gastrointestinal dysmotility syndrome (Diagnostic Code 7356).  Id.

If a law or regulation changes during the course of a claim or an appeal, the version more favorable to the Veteran will apply, to the extent permitted by any stated effective date in the amendment in question.  38 U.S.C. § 5110(g); see also Kuzma v. Principi, 341 F.3d 1327, 1328-29 (Fed. Cir. 2003).  If the revised version of the regulation is more favorable, the implementation of that regulation under 38 U.S.C. § 5110(g) can be no earlier than the effective date of that change.  See 341 F.3d at 1328-29.  If the former version is more favorable, VA can apply the earlier version of the regulation for the period prior to, and from, the effective date of the change.  38 U.S.C. § 5110(g); see id.  Therefore, the Board will consider the Veteran's claim under the old rating criteria prior to May 19, 2024, and under the old and new rating criteria from May 19, 2024.  The criteria that is more favorable to the Veteran will be applied.

In the instant case, the Board finds the pre-May 19, 2024, rating criteria more favorable to the Veteran.  Accordingly, the Board will apply such criteria for the entirety of the appeal period.

Upon review of the evidence of record, the Board finds the evidence is at least in approximate balance as to whether the Veteran's functional gastrointestinal disorder more nearly approximates the criteria for assignment of an initial rating of 30 percent, but no higher.

Turning to the evidence of record, a March 2024 VA examination report for intestinal conditions notes that the Veteran reported suffering from bloating and constipation.  The examiner indicated there was an undiagnosed condition of bloating and constipation.  The examiner noted that the Veteran's intestinal condition (not including his non-service-connected gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD)), required continuous medication to include Polyethylene Glycol 3350, 17 grams per day as needed (for constipation); Psyllium, one tablespoon twice per day; and Simethicone 80 milligrams (mg), four times per day as needed (for gas).  The examiner noted daily abdominal distension and found the Veteran had episodes of bowel disturbance with abdominal distress, to include more or less constant abdominal distress (emphasis added).  The examiner noted no surgical treatment, weight loss, malnutrition, serious complications, or other general health effects attributable to his intestinal condition, nor any neoplasm, metastases, scars or other pertinent physical findings.  The examiner indicated a computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen and pelvis had been performed in July 2020, and X-rays had been taken of the abdomen in June 2023, with the following results:

Small hypodense liver and left renal lesions most likely represent simple cysts. Normal appearance of the spleen, pancreas, adrenal glands and right kidney.  No free fluid, free air, or small bowel wall thickening. There is mild diffuse mesenteric inflammation with prominent subcentimeter mesenteric lymph nodes.  There is fluid in the cecum and distal small bowel.  Prominent pericecal lymph nodes measure up to 8 [millimeters] mm.  Distal colon is decompressed.  The appendix measures up to 8 mm (previously 4 mm).  There is no periappendiceal inflammation.  Sclerotic lesions in the left iliac bone, unchanged since 2020.

The examiner then noted that the Veteran's intestinal condition impacted his ability to work, explaining: "He has to take bathroom breaks[,] and this is stressful for him."  Finally, the examiner remarked that, while there was no official IBS diagnosis, the Veteran appeared to have such condition.

A July 2024 VA examination report for intestinal conditions notes that the Veteran received treatment from the VA gastroenterology (GI) clinic for bloating and was taking medication.  Specifically, the examiner noted Simethicone for gas and Psyllium and Polyethylene to help prevent constipation.  The examiner found no IBS diagnosis.  The examiner noted no inflammatory bowel disease, diverticular disease, surgical procedures, external intestinal fistulous disease, celiac disease, gastrointestinal dysmotility syndrome, visceroptosis, tumors, neoplasms, scars, or other pertinent physical findings.  The examiner indicated the Veteran's intestinal condition did not impact his ability to perform any type of occupational task.

An August 2024 Disability Benefits Questionnaire for intestinal conditions, which was completed a VA GI specialist and submitted by the Veteran, noted relevant intestinal condition diagnoses to include abdominal pain, diarrhea, and bloating, in addition to chest pain, heartburn/GERD.  The physician specified that the Veteran's functional digestive disorder included the diagnosis of functional bloating.  The physician further noted that the Veteran used prescribed medication, to include Simethicone 80 mg four times daily for gas and bloating.  The physician indicated the Veteran had either IBS, chronic enteritis, functional digestive disorder, or a similar condition-with abdominal bloating but without abdominal pain related to defecation during the previous 3 months.  The physician noted no Chron's disease, ulcerative colitis, undifferentiated form of inflammatory bowel disease, chronic enteritis or similar condition, diverticular disease or similar condition, surgery for intestinal conditions, external intestinal fistulous disease, celiac disease or similar condition, visceroptosis, tumors, neoplasms, scars, or other pertinent physical findings.  However, the physician found that the Veteran had gastrointestinal dysmotility syndrome, functional digestive disorder, or similar condition-with intermittent abdominal pain, with bloating, and requiring prescribed dietary management or manipulation, but without evidence of structural gastrointestinal disease.  The physician summarized the July 2023 CT scan results as "mildly dilated appendix, diffuse mesenteric inflammation [and] mild adenopathy," in addition to describing the negative tissue transglutaminase and helicobacter pylori laboratory test results of December 2023 and the normal calprotectin (fecal) results of July 2023.  The physician also noted mildly elevated sedimentation rate of uncertain clinical significance.  Finally, the physician indicated that the Veteran's intestinal conditions did not impact his ability to perform any type of occupational task.

A June 6, 2022, VA treatment record notes that the Veteran was first diagnosed with abdominal pain in July 2020.

An April 27, 2023, VA treatment record notes that the Veteran described having abdominal pain associated with panic attacks.

A June 30, 2023, VA treatment record notes that the Veteran reported having diarrhea after starting non-gastrointestinal related antibiotic treatment.

A July 8, 2023, VA treatment record notes that the Veteran presented to the emergency department with complaints of right-side abdominal pain and bloating-persistent for days.  The clinician listed diagnostic impressions of "1. Non-specific abdominal pain/ [question mark] IBS [and] 2. GERD."  The Board notes that the Veteran is not service-connected for GERD, and when it is not possible to separate the effects of a service-connected disability from a nonservice-connected condition, such signs and symptoms must be attributed to the service-connected disability.  See Mittleider v. West, 11 Vet. App. 181, 182 (1998).  The corresponding emergency department triage note lists the Veteran's chief complaint as "abdominal pain," notes loose stools, and describes that the Veteran "had labs done recently which were unremarkable per [the Veteran].  Taking [M]etamucil and [Imodium,] feeling bloated and has joint pain all over."  The Veteran's emergency department discharge note indicates a diagnosis of "abdominal pain."

A July 10, 2023, VA treatment record notes that the Veteran presented to the emergency department after four days of right upper quadrant, abdominal pain.  The Veteran described the pain as "intermittent crampy pain, lasting anywhere from 3 minutes [to] several hours," and described experiencing a bloating sensation.  A separate July 10, 2023, VA treatment record notes that the Veteran had been diagnosed with a shigella bacterial infection, received medication for constipation earlier that day in the emergency department, was feeling bloated, was unable to move his bowels, was passing gas, and had mild (but not constant) abdominal pain.  A different July 10, 2023, VA treatment records notes that the Veteran called to report right lower quadrant, abdominal pain (rated as a six out of ten), cramping, and bloating as of one week-with changes in bowel patterns for the prior 1.5 weeks, which included loose stool, diarrhea, and constipation.  The same treatment note indicates that the Veteran was concerned that the emergency department had not addressed his abdominal pain and wanted to see a GI or PACT Team specialist.  On such call, the Veteran also endorsed moderate to severe abdominal pain, lasting more than three hours, in addition to intermittent back or flank pain.  The treatment record notes that, based on the responses provided by the Veteran, it was recommended that he "be treated in the emergency room."

A July 11, 2023, VA treatment record notes abdomen and pelvis CT findings to include a nonobstructive bowel gas pattern, as well as mild scattered formed stool and air throughout the colon; and CT impressions to include "Mildly dilated appendix without periappendiceal inflammation [which] may represent early uncomplicated appendicitis."  The Board notes that appendicitis was later ruled out (see the medical evidence described below).

A July 12, 2023, VA treatment record notes that the Veteran reported abdominal bloating and occasional abdominal pain.

A July 13, 2023, VA treatment record notes that the Veteran presented to the emergency department with chest pain and upper abdominal cramping-having had "multiple recent visits for GI issues."  He was instructed to continue his Omeprazole.

A July 14, 2023, VA treatment record notes that the Veteran reported symptoms of abdominal discomfort with intermittent constipation and diarrhea as of one week.

A July 17, 2023, VA treatment record notes that the Veteran presented to the GI clinic "for evaluation of abdominal pain and diarrhea."  At the time of his visit, the Veteran also reported a sensation of bloating.  The clinician described the Veteran's symptoms as possibly "antibiotic related," further noting that that his "Abdominal pain seems to improve with [bowel movements], which [is] concerning for possible IBS-M, given intermittent episodes of diarrhea and constipation."  The clinician found the Veteran's laboratory results to be" unremarkable" and instructed him to, among others, begin Psyllium BIS and continue Pantoprazole 40 mg daily.

A July 21, 2023, VA treatment record notes that the Veteran presented to the emergency department due to cramping and ongoing abdominal (right lower quadrant) and flank pain-with pain that had worsened over the past few days.  The emergency department triage note states: "He was here in the [emergency department] on 7/10/2023.  GI and general surgery consulted.  Working diagnoses [sic] was IBS."  At his emergency department visit, the Veteran received education on IBS, diet, and medication-including a prescription for Dicyclomine HCL 20 mg for IBS.

A July 28, 2023, VA treatment record notes that a GI clinician called and spoke to the Veteran "who noted lower abdominal cramping and back pain, diarrhea now resolved."  The clinician indicated that he had "Provided reassurance [to the Veteran] that most likely [his] symptoms [were] due to IBS [as opposed to being] muscular."  The clinician recommended the Veteran use Psyllium twice per day.

An August 1, 2023, VA treatment record notes that laboratory test results had been positive for E. coli and that the Veteran reported feeling well-with his diarrhea resolved.

An August 9, 2023, VA treatment record notes that the Veteran presented to the emergency department for anxiety and gas bubbles and that his abdominal examination was benign.  The same treatment record notes "GI: Chronic abdominal discomfort, no change, no vomiting or diarrhea."

An August 22, 2023, VA treatment record notes that the Veteran reported feelings of bloating and indigestion.  A separate August 22, 2023, VA treatment record notes that the Veteran stated that his bowel habits had improved compared to a recent GI clinic visit: "He is now having 1-2 formed [bowel movements] daily on average."

An August 24, 2023, VA treatment record notes that the Veteran wanted to speak with a nurse or GI doctor due to continued bloating.

An August 25, 2023, VA treatment record notes that the Veteran continued to experience "burning epigastric and chest pain and abdominal bloating consistent with known GERD and IBS."  The Veteran was counseled to take Simethicone as needed for bloating.

An August 31, 2023, VA treatment record notes that, "Per chart review, [the Veteran] has had multiple [emergency department] and clinic visits for GI related symptoms in interim.  He reports some feelings of frustration regarding medication regimen and feeling like a 'guinea pig' as he's tried different medications to alleviate IBS, reflux and related symptoms. . . [Veteran] recognizes that his IBS symptoms are impacting his appetite and diet."  At his visit, the Veteran indicated he was also experiencing pain and attributed such pain to his "intermittent flares of IBS symptoms."

A September 7, 2023, VA treatment record notes that the Veteran cannot take nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) "due to IBS" and that he had made changes to his diet "due to struggles with IBS."

An October 4, 2023, VA treatment record notes that the Veteran presented to the emergency department for chest pain; the clinician noted gastrointestinal symptoms to include the Veteran feeling bloated and having epigastric discomfort.   The emergency department triage note indicates that the Veteran had presented "for evaluation [of] epigastric pain and bloating."

An October 13, 2023, VA treatment record notes that the Veteran presented for a follow-up visit to the GI clinic, reporting that, although his GERD symptoms were well-controlled, "His main complaint this visit is abdominal bloating/gassiness."  In the same treatment record, the clinician indicated the Veteran continued to have abdominal bloating and suspected such was "likely related to IBS, [but he could not] rule out [small intestinal bacterial overgrowth] or lactose intolerance, although current food triggers [did not] seem to match up with lactose intolerance."

An October 26, 2023, VA treatment record notes that the Veteran reported continued bloating and wanted to be seen earlier (at the GI clinic) than his next scheduled appointment.  Additionally, an addendum record from that day notes that the Veteran stated his "medication regimen is ineffective.  Looking [to] explore other treatment options."

An October 30, 2023, VA treatment record notes that the Veteran presented "with days of crampy abdominal pain, has been hemodynamically stable, labs unremarkable [with] benign abdominal exam.  Unlikely to be appendicitis" (emphasis added).

A November 4, 2023, VA treatment record notes that the Veteran presented to the emergency department with complaints of watery stools, every 45 minutes.  The clinician noted an impression of "Diarrhea, likely non-infectious."  The emergency department triage note states abdominal cramping, no recent use of antibiotics, no travel, no sick contact, and that "Due to IBS [the Veteran] continued taking MiraLax and Psyllium."  The emergency department discharge note indicates a diagnosis of gastroenteritis.

A November 9, 2023, VA treatment record notes that the Veteran reported his bloating medication did not seem to be working well anymore.

A December 5, 2023, VA treatment record notes that the Veteran reported a constant sensation of abdominal bloating, with occasional abdominal cramping in the lower quadrant, even with dietary adjustments.  At his visit, the Veteran also reported intermittent constipation, incomplete voids, and occasional straining.  The clinician noted: "Discussed differential for abdominal bloating.  Can be related to diet, underlying constipation, celiac disease, H. pylori, bacterial overgrowth, IBS, functional dyspepsia.  Plan to adjust food as above and maintain a food journal.  Patient also to start consistently taking [Psyllium and MiraLax] to help with occasional straining and incomplete voids."

A January 23, 2024, VA treatment record notes that the Veteran presented to the GI clinic for a follow-up visit, wherein he reported abdominal bloating the prior weekend and discussed which foods, based on his food journal, were possible causes for such bloating.  The clinician noted that the Veteran was taking Omeprazole 40 mg once daily.

A May 6, 2024, VA treatment record notes that the Veteran presented to the GI clinic for a follow-up visit and reported abdominal bloating, which "starts in the morning before eating.  Can occur sporadically.  Typically comes and goes.  Last[s] for a day or so.  Worse with certain foods.  He is unsure what foods make it worse.  May be spicy food or sauces.  Described as a full sensation in the stomach.  Associated with abdominal cramping.  No constipation or diarrhea."  The clinician noted that the Veteran had been taking Omeprazole for one month and took Psyllium once per day to help with bowel movements.

A May 10, 2024, VA treatment record notes that the Veteran was concerned with abdominal bloating and intermittent constipation.  For these symptoms, the clinician instructed him to restart Psyllium once per day, to begin Simethicone 80 mg three times per day as needed, and to purchase IBgard.

A July 16, 2024, VA treatment record notes that the Veteran presented to the GI clinic for a follow-up visit and reported abdominal bloating, which had improved with his avoidance of known food triggers and use of IBgard.

Upon review, and resolving all doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Board finds that the above evidence of record supports a 30 percent rating based on alternating diarrhea and constipation, with more or less constant abdominal distress.  Specifically, VA treatment records demonstrate more than 25 emergency department and clinic visits over the span of two years, wherein the Veteran reported some form of abdominal pain, abdominal cramping, abdominal bloating, constipation, or diarrhea.  Regarding these VA treatment records, the Board notes that statements made for purposes of diagnosis and treatment are exceptionally trustworthy because the Veteran has a strong motive to tell the truth in order to receive proper care.  See White v. Illinois, 502 U.S. 346, 355-56 (1991).  Furthermore, the March 2024 VA examiner, who evaluated the Veteran's medical records based on the pre-May 19, 2024, rating criteria, found that the Veteran had episodes of bowel disturbance with abdominal distress, to include more or less constant abdominal distress.  That examiner also concluded that the Veteran's intestinal condition impacted his ability to work, explaining: "He has to take bathroom breaks[,] and this is stressful for him."  The Board further notes that, while neither the July 2024 VA examiner nor the August 2024 VA GI specialist evaluated the Veteran under the pre-May 19, 2024, rating criteria, they (in combination) found bloating, constipation, abdominal pain, diarrhea, and the need for continuous medication to treat such symptoms-consistent with a finding of more or less constant abdominal distress.

The Board purposefully will not consider the ameliorative effects of the Veteran's medication in the evaluation of the severity of his functional gastrointestinal disorder.  See Jones v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 56, 63 (2012) (when a Diagnostic Code is silent as to the effects of medication, VA may not deny entitlement to a higher disability rating based on the relief provided by medication).  In this regard, Diagnostic Code 7319 does not specifically contemplate the use of medication to ameliorate symptoms.  Nonetheless, the evidence of record reflects that the Veteran frequently and continuously used medication during the appeal period to treat and prevent his functional gastrointestinal disorder symptoms.  However, the Veteran's medication use only further supports the Board's decision because it appears that his functional gastrointestinal disorder would be of increased frequency and severity but for his medication.  Notably, it is also unclear whether the AOJ considered the ameliorative effects of the Veteran's medications when assigning a noncompensable rating for his service-connected functional gastrointestinal disorder.

Additionally, although in the August 2024 VA GI specialist noted gastrointestinal dysmotility syndrome (without evidence of structural gastrointestinal disease, with symptoms of intermittent abdominal pain and bloating, and requiring prescribed dietary management or manipulation), the Board declines to rate the Veteran's functional gastrointestinal disorder under Diagnostic Code 7356, as such would not result in a higher than 30 percent rating.  Under Diagnostic Code 7356, the next highest rating after a 30 percent rating, a 50 percent rating, is warranted only if a veteran's gastrointestinal dysmotility syndrome requires intermittent tube feeding for nutritional support-with recurrent emergency treatment for episodes of intestinal obstruction or regurgitation due to poor gastric emptying, abdominal pain, recurrent nausea, or recurrent vomiting.  38 C.F.R. § 4.114.  In the instant case, the evidence of record does not show that the Veteran's condition has required intermittent tube feeding at any time during the period on appeal.  Additionally, the Board declines to rate the Veteran's gastrointestinal dysmotility syndrome separately from his rating under Diagnostic Code 7319, as doing so would violate the strictures provided by 38 C.F.R. § 4.114.  Specifically, the note following Diagnostic Code 7356 states: "Use this diagnostic code [7356] for illnesses associated with § 3.317(a)(2)(i)(B)(3) [For functional gastrointestinal disorders] of this chapter, other than those which can be evaluated under [Diagnostic Code] 7319" (emphasis added).

In reaching its conclusions in the instant case, the Board has afforded probative value to the Veteran's assertions that his functional gastrointestinal disorder is more severe than as reflected by the previously assigned noncompensable disability rating.  In this regard, however, the Board must consider the entire evidence of record when analyzing the criteria laid out in the Rating Schedule.  While the Board recognizes that the Veteran is competent to describe his symptomatology, he is not competent to provide an opinion regarding the severity of his symptomatology in accordance with the rating criteria.  See Woehlaert v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 456, 462 (2007).  Ultimately, the Board finds the medical evidence of record-in which professionals with specialized expertise examined and evaluated the Veteran, acknowledged his reported symptoms, and described the manifestations of his functional gastrointestinal disorder-to be persuasive.

The Board has also considered whether staged ratings under Fenderson, supra, are appropriate for the Veteran's service-connected disability; however, the Board finds that his symptomatology has been stable throughout the appeal period.  Thus, assigning staged ratings for such disability is not warranted.  The Veteran has not raised any other issues, nor have any other issues been reasonably raised by the record, regarding the initial rating claim adjudicated herein.  See Doucette v. Shulkin, 28 Vet. App. 366, 369 (2017) (confirming that the Board is not required to address issues unless they are specifically raised by the claimant or reasonably raised by the evidence of record).

In sum, the Board finds that the Veteran's functional gastrointestinal disorder was manifested by alternating episodes of diarrhea and constipation, with more or less constant abdominal distress throughout the period on appeal.  Consequently, a 30 percent rating, which is the maximum schedular rating for IBS, is warranted for the Veteran's functional gastrointestinal disorder for the entire appeal period.  See 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.3, 4.7, 4.114, Diagnostic Code 7319.

In reaching such determinations, the Board has considered the applicability of the benefit of the doubt doctrine, which has resulted in the award of an initial 30 percent rating-the maximum schedular rating for IBS-for the Veteran's functional gastrointestinal disorder.  However, insofar as the Board has denied higher or separate ratings for such disability, the weight of the probative evidence is against such aspects of the Veteran's claim.  Thus, the benefit of the doubt doctrine is not applicable in such regard, and his initial rating claim must otherwise be denied.  38 U.S.C. § 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.3, 4.7.

 

 

Melanie J. Mann

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Dumas, Rebecca H.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.