Citation Nr: A25034315
Decision Date: 04/14/25	Archive Date: 04/14/25

DOCKET NO. 240721-456031
DATE: April 14, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea (OSA), to include as secondary to right shoulder joint replacement with labral tear (right shoulder), right shoulder scar associated with right shoulder joint replacement (scar), left shoulder labral tear (left shoulder), post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), and tinnitus, is denied.

FINDING OF FACT

The Veteran's obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) was not incurred in or caused by service, is not proximately due to or the result of the Veteran's service-connected right shoulder, scar, left shoulder, PTSD, or tinnitus conditions and is not aggravated beyond its natural progression by these service-connected conditions. 

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea (OSA), to include as secondary to right shoulder joint replacement with labral tear (right shoulder), right shoulder scar associated with right shoulder joint replacement (scar), left shoulder labral tear (left shoulder), post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), and tinnitus have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 1112, 1113, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.304, 3.310.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran had active service from February 1995 to February 1998.

The Appeals Modernization Act (AMA) creates a new framework for Veterans dissatisfied with Department of Veterans Affairs' (VA) decision on their claim to seek review. The AMA became effective on February 19, 2019. 38 C.F.R. §?3.2400(a)(1). The AMA applies to all initial decisions issued after February 19, 2019.? 

The present matter comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a June 2024 rating decision issued by VA Agency of Original Jurisdiction (AOJ). Accordingly, this decision is subject to the AMA.

In August 2023, the Veteran's claim for obstructive sleep apnea (OSA), to include as secondary to right shoulder joint replacement with labral tear (right shoulder), right shoulder scar associated with right shoulder joint replacement (scar), left shoulder labral tear (left shoulder), post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), and tinnitus, was denied. In August 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR). In January 2024, the AOJ issued the HLR decision, which noted that a duty to assist error had been identified during higher level review, and further development of the claim was undertaken. In June 2024, the AOJ issued a special review rating decision, which considered the evidence of record at the time of the June 2024 rating decision.

Next, the Veteran timely appealed the June 2024 special review rating decision to the Board in a July 2024, VA Form 10182 Notice of Disagreement. Based on the Veteran's selection of the direct review docket, the Board may only consider evidence on record at the time of the June 2024 decision on appeal.

The Board interprets the Veteran's selection of the Direct Review option with an indication of a decision being rendered within 365 days as well as statements of record as reflecting an intent to have this matter reviewed in an expeditious manner, thus, the Board will proceed to adjudicate the claim finding that the Veteran does not wish to change Board dockets under Williams v. McDonough, 37?Vet. App.?305 (2024).

Service Connection  

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service. 38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a). To establish a right to compensation for a present disability, a Veteran must show: (1) the existence of a present disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service-the so-called "nexus" requirement. Holton v. Shinseki, 557 F.3d 1362, 1366 (Fed. Cir. 2009) (quoting Shedden v. Principi, 38 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004)). The absence of any one element will result in a denial of service connection.?????? 

The United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit (Federal Circuit) has held that "[l]ay evidence can be competent and sufficient to establish a diagnosis of a condition when (1) a layperson is competent to identify the medical condition, (2) the layperson is reporting a contemporaneous medical diagnosis, or (3) lay testimony describing symptoms at the time supports a later diagnosis by a medical professional." Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 (Fed. Cir. 2007); see also Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331, 1337 (Fed. Cir. 2006) ("[T]he Board cannot determine that lay evidence lacks credibility merely because it is unaccompanied by contemporaneous medical evidence").??? 

Service connection may also be granted for any disease initially diagnosed after service when all of the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).??? 

Service connection may alternatively be established on a secondary basis for a disability which is proximately due to, or the result of, a service-connected disability. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a).?? 

Service connection may alternatively be established on a secondary basis for a disability which is proximately due to, or the result of, a service-connected disability. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a). Secondary service connection may also be established for a disorder which is aggravated by a service-connected disability; compensation may be provided for the degree of disability (but only that degree) over and above the degree of disability existing prior to the aggravation. See 38?C.F.R. § 3.310(b); Allen v. Brown, 8?Vet. App.?374 (1995).??? 

In order to prevail on the issue of secondary service connection, the record must show: (1) evidence of a current disability; (2) evidence of a service-connected disability; and (3) medical nexus evidence establishing a connection between the service-connected disability and the current disability. See Wallin v. West, 11?Vet. App.?509, 512 (1998); see also Allen, supra.??? 

Service connection must be considered on the basis of the places, types, and circumstances of a Veteran's service as shown by his or her service records, the official history of each organization in which he or she served, his or her medical records, and all pertinent medical and lay evidence. See 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a); see also Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 (Fed. Cir. 2007); and see Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331, 1337 (Fed. Cir. 2006).?????? 

When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, the VA shall give the benefit of the doubt to the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. §?3.102.? 

1. Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea (OSA)

The Veteran seeks service connection for his OSA as secondary to his service-connected PTSD condition. 

With respect to current disability, the AOJ rendered a favorable finding in the June 2024 rating decision that the Veteran has a current disability of OSA. The Board is bound by this finding. 8 U.S.C. §§ 5104(b)(4), 5104A. 38 C.F.R. § 20.801(a). Accordingly, the first element of service connection, a current disability, is satisfied. 

Turning to service connection on a direct basis, with regard to in-service incurrence, the AOJ rendered a favorable finding in the June 2024 rating decision that the Veteran participated in a toxic exposure risk activity (TERA), and the Board is bound by this finding. 8 U.S.C. §§ 5104(b)(4), 5104A. 38 C.F.R. § 20.801(a). Thus, TERA participation is conceded by VA, and the in-service incurrence element of service connected is established.  

With respect to a nexus, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination in August 2023, and a VA medical opinion for direct service connection was obtained in January 2024. The examiner opined that the OSA was less likely than not incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness and that the Veteran's OSA was not due to TERA after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of TERA participation by the Veteran. Based on the evidence and review of the medical literature, the examiner stated that the Veteran has non-military risk factors for OSA, including obesity and being of the male sex. The examiner noted that the severity of OSA decreases with age when adjusting for BMI and noted that the Veteran's BMI is 37, which is consistent with obesity. The opinion is thorough, and its conclusion is adequately supported. As such, the Board finds the January 2024 opinion highly probative. 

VA treatment records emphasize morbid obesity in the setting of treating the Veteran's OSA, which adds further support to the January 2024 opinion regarding the Veteran's weight and OSA. See August 2023 CAPRI records.  

In sum, the Board finds that no nexus has been established on a direct basis for the Veteran's OSA and his service, and the most probative evidence is persuasively against the claim. As such, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule is not applicable here, and service connection for OSA on a direct basis is denied.

Next, the Board considered whether the Veteran's OSA is proximately due to or the result of the Veteran's service-connected right shoulder, scar, left shoulder, PTSD, or tinnitus conditions or whether his OSA is aggravated beyond its natural progression by these service-connected conditions. 

With respect to evidence of a current disability, as noted above this element is established by the AOJ's favorable finding in the June 2024 rating decision that the Veteran has a current disability of OSA, and the Board is bound by this finding. 

With respect to service-connected conditions, it is established that the Veteran is service-connected for a right shoulder, scar, left shoulder, PTSD, and tinnitus conditions. Thus, the second element is satisfied. 

With respect to medical nexus evidence establishing a connection between the service-connected disabilities and the current disability, a VA opinion regarding OSA as secondary to PTSD was obtained in August 2023 and multiple VA opinions were obtained in January 2024 for OSA as secondary to the right shoulder, scar, left shoulder, and tinnitus conditions.

In the August 2023 opinion, the examiner opined that the Veteran's OSA is less likely than not proximately due to or the result of his service-connected PTSD condition. As rationale, the examiner explained that, while there is some data showing an association between PTSD and OSA, association is not causation, and to assume that it is, is to seriously misunderstand the concept of cause and effect. That Thing A is seen to occur with Thing B, even frequently, even very, very frequently, does not mean that A causes B. Two things that frequently occur together does not imply or prove that one causes the other. A detailed review of the claim file and medical research was outlined in the opinion, which was extremely thorough, and the conclusion is supported by adequate rationale. As such, the Board finds the opinion the highly probative. 

The January 2024 VA medical opinions all concluded that the Veteran's OSA was not aggravated beyond its natural progression by his service-connected right shoulder, scar, left shoulder, PTSD, or tinnitus conditions. As rationale, the examiner noted in each of the opinions that the Veteran's sleep was improving and that he was getting 6-7 hours of constant, and of good quality, sleep with CPAP use, which is up from 3 hours of CPAP use tolerated per night. The examiner indicated that the medical records do not show any instances of aggravation, such as respiratory failure or tracheostomy attributed to OSA. Furthermore, the examiner reviewed the record evidence and considered the lay statements of the Veteran in forming the opinions. As such, the conclusions reached are adequately supported by the rationale given. Thus, the Board finds these opinions highly probative. 

A VA treatment record from July 31, 2023, noted that the Veteran experiences shoulder pain that is affecting his sleep pattern. See August 2023 CAPRI records. However, this statement does not associate the Veteran's OSA with his shoulder pain, but merely notes that pain impacts his sleep pattern. Thus, the Board does not find it probative as to a nexus between his right shoulder and his OSA.  

In sum, the Board finds that no nexus has been established between the Veteran's OSA and his service-connected right shoulder, scar, left shoulder, PTSD, and tinnitus, and the most probative evidence is persuasively against the claim. As such, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule is not applicable here. Accordingly, service connection for OSA on a secondary basis, proximately due to or the result of the Veteran's service-connected right shoulder, scar, left shoulder, PTSD, or tinnitus conditions or aggravated beyond its natural progression by these service-connected conditions, is denied.

 

 

GAYLE STROMMEN

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Jeffreys, J.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.