Citation Nr: A25034001
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 241022-484207
DATE: April 11, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a right toe disability, claimed as hallux rigidus, is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for a right knee disability, claimed as knee instability, is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty from February 1983 to August 1987.

This matter originally came before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an August 2024 rating decision of a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO). 

In the October 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the August 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claims of service connection for a right toe disability and a right knee disability, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

1. Entitlement to service connection for a right toe disability is remanded.

The Veteran contends his right toe disability is related to wearing combat boots during military service. See April 2024 VA Form 21-526EZ Application for Disability Compensation and Related Compensation Benefits. The Board cannot make a fully informed decision on the issue of service connection for a right toe disability because the Veteran has not been afforded a VA examination to determine the nature and etiology of the claimed disability. 

The Secretary's duty to assist includes "providing a medical examination or obtaining a medical opinion when such an examination or opinion is necessary to make a decision on the claim." 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(d)(1). VA is obliged to provide an examination when: (1) competent evidence of a current disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability, (2) evidence establishing that an event, injury, or disease occurred in service, or that certain diseases manifested during an applicable presumptive period, and (3) an indication that the disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability may be associated with the Veteran's service or with another service-connected disability, but (4) insufficient competent medical evidence to make a decision on the claim. See McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 81 (2006). The threshold for finding a link between current disability and service is low. Locklear v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 410 (2006).

Although no diagnosis exists in the claims file for a right toe disability, there is competent evidence in support of each of the McLendon factors to warrant an examination. The Veteran stated that his right toe disability is related to wearing combat boots in service, which is consistent with typical military activities. See April 2024 Application for Disability Compensation and Related Compensation Benefits. While the Veteran is not competent to provide a diagnosis in this case, he can attest to observable symptomatology such as pain in his right toe. Additionally, private treatment records obtained prior to the August 2024 rating decision indicate evidence of a diagnosis of hallux rigidus (stiff big toe) and "chronic great toe pain for years" by the Veteran's private provider. See SouthCoast Health July 2022 Provider Notes. It is not clear from the private medical records that the Veteran's diagnosis refers to his right toe, or to his toes bilaterally. Based on the foregoing, the Board finds that the evidence of record satisfies McLendon's threshold requirements to obtain a VA examination. As noted, the Veteran has not received an examination for his claimed right toe disability. 

Accordingly, a remand is warranted to correct this pre-decisional duty to assist error.

2. Entitlement to service connection for a right knee disability is remanded.

The Veteran contends his right knee disability is related to his military service. See April 2024 Application for Disability Compensation and Related Compensation Benefits. Specifically, the Veteran asserts that he injured his right knee during boot camp after running and marching with heavy packs. 

As above, the Veteran did not receive a VA examination for his right knee disability. Although no diagnosis exists in the claims file for a right knee disability, the Veteran has stated that he has "right knee instability" which indicates the presence of current symptoms. See April 2024 Application for Disability Compensation and Related Compensation Benefits. The Veteran also stated that the injury occurred while in boot camp at Parris Island, South Carolina. Id. Service treatment records show the Veteran reported "pain in knees" in service. See 1983 Service Treatment Records. Taken together, the evidence shows the occurrence of an in-service event or injury that the Veteran experiences presently as "right knee instability." Accordingly, the Board finds that the requirements to obtain a VA examination under McLendon are met. Remand is required to obtain a VA examination regarding the nature and etiology of the Veteran's right knee disability to correct this pre-decisional duty to assist error.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

1. Schedule the Veteran for VA examinations to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's right toe disability and right knee disability. The complete record, to include a copy of this remand and the claims folder, must be made available to and reviewed by the examiner. 

Based on a review of the entire record, the examiners must opine:

(a.) Whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that any diagnosed right toe disability had its origin in service, is related to the Veteran's active service, or had its onset within one year of the Veteran's separation from active-duty service.

(b.) Whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that any diagnosed right knee disability had its origin in service, is related to the Veteran's active service, or had its onset within one year of the Veteran's separation from active-duty service.

In providing the requested opinions, consider the Veteran's description of the in-service injury and symptoms as well as post-service symptoms. If there is any medical reason to accept or reject the proposition that the Veteran's reported injury and symptoms in service and thereafter represented the onset of the current disability, this should be noted.  

If a diagnosis cannot be provided but the Veteran's disability manifests in symptoms that cause functional impairment resulting in decreased earning capacity, then the examiner should consider them a "disability" for the purpose of providing the requested opinion.

The examiner is advised that the Veteran is competent to report symptoms, treatment, and injuries and that such reports must be considered in formulating the requested opinion. 

The examiner must provide the rationale for all proffered opinions. If the examiner is unable to provide any required opinion, he or she should explain why. If the examiner cannot provide an opinion without resorting to mere speculation, he or she shall provide a complete explanation as to why this is so. If the inability to provide a more definitive opinion is the result of a need for additional information, the examiner should identify the additional information that is needed.  

 

M. Schlickenmaier

Acting Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Marron, Sara C.

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.