Citation Nr: A25034703
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 240904-471340
DATE: April 15, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Navy from May 1974 to January 1976. This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from an August 2024 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

In the September 2024 VA Form 10182, the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the August 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of entitlement to service connection for COPD, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

Entitlement to service connection for COPD.

The Veteran asserts entitlement to service connection for COPD. Upon a review of the record, the Board finds that a remand is necessary to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error and obtain an adequate toxic exposure risk activity (TERA) opinion pursuant to the Sergeant First Class Heath Robinson Honoring our Promise to Address Comprehensive Toxics Act of 2022 (PACT Act). 

A May 2024 TERA opinion found that the claimed condition of COPD was less likely than not (likelihood was less than approximately balanced or nearly equal) caused by the indicated TERA, after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all TERA of the Veteran. The VA examiner noted that the records were reviewed. The VA examiner further noted that the Veteran had a significant tobacco use history that predisposed him to COPD. Cigarette smoke is the most common cause of developing COPD in a developed country. In this case, the significant smoking history was at least as likely as not the root cause of the COPD. Therefore, the VA examiner concluded that there was no nexus for COPD related to toxin exposure.

The Board finds the May 2024 TERA opinion inadequate for adjudication purposes. First, the VA has conceded the Veteran's participation in a TERA including exposure to asbestos, fuel, and PFAS as related to his in-service job duties. See August 2024 Rating Decision; see also April 2023 TERA Memorandum. Although the evidence of record describes the nature of the Veteran's in-service toxic exposure, the VA examiner failed to specifically address such exposure in the May 2024 TERA opinion. Additionally, in the October 2022 VA Form 21-4138 Statement in Support of Claim, the Veteran described the nature of his exposure to asbestos and fuel while aboard the U.S.S. Savannah as well as his respiratory symptoms following service. The Board notes that the Veteran is competent to report lay-observable symptoms such as wheezing, difficulty breathing, fatigue, and coughing that produced blood, and the time of its onset and, thus, such should be considered by the VA examiner. See Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 465, 470. Further, the VA examiner failed to address the June 2023 private medical opinion. Such relevant medical evidence must be addressed on remand. Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 312 (2007) (holding that when VA undertakes to provide a VA examination or obtain a VA opinion, it must ensure that the examination or opinion is adequate).

Based upon the foregoing, the Board finds that a remand is necessary to correct a pre-decisional duty to assist error an obtain an adequate TERA opinion to determine the etiology of the Veteran's COPD.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Schedule a VA examination to determine the etiology of the Veteran's COPD. The claims file, to include a complete copy of this REMAND, must be made available to the examiner. All diagnostic testing deemed to be necessary by the examiner should be accomplished.

Applying general medical principles, the examiner's experience, the clinical records (including the June 2023 private medical opinion), the April 2023 TERA Memorandum and the Veteran's lay statements (including the October 2022 VA Form 21-4138), the examiner is instructed to provide opinions responsive to the following:

Whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's COPD condition was incurred in or caused by toxic exposure in service. In so opining, the examiner is required to consider the synergistic, combined effects of the Veteran's exposure to any and all toxins in service.

(Continued on the next page)

The examiner must provide a complete rationale for his or her opinion(s) in the examination report. If any of the above requested opinions cannot be made without resort to speculation, the examiner must state this and provide a rationale for such conclusion.

 

 

John R. Doolittle, II

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Brostowski, Leyna

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.