Citation Nr: A25034621
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 250129-503919
DATE: April 15, 2025

ORDER

New and relevant evidence having been received, the petition to reopen the claim for service connection for traumatic brain injury claimed as head and brain damage is granted.

New and relevant evidence having been received, the petition to reopen the claim for service connection for congestive heart failure claimed as heart failure is granted.

New and relevant evidence having been received, the petition to reopen the claim for service connection for chronic sequelae small vessel ischemia is granted.

New and relevant evidence having been received, the petition to reopen the claim for service connection for atrial fibrillation granted.

New and relevant evidence having been received, the petition to reopen the claim for service connection for premature ventricular contractions is granted. 

New and relevant evidence having been received, the petition to reopen the claim for service connection for neurocognitive memory impairment claimed as amnesia is granted.

New and relevant evidence having been received, the petition to reopen the claim for service connection for vestibular dysfunction associated with gait ataxia is granted.

New and relevant evidence having been received, the petition to reopen the claim for service connection for bilateral eye condition to include macular degeneration and cataracts claimed as frequent blindness is granted.

New and relevant evidence having been received, the petition to reopen the claim for service connection for ophthalmologic migraines claimed as ocular migraines is granted.

New and relevant evidence having been received, the petition to reopen the claim for service connection for right basal ganglia lacunar infarction is granted.

New and relevant evidence having been received, the petition to reopen the claim for service connection for right cerebellar infarction is granted.

New and relevant evidence having been received, the petition to reopen the claim for service connection for near syncope is granted.

New and relevant evidence having been received, the petition to reopen the claim for service connection for tremor condition to include intention tremor and tremor senilis is granted.

New and relevant evidence having been received, the petition to reopen the claim for service connection for unsteady gait subject to fall is granted.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1.	New and relevant evidence was received after the November 2019 rating decision denying the claim for service connection for traumatic brain injury claimed as head and brain damage, and the evidence is relevant to the claim of service connection for traumatic brain injury claimed as head and brain damage.

2.	New and relevant evidence was received after the November 2019 rating decision denying the claim for service connection for congestive heart failure claimed as heart failure, and the evidence is relevant to the claim of service connection for congestive heart failure.

3.	New and relevant evidence was received after the November 2019 rating decision denying the claim for service connection for chronic sequelae small vessel ischemia, and the evidence is relevant to the claim of service connection for chronic sequelae small vessel ischemia.

4.	New and relevant evidence was received after the November 2019 rating decision denying the claim for service connection for atrial fibrillation, and the evidence is relevant to the claim of service connection for atrial fibrillation.

5.	New and relevant evidence was received after the November 2019 rating decision denying the claim for service connection for premature ventricular contractions, and the evidence is relevant to the claim of service connection for premature ventricular contractions.

6.	New and relevant evidence was received after the November 2019 rating decision denying the claim for service connection for neurocognitive memory impairment claimed as amnesia, and the evidence is relevant to the claim of service connection for neurocognitive memory impairment claimed as amnesia.

7.	New and relevant evidence was received after the November 2019 rating decision denying the claim for service connection for vestibular dysfunction associated with gait ataxia claimed as ataxia, and the evidence is relevant to the claim of service connection for vestibular dysfunction associated with gait ataxia claimed as ataxia.

8.	New and relevant evidence was received after the November 2019 rating decision denying the claim for service connection for bilateral eye condition to include macular degeneration and cataracts claimed as frequent blindness, and the evidence is relevant to the claim of service connection for bilateral eye condition to include macular degeneration and cataracts claimed as frequent blindness.

9.	New and relevant evidence was received after the November 2019 rating decision denying the claim for service connection for ophthalmologic migraines claimed as ocular migraines, and the evidence is relevant to the claim of service connection for ophthalmologic migraines claimed as ocular migraines.

10.	New and relevant evidence was received after the November 2019 rating decision denying the claim for service connection for right basal ganglia lacunar infarction, and the evidence is relevant to the claim of service connection for right basal ganglia lacunar infarction.

11.	New and relevant evidence was received after the November 2019 rating decision denying the claim for service connection for right cerebellar infarction, and the evidence is relevant to the claim of service connection for right cerebellar infarction.

12.	New and relevant evidence was received after the November 2019 rating decision denying the claim for service connection for syncope, and the evidence is relevant to the claim of service connection for syncope.

13.	New and relevant evidence was received after the November 2019 rating decision denying the claim for service connection for tremor condition to include intention tremor and tremor senilis, and the evidence is relevant to the claim of service connection for tremor condition to include intention tremor and tremor senilis.

14.	New and relevant evidence was received after the November 2019 rating decision denying the claim for service connection for unsteady gait subject to fall, and the evidence is relevant to the claim of service connection for unsteady gait subject to fall.

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for traumatic brain injury claimed as head and brain damage is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for congestive heart failure claimed as heart failure is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for chronic sequelae small vessel ischemia is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for atrial fibrillation is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for premature ventricular contractions is remanded. 

Entitlement to service connection for neurocognitive memory impairment claimed as amnesia is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for vestibular dysfunction associated with gait ataxia is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral eye condition to include macular degeneration and cataracts claimed as frequent blindness is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for ophthalmologic migraines claimed as ocular migraines is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for right basal ganglia lacunar infarction is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for right cerebellar infarction is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for near syncope is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for tremor condition to include intention tremor and tremor senilis is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for unsteady gait subject to fall is remanded.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

1.	The criteria for readjudicating the claim of service connection for traumatic brain injury claimed as head and brain damage have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 5108, 7105(c); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.2501, 20.1103.

2.	The criteria for readjudicating the claim of service connection for congestive heart failure claimed as heart failure have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 5108, 7105(c); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.2501, 20.1103.

3.	The criteria for readjudicating the claim of service connection for chronic sequelae small vessel ischemia have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 5108, 7105(c); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.2501, 20.1103.

4.	The criteria for readjudicating the claim of service connection for atrial fibrillation have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 5108, 7105(c); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.2501, 20.1103.

5.	The criteria for readjudicating the claim for service connection for premature ventricular contractions have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 5108, 7105(c); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.2501, 20.1103.

6.	The criteria for readjudicating the claim for service connection for neurocognitive memory impairment claimed as amnesia have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 5108, 7105(c); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.2501, 20.1103.

7.	The criteria for readjudicating the claim for service connection for vestibular dysfunction associated with gait ataxia have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 5108, 7105(c); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.2501, 20.1103.

8.	The criteria for readjudicating the claim for service connection for bilateral eye condition to include macular degeneration and cataracts claimed as frequent blindness have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 5108, 7105(c); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.2501, 20.1103.

9.	The criteria for readjudicating the claim for service connection for ophthalmologic migraines claimed as ocular migraines have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 5108, 7105(c); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.2501, 20.1103.

10.	The criteria for readjudicating the claim for service connection for right basal ganglia lacunar infarction have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 5108, 7105(c); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.2501, 20.1103.

11.	The criteria for readjudicating the claim for service connection for right cerebellar infarction have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 5108, 7105(c); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.2501, 20.1103.

12.	The criteria for readjudicating the claim for service connection for near syncope have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 5108, 7105(c); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.2501, 20.1103.

13.	The criteria for readjudicating the claim for service connection for tremor condition to include intention tremor and tremor senilis have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 5108, 7105(c); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.2501, 20.1103.

14.	The criteria for readjudicating the claim for service connection for unsteady gait subject to fall have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 5108, 7105(c); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.2501, 20.1103.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran honorably served in the United States Navy from January 1954 through June 1954.

This matter comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a March 2024 rating decision by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO) the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ).

In May 2002 the Veteran submitted a claim for entitlement to a pension due to his inability to work. See, VA 21-526 Veterans Application for Compensation or Pension received May 2002. The AOJ advised the Veteran his signature was needed on the VA 21-526 before his claim could be processed and enclosed the form for the Veteran to execute and return. See, VCAA/DTA Letter dated June 2002. The record does not indicate the Veteran returned the form.

In February 2017 the AOJ acknowledged the receipt of the Veteran's intent to file on February 22, 2017. See, Notification Letter dated February 2017. A claim for entitlement to service connection was not received within one year and this intent to file expired.

In October 2017 the Veteran submitted another intent to file a claim for compensation and/or pension. See, VA 21-0966 Intent to File received October 2017. A claim for entitlement to service connection was not received within one year and this intent to file expired.

In February 2019 the AOJ acknowledged the receipt of the Veteran's intent to file on February 13, 2019. See, Notification Letter dated February 2019.

In July 2019 the Veteran submitted a claim for entitlement to service connection for head and brain damage; tremor senilis; ocular migraines; unsteady gait subject to falling; syncope; atrial fibrillation; premature ventricular contractions; right basal ganglia lacune; chronic sequela small vessel ischemia; amnesia; ataxia, heart failure; and frequent blindness. See, VA 21-526EZ Fully Developed Claim (Compensation) received July 2019.

In November 2019, the AOJ issued a rating decision denying the Veteran's claims for entitlement to service connection. See, Notification Letter dated November 2019.

In October 2020 the Veteran submitted an intent to file a claim for compensation. See, VA 21-0966 Intent to File received October 2020.

In October 2020, the Veteran submitted a Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim regarding the November 2019 rating decision. See, VA Form 20-0995 Supplemental Claim Application received October 2020.

In December 2020 the AOJ issued a rating decision confirming the denial of the Veteran's claims for entitlement to service connection. See, Notification Letter dated December 2020.

In February 2021 the Veteran submitted a Review Request: Higher-Level Review. See, VA Form 20-0996 Request for Higher-Level Review received February 2021.

In April 2021 the AOJ issued a rating decision confirming the denials of the Veteran's claims for entitlement to service connection. See, Notification Letter dated April 2021.

The Veteran appealed to the Board and elected the evidence submission docket. See, VA Form 10182 Notice of Disagreement received June 2021.

In May 2022 the Board issued a decision remanding the Veteran's claims for service connection for further development. See, BVA Decision dated May 2022.

In March 2023 the AOJ issued a rating decision again denying the Veteran's claims for entitlement to service connection. See, Notification Letter dated March 2023. 

The Veteran submitted a Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review. See, VA Form 20-0996 Request for Higher-Level Review received October 2023. The Veteran also submitted a Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim. See, VA Form 20-0995 Supplemental Claim Application received October 18, 2023.

In October 2023 the AOJ issued another rating decision again denying the Veteran's claims for entitlement to service connection. See, Notification Letter dated October 2023.

In February 2024 the Veteran submitted Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim Applications regarding his claims for entitlement to service connection. See,  3 documents labelled: VA Form 20-0995 Supplemental Claim Application received February 2024; VA Form 20-0995 Supplemental Claim Application received February 2024; VA Form 20-0995 Supplemental Claim Application received February 2024.

In May 2024 the AOJ issued a decision denying the Veteran's claims for entitlement to service connection finding the evidence submitted was not new and relevant. See, Notification Letter dated March 2024.

In the January 2025 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket. VA Form 10182 Notice of Disagreement received January 2025; VA Form 10182 Notice of Disagreement received January 2025; VA Form 10182 Notice of Disagreement received January 2025; VA Form 10182 Notice of Disagreement received January 2025; VA Form 10182 Notice of Disagreement received January 2025; VA Form 10182 Notice of Disagreement received January 2025.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the March 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim[s], considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

However, because the Board is remanding the Veteran's claims of entitlement to service connection any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of those claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii). 

As an initial matter, the Board notes the record indicates the Veteran has indicated he had active service in the United States Naval Reserves and, upon additional development, the AOJ has not been able to obtain these records or obtain additional service treatment records because of the Veteran "not being in the SPOE database for electronic STRs." See, VA 21-3101 Request for Information dated July 2022. 

When, as here, at least a portion of the service records cannot be located, through no fault of the veteran, VA has a "heightened" obligation to discuss the reasons and bases for its decision and to carefully consider applying the benefit-of-doubt doctrine more fully. See, e.g., O'Hare v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 365 (1991). However, the threshold for allowance of a claim is not lowered and the need for probative medical nexus evidence causally relating the current disability at issue to service is not eliminated; rather, the Board's obligation to discuss and evaluate evidence is heightened. Russo v. Brown, 9 Vet. App. 46 (1996). Further, if the Board concludes that lay evidence presented by a Veteran is credible and competent, the lack of contemporaneous medical evidence should not be an absolute bar to the Veteran's ability to prove his claim of entitlement to disability benefits based on that competent lay evidence. Buchanan v. Nicholson, 451 F.3d 1331 (Fed. Cir. 2006).

NEW AND RELEVANT EVIDENCE

VA will readjudicate a claim if new and relevant evidence is presented or secured. 38 C.F.R. § 3.156(d). "Relevant evidence" is evidence that tends to prove or disprove a matter at issue. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501(a)(1).

In this instance, as discussed previously, the Veteran's claims for entitlement to service connection for head and brain damage; tremor senilis; ocular migraines; unsteady gait subject to falling; syncope; atrial fibrillation; premature ventricular contractions; right basal ganglia lacune; chronic sequela small vessel ischemia; amnesia; ataxia, heart failure; and frequent blindness began in July 2019 which were later denied by a November 2019 rating decision. Following a May 2022 Board decision, the AOJ again denied the Veteran's claims for entitlement to service connection in March 2023, and in March 2024 again denied the Veteran's claims for failure to submit new and relevant evidence. 

The new evidence for consideration includes the Veteran's lay statements as well as documents from the Shelby County Sheriff's Office in Nashville, Tennessee. This evidence is new as it has not been previously considered, and is relevant, as it tends to prove a missing element of the service connection claim - specifically the second element of an in-service injury. Indeed, the Veteran's lay statements that he was arrested and hit in the head by a police officer and mistakenly charged with strong armed robbery is supported by the February 2024 statement by the Tennessee Bureau of Investigation. 

The Board finds that this evidence is new and relevant to the matter at issue which is whether the Veteran suffered a traumatic brain injury during his active service and whether the Veteran's other claims for service connection are secondary to that traumatic brain injury, which was not established at the time of the March 2023 rating decision. As a result, the Veteran's claims for entitlement to service connection are readjudicated below on the merits. 38 U.S.C. § 5108; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.156(a), 3.310.

REASONS FOR REMAND

One feature of the AMA is the Board's limited authority to remand cases for further development and opinions. Remands under the AMA are limited to pre-decisional duty to assist errors and correction of any other error by the AOJ in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty if correction of the error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the Veteran's claim. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a). The Board finds, as discussed in more detail below, the failure to obtain a VA examination for the Veteran's traumatic brain injury; failure to ensure the VA examinations and medical opinions provided for the Veteran's heart conditions were adequate; and failure to obtain VA examinations and medical opinions as to whether the Veteran's other claimed disabilities are related to or caused by a the Veteran's claimed in-service head injuries amounts to pre-decisional duty to assist errors, and a remand is necessary to correct these errors. See, 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c). 

The Board regrets the delay this additional remand may cause.

Entitlement to service connection for congestive heart failure claimed as heart failure is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for atrial fibrillation is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for premature ventricular contractions is remanded. 

Following the Board's May 2022 remand, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination which resulted in VA medical opinions being issued. BVA Decision dated May 2022; C&P Exam (Disability Benefits Questionnaire (DBQ)) received December 2022; C&P Exam (Medical Opinion Heart Failure) received December 2022; C&P Exam (Medical Opinion Atrial) received December 2022; and C&P Exam (Medical Opinion Ventricular) received December 2022.

The VA examiner diagnosed the Veteran with arteriosclerotic heart disease, congestive heart failure, ventricular arrhythmia, implanted cardiac pacemaker, coronary artery bypass graft and atrial fibrillation. C&P Exam (DBQ) received December 2022. The VA examiner also opined the etiology for the Veteran's coronary artery disease was the narrowing of coronary arteries; congestive heart failure was the heart not pumping correctly; ventricular arrhythmia had an unknown etiology; and atrial fibrillation had an unknown etiology. Id. at page 4.

The Board finds the VA medical opinions regarding the Veteran's atrial fibrillation and premature ventricular contractions to be inadequate as they are inconsistent with the VA examination report wherein this same VA examiner stated the etiology was unknown as to the Veteran's atrial fibrillation and premature ventricular contractions. 

Additionally, the Board finds the VA medical opinion regarding the Veteran's congestive heart failure to be inadequate as it states excessive alcohol consumption is a risk factor for congestive heart failure but does not discuss the Veteran's 40 year history of alcohol dependency and any relationship that might have to the Veteran's active service including his mental health diagnoses during that service. See, Medical Treatment Record - Non-Government Facility received August 2019 at progress note dated July 11, 2016; STR - Medical received August 2019 at progress note dated February 28, 1955; STR - Medical received August 2019 at progress note dated April 22, 1955.

When the VA undertakes to provide a VA examination or obtain a VA medical opinion, it must ensure that the examination or medical opinion is adequate. Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 312 (2007). Here, the Board finds a remand for each of these issues is necessary to obtain adequate medical opinions regarding the etiology of the Veteran's congestive heart failure, atrial fibrillation, and premature ventricular contractions.

Entitlement to service connection for traumatic brain injury claimed as head and brain damage is remanded.

The Veteran contends he is entitled to service connection for traumatic brain injury claimed as head and brain damage.

The record indicates the Veteran was not afforded a VA examination in this matter for his traumatic brain injury claimed as head and brain damage.

VA will provide a medical examination where there is insufficient competent medical evidence to make a decision on the claim but: (1) competent evidence of a current disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability; (2) evidence establishing that an event, injury, or disease occurred in service; and, (3) an indication that the disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a disability may be associated with a veteran's service or with another service-connected disability. 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(d); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(4). All the stated elements must be met to trigger the requirement of an examination. The triggering threshold is low. See, McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79, 83 (2006); Locklear v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 410 (2006). Whether an examination is necessary requires the Board to take into consideration "all information and lay or medical evidence." 38 U.S.C. § 5103A(d)(2).

Here, there is no dispute the Veteran has a current diagnosed disability. See, Rating Decision - Narrative received October 2023 at page 10. Thus, the Board finds the first element of McLendon is satisfied. The Veteran contends he hit his head falling out of his rack; was hit in the head by a police officer during an arrest during the Veteran's active duty; and, shortly thereafter, the Veteran was knocked unconscious when he was struck in the head with the "pilot tube" on the wing of an airplane. A review of the file indicates during the relevant time period the Veteran contends he suffered these head injuries, his conduct ratings when from the highest possible score of a 4.0 to 1.5. See, Military Personnel Record received August 2019 at page 15. The Board finds this is enough to satisfy the second and third elements of McLendon.

The Board's review of the record indicates the evidence satisfying the McLendon elements were associated with the file prior to any decision denying the Veteran's claim for service connection for traumatic brain injury claimed as head and brain injury. Thus, the Veteran should have been afforded a VA examination regarding this issue and it is a pre-decisional duty to assist error to have not afforded such an examination.

The Board finds it necessary to remand this matter for the Veteran to be afforded a VA examination and medical opinion for his traumatic brain injury claimed as head and brain injury.

Entitlement to service connection for chronic sequelae small vessel ischemia is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for neurocognitive memory impairment claimed as amnesia is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for vestibular dysfunction associated with gait ataxia is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for bilateral eye condition to include macular degeneration and cataracts claimed as frequent blindness is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for ophthalmologic migraines claimed as ocular migraines is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for right basal ganglia lacunar infarction is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for right cerebellar infarction is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for near syncope is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for tremor condition to include intention tremor and tremor senilis is remanded.

Entitlement to service connection for unsteady gait subject to fall is remanded.

The Veteran contends he is entitled to service connection for chronic sequelae small vessel ischemia; neurocognitive memory impairment claimed as amnesia; bilateral eye condition to include macular degeneration and cataracts; ophthalmologic migraines claimed as ocular migraines; right basal ganglia lacunar infarction; right cerebellar infarction; near syncope; tremor condition to include intention tremor and tremor senilis; and unsteady gait subject to fall.

The record indicates the Veteran has diagnoses for all of these conditions. As it is the Board's understanding a traumatic brain injury may cause or aggravate these conditions, the Board finds the Veteran's entitlement to service connection for these conditions may be intertwined with the issue of entitlement to the Veteran's claim for traumatic brain injury. See, Parker v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 116 (1994); Harris v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 180, 183 (1991) (issues are "inextricably intertwined" when a decision on one issue would have a "significant impact" on a veteran's claim for the second issue). 

In this case, if the Veteran's claim for service connection for traumatic brain injury is granted, then his claims for chronic sequelae small vessel ischemia; neurocognitive memory impairment claimed as amnesia; bilateral eye condition to include macular degeneration and cataracts; ophthalmologic migraines claimed as ocular migraines; right basal ganglia lacunar infarction; right cerebellar infarction; near syncope; tremor condition to include intention tremor and tremor senilis; and unsteady gait subject to fall may be found to be etiologically connected to the Veteran's traumatic brain injury. A remand is necessary so that the AOJ can provide the Veteran with a VA examination and medical opinion for the Veteran's claim of traumatic brain injury and then determine the relationship, if any, to these remaining claims.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

The clinician must provide a comprehensive rationale for all opinions expressed. If the clinician cannot provide the requested opinion without resorting to speculation, it must be so stated, and the clinician must provide the reasons why an opinion would require speculation. Specifically, the clinician must indicate whether there was a further need for information or testing, or whether an opinion could not be rendered due to limitations of the knowledge in the medical community at large.

The clinician is reminded the Veteran is competent to report symptoms, treatment and injuries observable to a layperson. Jandreau v. Nicholson, 492 F.3d 1372, 1377 (Fed. Cir. 2007). The absence of documented treatment in service or thereafter is not fatal to a service connection claim, and the absence of evidence in the service treatment records is an insufficient basis, by itself, for a negative opinion. See, Ledford v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 87, 89 (1992). Thus, the VA must consider the totality of the record, and not just the absence of clinical treatment, in weighing the Veteran's statements and symptomology.

1. Congestive Heart Failure, Ventricular Arrhythmia, and Atrial Fibrillation

Direct the claims file to an appropriate clinician to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's congestive heart failure, ventricular arrhythmia, and atrial fibrillation. The claims file and a copy of this remand must be available to the clinician. The clinician should be instructed that the Veteran's service record, including his service treatment record is incomplete in this case.

After reviewing the record and conducting an appropriate examination, the clinician should provide an opinion as to whether the evidence is at least in approximate balance that the Veteran's currently diagnosed congestive heart failure, ventricular arrhythmia, and/or atrial fibrillation are related to the Veteran's military service including, but not limited to, the multiple head injuries the Veteran describes having received in service and any substance abuse related to self-medication for mental health conditions diagnosed during his active service. The clinician is specifically directed to address all avenues of service connection to include direct, secondary, and aggravation by a service connected disability or non-service connected disability. The Board notes the other disability need not be the sole cause of the Veteran's claimed condition for a nexus to exist for VA purposes. 

2. Traumatic Brain Injury

Direct the claims file to an appropriate clinician to determine the nature of the Veteran's head injury(ies) suffered during the Veteran's active service. The claims file and a copy of this remand must be made available to the clinician. The clinician should be instructed that the Veteran's service record, including his service treatment record is incomplete in this case.

After reviewing the record and conducting an appropriate examination, the clinician should provide an opinion as to whether the evidence is at least in approximate balance that the head injury(ies) the Veteran has described constitute a traumatic brain injury during his active service. The clinician is specifically directed to the change in the Veteran's conduct ratings and changes in his personality as noted in the psychiatric reports following the time period in which the Veteran contends the multiple head injuries occurred. 

3. Chronic Sequelae Small Vessel Ischemia

Direct the claims file to an appropriate clinician to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's chronic sequelae small vessel ischemia. The claims file and a copy of this remand must be available to the clinician. The clinician should be instructed that the Veteran's service record, including his service treatment record is incomplete in this case.

After reviewing the record and conducting an appropriate examination, the clinician should provide an opinion as to whether the evidence is at least in approximate balance that the Veteran's currently diagnosed chronic sequelae small vessel ischemia is related to the Veteran's military service including, but not limited to, the multiple head injuries the Veteran describes having received during his active service. The clinician is specifically directed to address all avenues of service connection to include direct, secondary, and aggravation by a service connected disability or non-service connected disability. The Board notes the other disability need not be the sole cause of the Veteran's claimed condition for a nexus to exist for VA purposes. 

4. Neurocognitive Memory Impairment Claimed as Amnesia

Direct the claims file to an appropriate clinician to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's neurocognitive memory impairment claimed as amnesia. The claims file and a copy of this remand must be available to the clinician. The clinician should be instructed that the Veteran's service record, including his service treatment record is incomplete in this case.

After reviewing the record and conducting an appropriate examination, the clinician should provide an opinion as to whether the evidence is at least in approximate balance that the Veteran's currently diagnosed neurocognitive memory impairment claimed as amnesia is related to the Veteran's military service including but not limited to the multiple head injuries the Veteran describes having received during his active service. The clinician is specifically directed to address all avenues of service connection to include direct, secondary, and aggravation by a service connected disability or non-service connected disability. The Board notes the other disability need not be the sole cause of the Veteran's claimed condition for a nexus to exist for VA purposes. 

5. Bilateral Eye Condition to include Macular Degeneration and Cataracts

Direct the claims file to an appropriate clinician to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's bilateral eye condition. The claims file and a copy of this remand must be available to the clinician. The clinician should be instructed that the Veteran's service record, including his service treatment record, is incomplete in this case.

After reviewing the record and conducting an appropriate examination, the clinician should provide an opinion as to whether the evidence is at least in approximate balance that the Veteran's currently diagnosed bilateral eye condition is related to the Veteran's military service including but not limited to the multiple head injuries the Veteran describes having received during his active service. The clinician is specifically directed to address all avenues of service connection to include direct, secondary, and aggravation by a service connected disability or non-service connected disability. The Board notes the other disability need not be the sole cause of the Veteran's claimed condition for a nexus to exist for VA purposes. 

6. Ophthalmologic Migraines claimed as Ocular Migraines

Direct the claims file to an appropriate clinician to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's ophthalmologic migraines claimed as ocular migraines. The claims file and a copy of this remand must be available to the clinician. The clinician should be instructed that the Veteran's service record, including his service treatment record is incomplete in this case.

After reviewing the record and conducting an appropriate examination, the clinician should provide an opinion as to whether the evidence is at least in approximate balance that the Veteran's currently diagnosed ophthalmologic migraine condition is related to the Veteran's military service including but not limited to the multiple head injuries the Veteran describes having received during his active service. The clinician is specifically directed to address all avenues of service connection to include direct, secondary, and aggravation by a service connected disability or non-service connected disability. The Board notes the other disability need not be the sole cause of the Veteran's claimed condition for a nexus to exist for VA purposes. 

7. Right Basal Ganglia Lacunar Infarction

Direct the claims file to an appropriate clinician to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's right basal ganglia lacunar infarction. The claims file and a copy of this remand must be available to the clinician. The clinician should be instructed that the Veteran's service record, including his service treatment record is incomplete in this case.

After reviewing the record and conducting an appropriate examination, the clinician should provide an opinion as to whether the evidence is at least in approximate balance that the Veteran's currently diagnosed right basal ganglia lacunar infarction is related to the Veteran's military service including but not limited to the multiple head injuries the Veteran describes having received during his active service. The clinician is specifically directed to address all avenues of service connection to include direct, secondary, and aggravation by a service connected disability or non-service connected disability. The Board notes the other disability need not be the sole cause of the Veteran's claimed condition for a nexus to exist for VA purposes. 

8. Right Cerebellar Infarction

Direct the claims file to an appropriate clinician to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's right cerebellar infarction. The claims file and a copy of this remand must be available to the clinician. The clinician should be instructed that the Veteran's service record, including his service treatment record is incomplete in this case.

After reviewing the record and conducting an appropriate examination, the clinician should provide an opinion as to whether the evidence is at least in approximate balance that the Veteran's currently right cerebellar infarction claimed as amnesia is related to the Veteran's military service including, but not limited to, the multiple head injuries the Veteran describes having received during his active service. The clinician is specifically directed to address all avenues of service connection to include direct, secondary, and aggravation by a service connected disability or non-service connected disability. The Board notes the other disability need not be the sole cause of the Veteran's claimed condition for a nexus to exist for VA purposes. 

9. Near Syncope

Direct the claims file to an appropriate clinician to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's near syncope. The claims file and a copy of this remand must be available to the clinician. The clinician should be instructed that the Veteran's service record, including his service treatment record is incomplete in this case.

After reviewing the record and conducting an appropriate examination, the clinician should provide an opinion as to whether the evidence is at least in approximate balance that the Veteran's currently diagnosed near syncope is related to the Veteran's military service including but not limited to the multiple head injuries the Veteran describes having received during his active service. The clinician is specifically directed to address all avenues of service connection to include direct, secondary, and aggravation by a service connected disability or non-service connected disability. The Board notes the other disability need not be the sole cause of the Veteran's claimed condition for a nexus to exist for VA purposes. 

10. Tremor Condition to Include Intention Tremor and Tremor Senilis

Direct the claims file to an appropriate clinician to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's tremor condition to include intention tremor and tremor senilis. The claims file and a copy of this remand must be available to the clinician. The clinician should be instructed that the Veteran's service record, including his service treatment record is incomplete in this case.

After reviewing the record and conducting an appropriate examination, the clinician should provide an opinion as to whether the evidence is at least in approximate balance that the Veteran's currently diagnosed tremor condition to include intention tremor and tremor senilis is related to the Veteran's military service including but not limited to the multiple head injuries the Veteran describes having received during his active service. The clinician is specifically directed to address all avenues of service connection to include direct, secondary, and aggravation by a service connected disability or non-service connected disability. The Board notes the other disability need not be the sole cause of the Veteran's claimed condition for a nexus to exist for VA purposes. 

11. Unsteady Gait Subject to Fall

Direct the claims file to an appropriate clinician to determine the nature and etiology of the Veteran's unsteady gait subject to fall. The claims file and a copy of this remand must be available to the clinician. The clinician should be instructed that the Veteran's service record, including his service treatment record is incomplete in this case.

After reviewing the record and conducting an appropriate examination, the clinician should provide an opinion as to whether the evidence is at least in approximate balance that the Veteran's currently diagnosed unsteady gate subject to fall is related to the Veteran's military service including but not limited to the multiple head injuries the Veteran describes having received during his active service. The clinician is specifically directed to address all avenues of service connection to include direct, secondary, and aggravation by a service connected disability or non-service connected disability. The Board notes the other disability need not be the sole cause of the Veteran's claimed condition for a nexus to exist for VA purposes. 

 

 

Martin T. Mitchell

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Tina Budzisz, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.