Citation Nr: A25034019
Decision Date: 04/11/25	Archive Date: 04/11/25

DOCKET NO. 240508-440108
DATE: April 11, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for chronic migraines is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from July 1984 to September 2005. 

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a February 2024 rating decision.

In October 2023, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review (HLR), and requested review of an April 2023 decision.  In February 2024, the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) issued the HLR decision on appeal, which considered the evidence of record at the time of the prior April 2023 decision. 

In the May 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the April 2023 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. If evidence was submitted during the period after the AOJ issued the decision, which was subsequently subject to higher-level review the Board did not consider it in its decision. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

However, because the Board is remanding the claim of entitlement to service connection for chronic migraines, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the AOJ in the adjudication of the claim. 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2)(ii).

The Veteran asserts that his chronic migraines are the result of his time in active service. 

Under the AMA, the Board may only remand an issue to correct any pre-decisional duty to assist errors it identifies if correction of such error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating a claim. 38 C.F.R. § 20.802(a).

Once VA undertakes the effort to provide an examination or medical opinion, it must provide an adequate one. See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 311 (2007).

The Veteran was afforded a VA examination in December 2022. The VA examiner diagnosed the Veteran with migraines, including migraine variants. The Veteran asserted that his migraines began in the early 2000s while he was serving on active duty. The VA examiner did not provide a nexus opinion as to whether the Veteran's migraines were related to his time in active service. 

The Veteran was afforded another VA examination in March 2023. The VA examiner diagnosed the Veteran with migraines, including migraine variants. The Veteran asserted that his condition began with generalized headaches while he served on active duty due to elevated stress in 2004. The VA examiner opined that the Veteran's migraine headaches were less likely than not caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activity(ies), after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran.  The VA examiner explained migraines were primarily the result of abnormal brain activity temporarily affecting the nerve signals, chemicals, and blood vessels in the brain. The VA examiner reported many possible migraine triggers have been suggested, including hormonal, emotional, physical, dietary, environmental, and medicinal factors. The VA examiner noted there were no records of injuries during active duty and there was no evidence to show that specific exposure events experienced by the Veteran during service, but the TERA, are related to the current condition. 

The Board finds the March 2023 VA opinion to be inadequate. The VA examiner did not address the Veteran's assertions that he had been suffering from migraines that started while he served on active duty and had continued to suffer from migraines since then.  As such, the opinion is inadequate as the VA examiner failed to adequately address the lay reports of in-service symptoms that have continued thereafter. See Miller v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 249, 258-260 (2020) (stating a VA examiner's failure to consider the veteran's relevant lay statements when formulating an opinion renders the opinion inadequate). Additionally, the VA examiner noted there were many possible migraine triggers, including hormonal, emotional, physical, dietary, environmental, and medicinal triggers. However, the VA examiner did not address which, if any, of these triggers the Veteran experienced. Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008) (most of the probative value of a medical opinion comes from its reasoning).  As the March 2023 VA opinion is inadequate, the Board finds that a remand is required. 

The matter is REMANDED for the following action:

The AOJ should obtain a medical opinion from an appropriate clinician to assist in determining the nature and etiology of the Veteran's chronic migraines.  The need for an additional examination is left to the discretion of the clinician.   

The entire claims file and a copy of this REMAND must be made available to the examiner.  The examiner must note in the opinion that the evidence in the claims file has been reviewed. 

The examiner is requested to review all pertinent records associated with the claims file.

The examiner should state whether it is at least as likely as not that the Veteran has chronic migraines that manifested in or are otherwise causally or etiologically related to his military service, to include any symptomatology or environmental exposures therein.

In rendering his or her opinion, the examiner should consider the Veteran's total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments and the synergistic, combined effect of all TERAs.

The examiner must provide a comprehensive report including a clearly stated rationale for any opinions offered and conclusions reached, citing the objective medical findings leading to the conclusions, and must not be based solely on the lack of records. In this regard, the Board emphasizes that the Veteran is competent to report his symptoms and history, and such statements by the Veteran regarding symptomatology and medical history must be specifically acknowledged and considered in formulating any opinions concerning the onset and severity of his disability. If such reports are rejected by the examiner, a reason for doing so must be provided.

 

 

J. SAIKH

Acting Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	H. Glass, Associate Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.