Citation Nr: A25034113
Decision Date: 04/14/25	Archive Date: 04/14/25

DOCKET NO. 240901-469325
DATE: April 14, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for congestive heart failure (claimed as a heart condition) is remanded.

REASONS FOR REMAND

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army from November 1966 to November 1970.

As an initial matter, on August 23, 2017, the President signed into law the Veterans Appeals Improvement and Modernization Act, Pub. L. No. 115-55 131 Stat. 1105 (2017), also known as the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA). This law, which went into effect in February 2019, creates a new framework for Veterans dissatisfied with VA's decision on their claim to seek review.

This matter is before the Board on appeal from a July 2024 AMA rating decision which denied service connection for a heart disability. In September 2024, the Veteran timely appealed the decision to the Board by requesting the AMA hearing lane. This decision has been written consistent with the new AMA framework.

The Veteran appeals the denial of service connection for a heart disability. Prior to the AOJ decision on appeal, the Veteran had testified at a Board hearing in February 2023 that the underling pathology of his left shoulder causing hypesthesia interfered with his blood flow to major arteries and, thus, caused or aggravated congestive heart failure. 

In relation to his claim, the Veteran was afforded a VA examination in July 2023. After review of the record, the VA examiner stated that:

The veteran is diagnosed with left shoulder orthopedic impairment.  The veteran is diagnosed with congestive heart failure. Congestive heart failure is often caused from structural abnormality to the heart, hypertensive heart disease, CAD. The left shoulder condition is not a known cause for congestive heart failure. Given this it is less likely than not that the Veterans left shoulder condition has caused the Veterans congestive heart failure.

While the VA examiner found that the Veteran's heart problems were less likely than not caused by his service-connected left shoulder disability, the examiner did not address whether there is any aggravation from the service connected disability. The Board finds that the AOJ's failure to obtain an addendum opinion in light of the examiners omission to discuss aggravation constitutes a pre-decisional error under the AMA. Accordingly, a remand is warranted to correct a duty to assist error that occurred prior to the rating decision on appeal. See Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303 (2007). The AOJ's failure to obtain an adequate etiology opinion is a pre-decisional duty to assist error that necessitates a remand for development.

The matters are REMANDED for the following action:

Obtain a VA opinion to determine whether his congestive heart failure is proximately due to his service-connected left shoulder disability. The examiner must be provided access to the Veteran's electronic claims file. The need for examination is left to the discretion of the examiner.

After review of the record, the examiner must address whether it is at least as likely as not (likelihood is at least approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) that the Veteran's congestive heart failure:

a)	Was caused by service-connected left shoulder disability, OR

b)	Aggravated by his left shoulder disability. Specifically, would the Veteran's congestive heart failure have been less severe "but-for" the impairment(s) caused by the service-connected disability? 

The examiner is requested to explain whether the underlying left shoulder pathology, to include hypesthesia, is medically capable of interfering with blood flow to the heart and, if so, whether in this particular case the Veteran's left shoulder pathology has caused or contributed to congestive heart failure.

A rationale should be provided for all opinions offered.

 

 

T. MAINELLI

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	T.S. Willie

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. ยง 20.1303.