Citation Nr: A25034384
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 240324-428239
DATE: April 15, 2025

REMANDED

Entitlement to service connection for a kidney disability is remanded. 

Entitlement to service connection for a stomach disorder is remanded. 

INTRODUCTION

The Veteran served on active duty in the U.S. Army from February 1996 to February 1997, from June 2009 to May 2010, and from September 2011 to December 2012. 

In September 2023, the Regional Office (RO) issued a rating decision which addressed the above-noted issues.  Thereafter, in March 2024, the Veteran submitted a VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement) (NOD), wherein he sought to appeal the claims in the Appeals Modernization Act (AMA) System.  He selected the Direct Review option; therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time the RO issued the September 2023 rating decision.  38 C.F.R. § 20.301. 

However, because the Board is remanding the above-referenced claims, any evidence the Board could not consider will be considered by the RO in the readjudication of those claims.  38 C.F.R. § 3.103 (c)(2)(ii).  Finally, the Board also observes the Veteran sought to appeal entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea, bronchitis/lung disability, and sinusitis, as well as entitlement to an increased rating for his left knee disability and loss of use of a creative organ; however, those appeals were not timely filed.  See 38 C.F.R. § 20.203(b). 

As such, the Board will not address these issues, and the Veteran is advised that should he wish to submit claims for readjudication of those matters he should do so on a properly completed supplemental claim application, VA Form 20-0995.  

REASONS FOR REMAND

Pursuant to 38 C.F.R. § 20.802, unless an issue on appeal can be granted in full, the Board shall remand the appeal to the agency of original jurisdiction for correction of an error on the part of the agency of original jurisdiction to satisfy its duties under 38 U.S.C. § 5103A, if the error occurred prior to the date of the agency of original jurisdiction decision on appeal.  The Board may remand for correction of any other error by the agency of original jurisdiction in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty, if correction of the error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the appellant's claim. 

Under certain circumstances, 38 U.S.C. § 5103A (d) and 38 C.F.R. § 3.159 (c)(4) require VA to obtain a VA examination or obtain a medical opinion.  When VA undertakes to provide a VA examination or obtain a VA opinion, it must ensure that the examination or opinion is adequate.  Barr v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 303, 312 (2007).  The failure to provide the above-noted assistance constitutes a due process violation.

At the outset, the Board observes the Veteran underwent VA stomach and kidney conditions examinations in April 2020.  Following those examinations, the examiner found the Veteran did not warrant a diagnosis of a stomach or kidney disability.  The examiner acknowledged the Veteran's use of Ranitidide to relieve his manifestations of stomach acid.  He also chronicled the Veteran's reports of ongoing stomach pain, itching and burning of the throat, acid reflux, a pinch and pull sensation, and food regurgitation.  The Board notes a November 2018 treatment note from the Seattle VAMC indicates the Veteran was prescribed Ranitidide to control gastroesophageal reflux disorder (GERD) symptoms, but the April 2020 examiner failed to explain how or why the Veteran's reported symptoms, and continued use of Ranitidide did not provide sufficient evidence to warrant a current diagnosis. 

Additionally, the examiner stated the Veteran's kidney condition had fully resolved.  Here, the examiner noted abnormal labs tests, but determined recent serological chemistry revealed creatinine and blood urea nitrogen (BUN) levels were within normal ranges.  However, a review of the Veteran's outpatient treatment records from the Seattle VAMC indicates the Veteran underwent kidney testing in 2016.  Following this testing, the Veteran was noted to have elevated renal function tests consistent with kidney disease.  Since that time, the Veteran has undergone numerous additional kidney function tests, which demonstrated elevated BUN and creatinine.  For example, the Veteran's BUN was elevated in April 2021, June 2021, March 2022, and September 2022.  The Veteran also had high protein levels in his urine and elevated creatinine in March 2022.  The above-noted medical findings were not addressed by the April 2020 examiner, and clearly call his diagnostic assessment into question.  An opinion based upon an inaccurate factual premise has no probative value.  Reonal v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 458, 461 (1993).  Further, examiners cannot ignore a veteran's statements related to lay observable symptoms.  See Dalton v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 23 (2007).  Based on the foregoing, the Board finds the April 2020 examinations to be significantly deficient.  As such, the ROs utilization of those examinations constituted a pre-decisional duty to assist error.

Accordingly, this case is REMANDED for the following actions:

Obtain a VA examination and medical opinion from an examiner with sufficient expertise to address the etiology of the Veteran's claimed kidney disability and stomach disorder.  All pertinent evidence of record must be made available to and reviewed by the examiner.

Initially, the examiner is asked to state whether the Veteran's lay statements and medical records demonstrate sufficient evidence to warrant a diagnosis of a kidney disability or stomach disorder at any time throughout the period on appeal, i.e. since January 2020.  

In this respect, the examiner is asked to consider and expressly discuss the Veteran's prescription and use of Ranitidide since November 2018 for GERD symptoms, as well as his reports of ongoing stomach pain, itching and burning of the throat, acid reflux, a pinch and pull sensation, and food regurgitation.  

The examiner is also asked to consider and expressly discuss the Veteran's January 2017 treatment note from the Seattle VAMC which indicated his elevated renal function tests were consistent with kidney disease, as well as his numerous additional kidney function tests, which demonstrated elevated BUN and creatinine.  For example, the Veteran's BUN was elevated in April 2021, June 2021, March 2022, and September 2022.  The Veteran also had high protein levels in his urine and elevated creatinine in March 2022.

Thereafter, the examiner is asked to state whether any diagnosed or diagnosable kidney or stomach disability as likely as not (likelihood is approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher) originated during his periods of active service or are otherwise etiologically related to his active service.

The examiner should also state whether the Veteran's claimed stomach or kidney disabilities at least as likely as not (likelihood is approximately balanced or nearly equal, if not higher):

a)  were caused by his service-connected posttraumatic stress disorder, with alcohol use disorder; or

b)  were worsened to any degree by his service-connected posttraumatic stress disorder, with alcohol use disorder.

For these opinions, the examiner should note veterans are generally competent to attest to factual matters of which they have first-hand knowledge, including events and symptoms.  The examiner is asked to consider and expressly discuss the Veteran's reports relative to the nature and etiology of his claimed disabilities.  

If the examiner finds any reports provided by the Veteran to lack reliability, the examiner should state why.

The examiner must also provide a complete rationale for any proffered opinion.  If the examiner is unable to provide any required opinion, he or she should explain why.  If the examiner cannot provide an opinion without resorting to mere speculation, he or she shall provide a complete explanation as to why this is so.  If the inability to provide a more definitive opinion is the result of a need for additional information, the examiner should identify the additional information that is needed.

 

 

T. REYNOLDS

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Fraser, Gordon

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.