Citation Nr: A25034434
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 240806-462687
DATE: April 15, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for cecal carcinoid is denied.

Entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The weight of the persuasive evidence is against finding that the Veteran's cecal carcinoid disability began during his active service, manifested to a compensable degree within a year of service separation, or is otherwise related to his active service, to include exposure to asbestos.

2. The weight of the persuasive evidence is against finding that the Veteran's sleep apnea disability began during his active service, or is otherwise related to his active service, to include exposure to asbestos.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for service connection for cecal carcinoid are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1112, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.307, 3.309.

2. The criteria for service connection for sleep apnea are not met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served honorably in the United States Navy from July 1995 to July 1999, with additional service in the Naval Reserve. The Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) thanks the Veteran for his service to our country.

This case comes before the Board on appeal from a July 2024 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office.

Procedural History

In June 2021, the Veteran submitted an initial claim for service connection for cecal carcinoid due to asbestos exposure. See June 2021 VA Form 21-526EZ. In a September 2021 rating decision, service connection for cecal carcinoid was denied.

In July 2022, the Veteran submitted VA Form 20-0995, Decision Review Request: Supplemental Claim, requesting readjudication of entitlement to service connection for cecal carcinoid.

In July 2022, the Veteran submitted an initial claim for service connection for sleep apnea. See July 2022 VA Form 21-526EZ.

In an October 2022 rating decision, the Regional Office continued the denial of entitlement to service connection for cecal carcinoid because the evidence submitted was not new and relevant; the claim for service connection for sleep apnea was denied.

In September 2023, the Veteran submitted VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review, and requested readjudication of these claims. In January 2024, a higher-level review decision found duty to assist errors that required additional development for both claims. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2601(g). Thereafter, in July 2024, the Regional Office issued the higher-level review decision on appeal which found that new and relevant evidence had been received but denied the claim for service connection for cecal carcinoid and the claim for sleep apnea on the merits. 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.2501, 3.2502. The Board is bound by the finding of new and relevant evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104(c).

In the August 2024 VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), the Veteran elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the July 2024 agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801.

If the Veteran would like VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claims, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision.

Service Connection

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(a). Service connection may also be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge, when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).

Generally, to prevail on the issue of service connection the evidence must show: (1) the existence of a present disability; (2) in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the present disability and the disease or injury incurred or aggravated during service. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1167 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

Cecal carcinoma (malignant neoplasm of the digestive system) is considered a chronic disease and will be presumed related to service, absent an intercurrent cause, if shown as chronic in service; or, if manifested to a compensable degree within a presumptive period following separation from service; or, if it was noted in service (or within an applicable presumptive period) with continuity of symptomatology since service that is attributable to the chronic disease. 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.307, 3.309; Walker v. Shinseki, 708 F.3d 1131, 1338 (Fed. Cir. 2013).

In rendering a decision on appeal, the Board must analyze the credibility and probative value of the evidence, account for the evidence which it finds to be persuasive or unpersuasive and provide the reasons for its rejection of any material evidence favorable to the claimant. See Daye v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 512, 526 (2006).

When there is an approximate balance of evidence regarding the merits of an issue material to the determination of the matter, the benefit of the doubt in resolving each such issue shall be given to the claimant. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch v. McDonough, 21 F.4th 776 (Fed. Cir. 2021) (en banc).

1. Entitlement to service connection for cecal carcinoid.

The Veteran asserts his cecal carcinoid is related to exposure to asbestos during active duty service, specifically, during the construction of the USS Billfish. See He maintains that he has had "zero exposure to asbestos" since leaving the service. See July 2021 Statement; June 2021 VA Form 21-526EZ. In support of his claim for service connection, the Veteran submitted an article analyzing the relationship between asbestos exposure and pulmonary carcinoid tumors.

The evidence of record reflects the Veteran has been diagnosed with cecal carcinoid, status post-surgical removal. See August 2021 and February 2024 VA examination reports. As such, the first element of service connection has been met.

In January 2024, VA determined the Veteran participated in a Toxic Exposure Risk Activity (TERA) during military service. VA determined there was evidence of non-deployment related exposure consistent with the circumstances of the Veteran's service. Specifically, his military occupational specialty of MM Basic Auxiliary Equipment Technician (Machinist Mate) was associated with a probability of asbestos exposure. See January 2024 TERA Memorandum. Thus, the second element of service connection has been met.

The determinative issue then becomes whether a nexus, or causal link, exists between the Veteran's service, to include exposure to asbestos, and his current cecal carcinoid.

The Veteran's service treatment records (STRs) are silent for any complaints, treatment, or diagnosis of cecal carcinoid or a digestive disability. Clinical evaluation was normal for "abdomen and viscera" on his Report of Medical Examination form, completed at his separation examination in June 1999.

The Veteran was afforded a VA respiratory conditions examination in July 2021. The VA examiner remarked, "for the claimant's claimed condition of cecal carcinoid there is no diagnosis because this is an intestinal condition not a respiratory condition."

The Veteran was afforded a VA Acceptable Clinical Evidence (ACE) examination based on review of available records in conjunction with an interview for intestinal conditions and intestinal surgery in August 2021. The Veteran reported an onset of 2019. He stated he was having abdominal pain and was diagnosed with cecal carcinoid. He underwent laparoscopic right hemicolectomy. The VA examiner concluded the cecal carcinoid was less likely than not incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness. As rationale, the examiner stated "medical literature does not show carcinoid tumors in the GI (gastrointestinal) tract from asbestos exposure. It does show it in the lungs as the veteran has pointed out in the article supplied 'pulmonary carcinoid tumors and asbestos exposure.'"

In September 2021, the AOJ requested an addendum opinion. The AOJ advised the examiner that VA's Adjudication Procedures Manual (M21-1) indicates that inhalation of asbestos fibers can produce cancers of the gastrointestinal tract. See M21-1, Part VIII, Subpart iii, Chapter 7, Section A.2.b.

In a September 2021 addendum opinion, the August 2021 VA examiner stated, "data shows not a well understood connection between GI cancers and asbestos although, as the VA has pointed out, they are linked. There are no pathology results showing asbestos fibers in the cancer that was removed." The examiner included citations to the cited literature.

As noted above, in January 2024, a higher-level review decision found a duty to assist error. Specifically, an intestinal exam with a TERA medical opinion was warranted.

VA obtained an Acceptable Clinical Evidence (ACE) records review for intestinal conditions and intestinal surgery in February 2024. The VA examiner noted an onset of 2019. Abdominal pain evaluation revealed cecal carcinoid. Veteran underwent a right hemicolectomy on July 25, 2019. The VA examiner diagnosed cecal carcinoid, status post-surgical removal (resection of the large intestine).

The examiner concluded the cecal carcinoid, status post-surgical removal, was less likely than not caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activity, after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran. As rationale, the examiner noted the records reviewed did not indicate any exposure to asbestos outside of military service. "A thorough [review of] medical literature was conducted. A study by Benedicte, C. et al. 2012, noted a relationship between asbestos exposure and certain pulmonary carcinoid tumors, but no evidence linked to intestinal tract carcinoid tumors. In light of the referenced information, there is no applicable literature evidence to suggest a compelling causal association between the TERA event and cecal carcinoid, therefore a nexus was not established." The examiner included citations to the cited literature.

The Board finds that the August 2021, September 2021, and February 2024 medical opinions considered together are probative on the question of whether the Veteran's cecal carcinoid was incurred in or related to his military service. The opinion is based on the Veteran's lay statements, STRs, consideration of his medical history, and supported by sound rationale. Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295, 304 (2008) (most of the probative value of a medical opinion comes from its reasoning).

Review of the medical evidence of record does not support a finding of cecal carcinoid during active service or for more than a year thereafter. Thus, entitlement to service connection on a presumptive basis is not warranted.

The Board has considered whether the Veteran should have been provided a VA examination to obtain a medical opinion addressing a theory of general direct service connection. See McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006).  With respect to an in-service event, injury, or disease, the Veteran's STRs are silent as to complaints of or treatment for cecal carcinoid. He does not claim otherwise and had provided no evidence or argument as to the initial onset of or treatment for this condition. The Veteran has clearly attributed this condition to in-service asbestos exposure.  As such, the Board finds that requirements under McLendon were not met at the time of the July 2024 rating decision on appeal and that the AOJ did not commit a duty to assist error in not obtaining a medical opinion addressing direct service connection.

The Board has also considered the Veteran's lay opinion that his claimed cecal carcinoid is related to service. In this case, the Board considers the potential relationship between the Veteran's cecal carcinoid and its connection to service to be complex in nature. Woehlaert v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 456, 462 (2007). Therefore, while the Veteran is competent to describe his symptoms, he is not competent to provide a nexus/etiology opinion.

In this case, the most probative evidence of record does not show that the Veteran's cecal carcinoid is due to service.

As the weight of the persuasive evidence is against the claim, the benefit of the doubt doctrine is not for application to the instant appeal. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch, 21 F.4th 776. For these reasons, the claim for service connection for cecal carcinoid is denied.

2. Entitlement to service connection for sleep apnea.

The Veteran asserts his sleep apnea is related to service. He has not offered any lay statements in support of his claim explaining why he believes his sleep apnea is related to service.

The evidence of record reflects the Veteran has been diagnosed with obstructive sleep apnea. See February 2024 VA examination report. As such, the first element of service connection has been met.

As discussed above, in January 2024, VA determined the Veteran participated in a TERA during military service. VA determined there was evidence of non-deployment related exposure consistent with the circumstances of the Veteran's service. Specifically, his military occupational specialty of MM Basic Auxiliary Equipment Technician (Machinist Mate) was associated with a probability of asbestos exposure. See January 2024 TERA Memorandum. Thus, the second element of service connection has been met.

The determinative issue then becomes whether a nexus, or causal link, exists between the Veteran's service, to include exposure to asbestos, and his current sleep apnea.

The Veteran's service treatment records (STRs) are silent for any complaints, treatment, or diagnosis of sleep apnea. Clinical evaluation was "normal" on his Report of Medical Examination form, completed at his separation examination in June 1999. 

As noted above, in January 2024, a higher-level review decision found a duty to assist error. Specifically, a sleep apnea exam with a TERA medical opinion was warranted.

VA obtained a VA Acceptable Clinical Evidence (ACE) records review for sleep apnea in February 2024. The VA examiner noted the Veteran underwent a sleep study in May 2011. The VA examiner diagnosed obstructive sleep apnea.

The examiner concluded the obstructive sleep apnea was less likely than not caused by the indicated toxic exposure risk activity, after considering the total potential exposure through all applicable military deployments of the Veteran and the synergistic, combined effect of all toxic exposure risk activities of the Veteran. As rationale, the examiner noted the records reviewed did not indicate any exposure to asbestos outside of military service. "A thorough [review of] medical literature was conducted. There is no applicable literature evidence to suggest a compelling causal association between the TERA event and obstructive sleep apnea, therefore a nexus was not established." The examiner included citations to the cited literature.

The Board finds the February 2024 medical opinion probative on the question of whether the Veteran's sleep apnea was incurred in or related to his military service. The opinion is based on the Veteran's lay statements, STRs, consideration of his medical history, and supported by sound rationale. Nieves-Rodriguez, 22 Vet. App. at 304.

After a review of the lay and medical evidence of record, the Board finds that the weight of the persuasive evidence is against finding that a medical nexus exists between the Veteran's sleep apnea disability and in-service exposure to asbestos. 38 U.S.C. § 1110; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303. There are no medical opinions of record which weigh in favor of the claim. Records associated with the claims file do not show any nexus between sleep apnea and active duty service.

The Board has considered whether the Veteran should have been provided a VA examination to obtain a medical opinion addressing a theory of general direct service connection. See McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006).  With respect to an in-service event, injury, or disease, the Veteran's STRs are silent as to complaints of or treatment for sleep apnea symptoms. He does not claim otherwise and had provided no evidence or argument as to the initial onset of or treatment for this condition. The Veteran has provided no argument or explanation as to why service connection is warranted. As such, the Board finds that requirements under McLendon were not met at the time of the July 2024 rating decision on appeal and that the AOJ did not commit a duty to assist error in not obtaining a medical opinion addressing direct service connection.

The Board has also considered the Veteran's lay opinion that his claimed sleep apnea is related to service. In this case, the Board considers the potential relationship between the Veteran's sleep apnea and its connection to service to be complex in nature. Woehlaert, 21 Vet. App. at 462. Therefore, while the Veteran is competent to describe his symptoms, he is not competent to provide a nexus/etiology opinion.

In this case, the most probative evidence of record does not show that the Veteran's sleep apnea is due to service.

(Continued on the next page)

?

As the weight of the persuasive evidence is against the claim, the benefit of the doubt doctrine is not for application to the instant appeal. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102; Lynch, 21 F.4th 776. For these reasons, the claim for service connection for sleep apnea is denied.

 

 

Rebecca N. Poulson

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Grace A. Johnk, Counsel

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.