Citation Nr: A25034710
Decision Date: 04/15/25	Archive Date: 04/15/25

DOCKET NO. 240625-450866
DATE: April 15, 2025

ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea (OSA), as secondary to the Veteran's service-connected cervical strain and degenerative disc disease, with weight gain as an intermediate step, is granted.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. The Veteran's OSA did not have its onset in service and is not otherwise related to an in-service injury or event. 

2. The Veteran's OSA is proximately due to, or the result of, his service-connected cervical strain and degenerative disc disease, which caused or aggravated weight gain that was a substantial factor in the development of OSA.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for service connection for OSA, as secondary to cervical strain and degenerative disc disease, have been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.310.

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran served in the United States Navy from December 2014 to October 2015.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a July 2023 rating decision issued by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO), an agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ).

The Veteran has continuously pursued an appeal from an October 2022 rating decision that denied service connection for OSA. In November 2022, the Veteran submitted VA Form 20-0996, Decision Review Request: Higher-Level Review, and requested readjudication of service connection for OSA, addressed in the October 2022 rating decision. In January 2023, the Higher-Level Reviewer determined that there had been a duty to assist error and transferred the claim to the Supplemental Claim decision review option for additional development. 

Following development, in July 2023, the AOJ issued the supplemental claim decision on appeal, which found that new and relevant evidence had been received, but ultimately denied the claim.

In June 2024, the Veteran submitted VA Form 10182, Decision Review Request: Board Appeal (Notice of Disagreement), and elected the Direct Review docket.

Therefore, the Board may only consider the evidence of record at the time of the July 2023 AOJ decision on appeal. 38 C.F.R. § 20.301. Any evidence submitted after the AOJ decision on appeal cannot be considered by the Board. 38 C.F.R. §§ 20.300, 20.301, 20.801. 

If the Veteran would like the VA to consider any evidence that was submitted that the Board could not consider, the Veteran may file a Supplemental Claim (VA Form 20-0995) and submit or identify this evidence. 38 C.F.R. § 3.2501. If the evidence is new and relevant, VA will issue another decision on the claim, considering the new evidence in addition to the evidence previously considered. Id. Specific instructions for filing a Supplemental Claim are included with this decision. 

Entitlement to service connection for obstructive sleep apnea (OSA), as secondary to the Veteran's service-connected cervical strain and degenerative disc disease, with weight gain as an intermediate step, is granted.

The Veteran contends that his OSA is secondary to his service-connected cervical strain and degenerative disc disease, which he asserts either caused or aggravated his OSA. See June 2022 VA Form 526EZ Application for Disability Compensation and Related Compensation Benefits. Specifically, the Veteran states that his service-connected cervical strain and degenerative disc disease result in pain and a limited range of motion, which in turn reduced his activity levels. See October 2021 VA Neck (Cervical Spine) Conditions Examination.

Service Connection

Service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from a disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by active service. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1110, 5107; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303. Establishing service connection requires evidence of: (1) a current disability; (2) an in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) a causal relationship between the current disability and the in-service disease or injury. Shedden v. Principi, 381 F.3d 1163, 1166-67 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

Service connection may also be granted on a secondary basis for a disability that is proximately due to, or the result of, or aggravated by a service-connected disability. Establishing secondary service connection requires evidence of: (1) a current disability (for which secondary service connection is sought); (2) an already service-connected disability; and (3) an indication that the current disability was either (a) caused by or (b) is being aggravated by the service-connected disability. 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a) and (b); Allen v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 439 (1995) (en banc).

While obesity cannot be service-connected on a direct basis, and obesity cannot qualify as an in-service injury or disease for service connection purposes, obesity may serve as an "intermediate step" between a service-connected disability and a current disability that may be service-connected on a secondary basis under 38 C.F.R. § 3.310(a). Walsh v. Wilkie, 32 Vet. App. 300 (2020); see also VAOGCPREC 1-2017. Specifically, VA's General Counsel has held that where it is shown that a service-connected disability causes a veteran to become obese and that obesity, in turn, is a substantial factor in causing additional disability, which disability, but for the Veteran's obesity, would not have occurred, the resulting additional disability can be service-connected on a secondary basis. VAOPGCPREC 1-2017.

Factual Background

In this case, the July 2023 rating decision made favorable findings that the Veteran is currently diagnosed with OSA and is service-connected for cervical strain, degenerative disc disease, and bilateral upper extremity radiculopathy. The Board is bound by these favorable findings. 38 C.F.R. § 3.104.

Accordingly, the first two elements of secondary service connection are satisfied. The remaining question before the Board is whether the Veteran's service-connected cervical strain and degenerative disc disease caused or aggravated his OSA. 

The Veteran's service treatment records (STRs) show that in September 2015, he reported difficulty sleeping with nightmares. See pages 24, 26, 40, 46, 48, and 49 of 69 STRs. The medical provider attributed these sleep disturbances to his psychological symptoms. See pages 25 of 69 STRs. At separation, the Veteran reported frequent trouble sleeping. See page 7 of 56 STRs. 

In October 2021, the Veteran underwent a VA Neck (Cervical Spine) Conditions examination, during which diagnoses of cervical strain, degenerative disc disease, and bilateral upper extremity radiculopathy were confirmed. The Veteran reported significant functional limitations, including difficulty sitting, standing, reaching overhead, rotating his neck side to side and up and down, and sleeping. The examiner determined that these conditions contributed to difficulty turning his head, overhead lifting, and typing for extended periods. Additionally, the examiner noted that these conditions caused neck pain, reduced range of motion, and his bilateral radiculopathy symptoms also caused pain, numbness, and tingling down both arms.

In November 2021, the Veteran was granted service-connected for cervical strain, degenerative disc disease, and bilateral upper extremity radiculopathy. 

In June 2022, he filed a claim for service connection for OSA as secondary to his service-connected cervical strain and degenerative disc disease disabilities. 

Later that month, the Veteran underwent a VA Sleep Apnea examination. The examiner confirmed a diagnosis of OSA. The Veteran reported that his OSA began approximately five years earlier [in 2017] and that his symptoms had progressively worsened over the last three years. He endorsed symptoms including persistent daytime hypersomnolence, snoring, morning headaches, waking frequently throughout the night, and apneic episodes. 

The examiner opined that the Veteran's OSA was at least as likely as not proximately due to or the result of the Veteran's service-connected cervical strain and degenerative disc disease. The examiner reasoned that the Veteran's body mass index (BMI) was 25, which is considered normal, at the time he entered service. However, at the time of his OSA diagnosis, his BMI was 28.8, which is categorized as overweight. The examiner explained that excess body weight contributes to OSA by increasing pressure on the upper airways, leading to airway collapse and decreased neuromuscular control due to fatty deposits, which decrease lung volume and make it more difficult to breathe. Citing medical literature, the examiner noted that osteoarthritis and musculoskeletal conditions can lead to decreased activity levels due to pain and decreased range of motion, which contribute to weight gain. This weight gain increases BMI and results in greater adipose fat deposition around the airway, which is associated with OSA. The examiner concluded that the Veteran's decreased activity level due to his cervical spine pain and limited mobility likely contributed to his weight gain. The examiner noted that degenerative disc disease can limit an individual's ability to use upper extremities for exercise as well as limiting an individual's ability to do any high impact exercises such as running or jumping. Therefore, based on the Veteran's statements, medical history, and current examination findings, the examiner concluded that the Veteran's OSA was at least as likely as not (50 percent or greater probability) proximately due to or the result of his service-connected cervical strain and degenerative disc disease disabilities.

In September 2022, VA obtained an additional medical opinion to evaluate whether the Veteran's obesity was a substantial factor in causing his OSA. The examiner provided the following opinions: (1) aggravation of a condition that existed prior to service; and (2) secondary service connection, to include both causation and aggravation. 

Regarding aggravation of a preexisting condition, the examiner opined that the claimed condition "clearly and unmistakably" existed prior to service and was clearly and unmistakably not aggravated beyond its natural progression by an in-service injury, event, or illness. However, the examiner then stated that the question could not be answered, asserting that any correlation between the Veteran's obesity to his service-connected disabilities would be purely speculative. 

With respect to secondary service connection, the examiner opined that the Veteran's obesity was less likely than not proximately due to or the result of his service-connected conditions. The examiner explained that it was not possible to determine the cause of the Veteran's weight gain without resorting to speculation. The examiner cited common causes of obesity, including diet, lack of activity/exercise, lifestyle, genetics, hormones, and medication. The examiner further asserted that accepting the Veteran's lay statements attributing his weight gain to his service-connected disabilities, without accounting for other factors such as daily diet/caloric intake, his genetic predisposition, daily habits, personal desire to perform non-weight bearing exercises would not meet the evidentiary standard for secondary service connection. Ultimately, the examiner stated that he could not correlate the Veteran's weight gain to any specific factor with any degree of certainty. 

As to secondary service connection based on aggravation of a non-service-connected condition by a service-connected disability, the examiner indicated that they could not determine the baseline level of severity of the claimed condition. The examiner then opined that the Veteran's claimed condition was not aggravated beyond its natural progression by "(insert 'service connected condition')."

In October 2022, the VA obtained a clarifying opinion to reconcile conflicting evidence as to whether the Veteran's obesity is the result of his service-connected cervical strain or degenerative disc disease. The examiner opined that obesity is not caused by lack of physical exercise but rather is the result of overconsumption of calories beyond an individual's daily metabolic needs. The examiner stated that weight gain or loss can be controlled by diet and is not dependent on physical exercise. With respect to OSA, the examiner explained that OSA is caused by anatomical abnormalities in the airway that limit or restrict airflow during sleep and can affect individuals regardless of their body type (normal, underweight, or overweight). The examiner concluded that OSA is not a consequence of obesity, and that the Veteran's weight gain was less likely due to his service-connected neck condition, therefore, his OSA was also less likely due to obesity. 

In March 2023, the VA obtained another medical opinion to address whether the Veteran's OSA was directly related to service or was secondary to the Veteran's service-connection disabilities.

Regarding direct service connection, the examiner opined that OSA was less likely than not incurred in or caused by the claimed in-service injury, event, or illness. The examiner acknowledged that the Veteran's separation examination documented that he was only getting four hours of sleep per night. However, the examiner attributed this symptom to the Veteran's mental health condition and noted that the separation examination did not reflect symptoms such as snoring or breath-holding during sleeping, which are common symptoms of OSA. The examiner further noted that sleep disturbances can result from a variety of conditions, including mental health disorders, and ultimately concluded that the Veteran's OSA was less likely than not incurred in or caused by service. 

Regarding secondary service connection, the examiner offered three opinions: (1) the Veteran's OSA was less likely than not proximately due to or the result of the Veteran's service-connected conditions; (2) the Veteran's OSA was less likely than not aggravated beyond its natural progression by the Veteran's service-connected conditions; and (3) the Veteran's weight gain was less likely than not caused by the Veteran's service-connected conditions. The examiner explained that OSA is caused by anatomical issues in the airway that limit or restrict airflow during sleep and can occur in individuals of any body type (normal, underweight, or overweight). The examiner stated that weight gain is the result of the overconsumption of calories beyond an individual's daily needs. Since the Veteran's service-connected conditions do not impact caloric intake or the anatomy of the airway, the examiner concluded that they are not pathologically relevant to the development of OSA.

Analysis

Direct Service Connection

Initially, the Board finds that the Veteran is not entitled to direct service connection for OSA. The Veteran's STRs do not reflect any complaints, treatment, or diagnoses related to OSA during service. Although the Veteran reported sleep difficulties in September 2015, the treating medical provider attributed these issues to his mental health condition. 

Moreover, the Veteran has not contended, and the evidence does not otherwise support, that his OSA began during service or is directly related to service. Accordingly, direct service connection is not warranted.

Secondary Service Connection

Following review of the claims file, the Board finds that the evidence of record supports secondary service connection for OSA.

The Board finds the September 2022, October 2022, and March 2023 VA opinions inadequate for adjudication purposes and assigns them no probative weight. 

September 2022 opinion

With respect to the September 2022 opinion, the Board finds it inadequate for three primary reasons. First, the examiner relied on an inaccurate factual premise. Reonal v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 458, 461 (1993). Specifically, the examiner concluded that the claimed condition "clearly and unmistakably" preexisted service and was not aggravated beyond its natural progression. However, the examiner did not clarify whether this conclusion referred to obesity or OSA. In either case, the Veteran's entrance examination does not document any defect, infirmity, or diagnoses related to obesity or OSA. Therefore, the presumption of soundness applies. See 38 U.S.C. 1111; Wagner v. Principi, 370 F.3d 1089, 1096 (Fed. Cir. 2004); Horn v. Shinseki, 25 Vet. App. 231, 236 (2012).

Second, the September 2022 opinion lacked an adequate rationale. While the examiner listed general causes of obesity, such as diet, lack of activity/exercise, lifestyle, genetics, hormones, medication, he did not explain how these general risk factors applied to this Veteran or provide a reasoned basis for concluding that the Veteran's weight gain was unrelated to the functional limitations imposed by his service-connected conditions. The examiner's failure to consider the Veteran's individual circumstances, renders the opinion conclusory. 

Third, the September 2022 examiner's assertion that a definitive opinion would be speculative does not excuse the failure to offer a rationale. Medical professionals are expected to explain why a conclusion cannot be provided and whether further information or testing might allow for a conclusive determination. See Jones v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 382, 389-90 (2010).

October 2022 opinion

As for the October 2022 opinion, the Board likewise finds it inadequate. The examiner failed to address whether the Veteran's weight gain was aggravated by the Veteran's service-connected disabilities. El-Amin v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 136, 14041 (2013)(a secondary service connection opinion must address both causation and aggravation to be deemed adequate).

Second, the October 2022 examiner again relied on generalized statements regarding obesity and OSA but did not tailor the rationale to the Veteran's specific circumstances, including his medical history or the functional limitations caused by his service-connected disabilities. Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 124 (2007) (a mere conclusion by a medical doctor is insufficient to allow the Board to make an informed decision as to what weight to assign to the doctor's opinion).

Third, the October 2022 examiner failed to reconcile conflicting medical evidence of record. Specifically, the examiner did not address the June 2022 examiner's finding that excess body weight contributes to OSA, nor did they reconcile this with their own conclusion that obesity is not a contributing factor to OSA. The examiner also did not explain how their opinion aligned with or differed from the September 2022 opinion, which listed diet, lack of activity/exercise, lifestyle, genetics, hormones, medication as common contributors to obesity. The failure to acknowledge, discuss, and distinguish these conflicting medical findings renders the October 2022 opinion internally inconsistent and of no probative value. See Nieves-Rodriguez v. Peake, 22 Vet. App. 295 (2008).

March 2023 opinion 

The March 2023 opinion is also inadequate. The examiner's rationale regarding obesity again relied on generalized medical principals rather than addressing the Veteran's specific medical history, lay reports, or prior medical opinions suggesting a link between the Veteran's weight gain and the functional limitations imposed by his service-connected disabilities. Stefl v. Nicholson, 21 Vet. App. 120, 124 (2007) (a mere conclusion by a medical doctor is insufficient to allow the Board to make an informed decision as to what weight to assign to the doctor's opinion). 

June 2022 opinion

On the other hand, the Board finds the June 2022 opinion to be the most probative and persuasive. This opinion directly addressed the relationship between the Veteran's OSA and his service-connected disabilities with weight gain serving as an intermediate step.

The examiner reviewed the Veteran's medical history and explained that his decreased activity due to neck pain, reduced range of motion, and limited ability to perform high-impact exercises likely contributed to his weight gain. The examiner then cited medical literature showing that excess body weight can contribute to OSA by increasing pressure on the upper airway, which leads to fatty deposits that decrease lung volume and make it more difficult to breathe.

Although the examiner did not expressly state that, but for the Veteran's weight gain, the Veteran would not have developed OSA, the Board finds that, when read as a whole, the opinion conveys this implication. See Monzingo v. Shinseki, 26 Vet. App. 97, 106 (2012). The examiner provided a detailed and plausible rationale supported by citations of the Veteran's individual circumstances and medical literature. As such, the Board finds that the June 2022 opinion to be of significant probative weight.

Conclusion

Accordingly, the Board finds that the three elements necessary to establish weight gain as an intermediate step for purposes of secondary service connection have been met. The Veteran is currently diagnosed with OSA, he is service-connected for cervical strain and degenerative disc disease; and the probative medical evidence establishes that those service-connected disabilities caused or aggravated weight gain, which was a substantial factor in the development of OSA.

Therefore, service connection for OSA is granted. See 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b), 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

 

KRISTI L. GUNN

Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans' Appeals

Attorney for the Board	Hatcher, Valerie

The Board's decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303.